* 2343869
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Interpretable Fair Machine Learning: Frameworks, Robustness, and Scalable Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Grani Adiwena Hanasusanto, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2025
* USD 197,626.00

Machine-learning algorithms are revolutionizing modern decision-making
processes, from deciding job offers, evaluating loans, and determining
university enrollments to proposing medical interventions. However, despite the
recent success of machine-learning algorithms in solving large-scale problems,
serious concerns have been raised that they are not entirely objective and can
inadvertently amplify human biases. The proposed research project addresses this
fundamental shortcoming by developing scalable data-driven methods and
algorithms that generate interpretable policies aiming for provable fairness
guarantees. The project will inform the policy-makers or decision-makers about
possible outcomes and tradeoffs between machine learning outcomes and social
equity/fairness. Furthermore, the research results will provide guidelines to
support policies as well as regulations to promote diversity and fairness in
many relevant domains of application. The proposed research leverages recent
advances in discrete and robust optimization, aiming for solution methodologies
that faithfully address the exact learning models with fairness measures,
provide strong out-of-sample fairness guarantees, are robust against bias and
noisy outliers in the dataset, and can be solved efficiently for large-scale
problem instances. More specifically, the proposed research aims to develop
effective new frameworks for fair learning via sub-data selection that can
leverage past efforts and enhance the fairness in the learning outcomes. Robust
solution schemes will be carefully designed to significantly mitigate the severe
overfitting effects of empirical-based methods and improve out-of-sample
performance. Efforts will also be devoted to addressing algorithmic fairness in
multi-stage decision-making and resource-allocation problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.