* 2343131
* CAREER: The Effects of Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation on Ubiquilin Chaperone and Triage Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Matthew Wohlever, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2026
* USD 115,874.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

In response to cellular stress, some proteins form liquid-like droplets by a
process called Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation (LLPS), but the specific effects
of LLPS on protein activity are poorly understood. Other proteins, referred to
as chaperones, have the role of mitigating cellular stress. This project focuses
on a family of proteins called Ubiquilins that are considered chaperones.
Ubiquilins can undergo LLPS and mitigate cellular stress by preventing the
formation of toxic protein aggregates. The goal of this project is to understand
how LLPS affects the ability of Ubiquilins to either assist proteins to insert
into the cell membrane or degrade proteins that cannot properly insert, roles
that are essential to prevent the accumulation of toxic protein aggregates and
other forms of cell stress. The research project is intimately integrated with
three key outreach activities targeted to children in foster care and students
at Toledo Public Schools (TPS). First, in partnership with Lucas County Children
Services and TPS, there will be science day at Elevate Summer Camp, which
provides a safe summer environment for at risk youth, including foster youth.
Campers will learn about STEM careers and conduct basic LLPS experiments.
Second, TPS high school students will do a field trip to the University of
Toledo to tour laboratories, demystify the college admission process, and learn
about STEM research opportunities. Third, TPS students and foster youth will be
mentored in a summer research internship. These outreach activities will
increase scientific literacy, improve STEM education, and promote the full
participation of foster youth and TPS students in STEM fields. American Rescue
Plan funding is used to support this early career investigator at a critical
stage in his career.

Humans have three broadly expressed Ubiquilin paralogs: Ubqln1, Ubqln2, and
Ubqln4. Ubiquilins have been shown to bind to uninserted membrane proteins and
provide additional opportunities for productive membrane insertion. Ubiquilins
can also interact with the Ubiquitin-Proteasome System to facilitate client
protein degradation. Ubqln2 has been shown to undergo LLPS, but how LLPS affects
Ubqln2 activity is unknown. This project focuses on determining how LLPS affects
the ability of Ubiquilins to chaperone and triage uninserted membrane proteins.
The project’s goals are to: (1) determine how LLPS affects the ability of
Ubiquilins to facilitate client protein ubiquitination and degradation and (2)
determine how LLPS affects the ability of Ubiquilins to bind membrane proteins
and facilitate their insertion into the lipid bilayer. Completion of this
project will facilitate the principal investigator’s long-term goal of
understanding the functional significance of LLPS on Ubiquilin activity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.