* 2343536
* CAREER: Synthetic design of structure-inspired magnetic topological materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Nirmal Ghimire, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 133,782.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2.

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION Most modern-day computers and microelectronics make
use of the semiconductor silicon, which exploits the electron’s charge to store,
transmit, and process information. Although silicon has been instrumental in
technological advancements over the last several decades, use of the electron’s
intrinsic spin, in addition to its charge, holds promise for thinner, faster and
more energy efficient devices. A grand challenge, however, lies in the design
and discovery of materials that allow the interplay between charge and spin to
yield properties whose whole is greater than the sum of its parts. The research
objective of this project is to design, synthesize and study materials where the
underlying crystal structure plays crucial role in providing the platform for
this coupling between charge and spin as a platform that can potentially shape
future technologies, such as spin-based electronics (spintronics) or quantum
computing. Integrated with the research efforts, the education goal of this
project is to bring materials synthesis and characterization to students and the
broader community in the greater DC-Maryland-Virginia (DMV) area through
multiple channels: recruitment of both undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups; curriculum development in quantum materials; and
workshop organization on materials synthesis and characterization for
undergraduate and graduate students. The project also aspires to engage high
school students—who generally do not see science career paths represented in
their communities—in research through existing K-12 programs at GMU, such as the
Aspiring Scientists Summer Internship Program and the GMU STEM Accelerator
Program.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION Finding and understanding emergent phenomena arising due
to the combined effect of electron correlations and electronic topology is a
major goal of the contemporary condensed matter physics. The research goal of
this project is to design, discover and investigate a cross-section of quantum
matter with the unifying principle of degeneracy breaking in either the real or
reciprocal space mediated by the crystal structure of the materials.
Specifically, the project concentrates on: 1) synthesizing and studying by means
of magnetotransport measurements a specific class of kagome lattice magnets that
provide a unique platform for the interplay of topological properties arising
both in the real and the momentum space, and 2) synthesizing and providing
experimental validation of recently proposed collinear antiferromagnets which,
by virtue of the crystalline symmetry, give rise to the properties expected in
ferromagnets but without the net magnetization and without the requirement of
spin-orbit coupling. As such, this project aims to advance the fundamental
understanding of the interplay between electronic topology and complex
magnetism, and the interplay between simple magnetic ordering and the crystal
structure. Its ultimate goal is to synthesize materials that can shape future
technology and quantum information science through the emergent phenomena these
materials harbor. Such properties are applicable for spintronics,
dissipationless electronics and quantum computing. Integrated with the research
efforts, the education goal of this project is to bring materials synthesis and
characterization to students and the broader community in the greater DC-
Maryland-Virginia (DMV) area through multiple channels: recruitment of both
undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups; curriculum
development in quantum materials; and workshop organization on materials
synthesis and characterization for undergraduate and graduate students. The
project also aspires to engage high school students—who generally do not see
science career paths represented in their communities—in research through
existing K-12 programs at GMU, such as the Aspiring Scientists Summer Internship
Program and the GMU STEM Accelerator Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.