* 2343863
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Efficient Ways to Enlarge Practical DNA Storage Capacity by Integrating Bio-Computer Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Bingzhe Li, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2025
* USD 283,362.00

The world's digital data increases immensely each year. By 2025, it will reach
175 Zettabytes (ZB). Most human activities are recorded in digital format today.
However, data recorded in digital media cannot last very long. Therefore,
valuable data cannot be preserved today with our current storage technologies
and devices for a long duration (beyond 15 years). The capacity of existing
storage media cannot keep up with the growth of the amount of digital data.
Also, all storage devices could become obsolete within several years, so the
data stored are vulnerable as they perish as time goes by. Therefore, synthetic
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) becomes an attractive alternative storage medium due
to its high density and long durability. These characteristics of DNA storage
make it a great candidate for archival storage. However, the preliminary study
of the project indicates the practical DNA storage tube capacity based on
current technologies is only around 250GB, which is much less than the expected
capacity. The major reason is that primer-payload collisions in DNA storage can
drastically reduce the number of usable primers in a tube as the data payload
size increases. The use of primers is essential for random access to DNA data.
In this project, an interdisciplinary team is formed to investigate both bio and
storage approaches that can improve the scalability of DNA storage. Among the
many factors that can scale up DNA storage, the project plans to investigate the
following questions: 1) How to identify more primers for a primer library to be
used in DNA storage? 2) Given a primer library, how to efficiently allocate
payload data to avoid primer-payload collisions to increase DNA storage
capacity? and 3) How to effectively use a popular technique called data
deduplication in data backup applications to further increase the storage
capability of DNA storage? With a deep understanding of molecular biology and
computer storage technologies and systems, this interdisciplinary team fosters
several innovative ways of understanding the fundamental issues of DNA storage
and will develop necessary genome engineering, sequencing techniques, software,
and new algorithms to optimize the process of converting the world's digital
data to DNA storage for archiving and preserving today's valuable digital data
for hundreds of years in the future. The goal of storing the world's digital
data in DNA storage to preserve all human activities can move one step closer
with this project. The potential research outcomes of the project include
fostering the advancement of bioscience and storage technologies, preserving
human activities in DNA storage for hundreds of years, and facilitating
fundamental understanding, identifying tradeoffs, and creating efficient ways of
scaling up DNA storage. The project will provide an ideal inter-disciplinary
thinking, hands-on learning, and development environment to teach computer
science and electrical and computer engineering graduate and undergraduate
students important system building and experimental skills that are critical for
today's and the future IT workforce. The research outcomes of the project will
be incorporated into the classroom teaching of the team members, for both class
projects and the core courses in computer science and electrical and computer
engineering. The team plans to include the obtained research results in a new
course on Storage Technologies /Systems for Big Data for students in a Data
Science Program, as well as in undergraduate senior design and directed research
studies. The team plans to disseminate the research advances to industrial
collaborators, and through publications, presentations, and public release of
research data, software tools, and prototype systems to the research community.
The team is committed to recruiting underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
students to the project. Research results will be made quickly available to the
general public and disseminated via websites and open source repositories like
GitHub.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.