* 2344951
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Situation-Aware Identification and Rectification of Regrettable Privacy Decisions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Heng Xu, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 374,996.00

People today are faced with many privacy decisions in their daily interactions
with mobile devices. In the past decade, researchers have studied the design of
many tools and mechanisms, such as privacy nudges, that aim to help individuals
make better privacy decisions. But just like decision support tools in other
domains, these tools cannot make users perfect decision-makers. Users still make
mistakes and regret their privacy decisions later. This project casts a fresh
perspective on Privacy-by-Redesign by helping users revisit and rectify past
privacy decisions that they may regret. In order to avoid annoying users through
repetitive alerts, a focus of the project is to identify which past privacy
decisions most likely trigger regrets, and to ask users to revisit only those
decisions. This project has high societal importance, given that more than 75%
of Americans own a smartphone today and need to make frequent privacy decisions.
The broader impacts of the project also reach technology developers, policy
makers, and consumers by connecting the social analysis of privacy behaviors
with the technical design of privacy tools.

This project is rooted in integrating substantive bodies of multidisciplinary
knowledge to address the acute challenges of mobile privacy. It develops a
theory on how three types of factors, cognitive appraisal, affective states, and
environmental cues undercut high-effort decision making and move people toward
low-effort information processing, which ultimately leads to regrettable privacy
decisions. For the social analysis of privacy behaviors, this project employs a
novel combination of experience sampling method and factorial vignette studies
to empirically validate the theoretical framework. For the technical design of
privacy tools, the project develops an expert-augmented prediction model that
infers from data collectible by a mobile operating system the influential
factors of cognitive appraisal, affective states, and environmental cues, so as
to predict the quality of a privacy decision. The long-term vision of this
project is to enable technological designs that help bridge the discrepancies
between users' privacy decisions and their perceptions, especially in the
context of a mobile system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.