* 2344044
* Analytic Theory of Automorphic Forms and L-Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Rizwanur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 39,257.00

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program in the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This research project is concerned with two objects at the cornerstones of
number theory: L-functions and automorphic forms. These are very special types
of functions, which package a lot of information and symmetry, and for this
reason are the key to solving a myriad of mathematical problems. The project
will reveal new symmetries possessed by L-functions, which in turn will be
useful for understanding objects such as the prime numbers. Prime numbers are
essential in cryptography, a method by which computer data is securely
transferred. The project will also reveal how automorphic forms are distributed.
This will partially answer some open questions in Arithmetic Quantum Chaos, a
multidisciplinary field at the interface of number theory and theoretical
physics. The project will provide research training opportunities for graduate
students. The principal investigator will also continue to be involved in an
outreach program to prepare underprivileged high school students for college
entrance.

In more detail, the principal goals of this project are to: 1) Make progress
towards the Random Wave Conjecture, which predicts that automorphic forms should
behave like random waves and 2) investigate the class of reciprocity formulae
for L-functions. The Random Wave Conjecture can be formulated in terms of
moments of automorphic forms, with the statement for the second moment
corresponding to the familiar Quantum Unique Ergodicity problem. This project
will go beyond QUE, by investigating higher moments of automorphic forms, and
yielding a finer understanding of the distribution of automorphic forms. The
reciprocity formulae are certain exact formulae for moments of L-functions,
exhibiting some surprising symmetry. An early example is Motohashi's formula,
which relates the fourth moment of the Riemann Zeta function to the third moment
of automorphic forms. This project will discover new examples of reciprocity
formulae, which will shed light on the nature of such symmetries and yield new
applications, such as subconvexity bounds for L-functions. The unifying approach
for both goals will be a study of moments of automorphic forms and L-functions,
using methods from the analytic theory of L-functions and the spectral theory of
automorphic forms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.