* 2344570
* Collaborative Research: Minoritized Youth Computer Science Learning, Belonging and Career Interest: Coding and Creating with Beats
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,04/30/2025
* David Shepherd, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 04/30/2025
* USD 196,808.00

Computer science knowledge and skills are essential in the digital world.
Despite progress in the availability of computer science (CS) coursework in
secondary school settings, a number of student groups remain substantially
underrepresented in computing. This project aims to broaden youth participation
in computing by focusing on innovative technology experiences centered around
coding-based music. The project will engage Black, Latinx, and female youth
during the critical middle school years when many students decide whether future
opportunities in CS merit consideration. Through week-long summer programs held
on college campuses, the project will develop and study a series of culturally
relevant activities where participants learn how to play, manipulate, and create
by coding authentic-sounding hip-hop beats using Sonic Pi music software. The
project extends prior research into CS learning through coding beats by (1)
enhancing the depth of technical analysis, (2) moving students from beat
modification to beat creation, and (3) increasing the range of concepts that can
naturally be included in a course. This collaborative effort across two
universities, a local school district, and a community organization will engage
musicians who utilize Sonic Pi in performances and host annual competitions and
concerts featuring student work to help broaden youth perspectives of CS and
computing-related careers. The project team will also prepare 40 teachers and
community instructors to facilitate similar programs in their own settings,
ensuring sustainability beyond the duration of the project. This project is
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

The project employs design-based implementation research to iteratively refine
the instructional approaches across 160 middle school students and two settings
to best address the mismatch between CS culture and the culture and learning
experiences of students underrepresented in computing. This project will design
and investigate a summer program instructional approach that highlights how
particular coding technology (e.g., Sonic Pi), scaffolding techniques, and
learning activities work to support youth's computer science knowledge,
confidence, sense of belonging, and career awareness. The project will build
upon previously funded NSF STEM education research (e.g., EarSketch) by
grounding in the Use-Modify-Create framework, which articulates a trajectory of
youth learning in computing. Mixed methods will inform the research. Qualitative
data from observations, focus groups and computational artifacts will explore
the promise and effectiveness of the program in promoting expected youth
outcomes. Quantitative data (e.g., validated pre- and post-surveys) will
identify emergent patterns that will help strengthen the feasibility,
sustainability, and social validity of the scaffolded approach. The knowledge
and insights gained from this research will provide evidence to support future
programs across other regions and develop strong CS learning experiences for
students underrepresented in computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.