* 2344799
* Youth Engineering Solutions: Engineering Opportunities in Out-of-School Programs for English Learners
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Christine Cunningham, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Matthew A. Verleger
* 09/30/2024
* USD 303,566.00

Millions of youth participate in out-of-school (OS) programs each year. Hispanic
and Black youth participate at twice the rate of Caucasian youth in OS programs,
making OS programs promising venues for addressing inequities in STEM. Although
a majority of programs offer STEM experiences, less than a third of OS STEM
programming includes engineering. High-quality curricular materials can support
the introduction of engineering into these environments. However, such resources
need to be carefully designed to provide learning opportunities that ensure all
youth can participate, contribute, and benefit. One of the most rapidly growing
populations in the U.S. at the elementary level are English learners (ELs).
These youth face the challenge of simultaneously learning English and academic
content, such as engineering. Few, if any, engineering curricula exist for OS
settings that include scaffolds for ELs and their educators. The Youth
Engineering Solutions: Engineering Opportunities in Out-of-School Programs for
English Learners (YES-OS) project will refine a set of equity-oriented design
principles for OS engineering that are informed by strategies for ELs. It will
work closely with OS educators and stakeholders to develop and study two OS
engineering curricular units for youth ages 9–12. Units will feature socially
engaged, real-world design challenges, engage youth in engineering practices,
and provide language scaffolds. The educative materials will include youth,
educator, and family-facing resources and will be designed to scale nationwide.
Research will study how curricula can provide opportunities for ELs and support
educators. YES-OS’s principles, resources, and research will inform asset-based
models that build on youth’s experience to create more equitable educational
opportunities and thus broaden participation in engineering.

YES-OS will investigate ways that equity-oriented OS engineering curricula
provide opportunities for ELs to learn knowledge, discourses, and practices;
bring their cultures, experiences, and ideas to the engineering projects; expand
their repertoire of identities and interests; and enhance membership in the
learning community. The project will: (1) refine, apply, study, and modify a set
of equity-oriented design principles for OS engineering curricula that are
informed by strategies for ELs, (2) develop, test, and revise two OS engineering
units for youth in ages 9–12 that instantiate the principles using design-based
research, (3) begin to examine affordances of engineering for ELs in OS
programming. This will include investigating how the engineering units engage
youth in disciplinary knowledge and practices, scaffold social and academic
discourses, increase interest in STEM, and foster a community that supports
participation and identity development, and (4) explore how equity-based
engineering curricula can support OS educators as they build their knowledge of
and confidence with engineering, engineering practices, and ELs and create
asset-based engineering programming. YES-OS will use design-based research to
systematically design curriculum while simultaneously researching the efficacy
of the curriculum design and the learning environments they foster. Thirty OS
educators nationwide will work with developers to test frameworks and materials.
Data including educator feedback, youth work, surveys, lesson observations and
video, and focus groups will be analyzed using multiple qualitative and
quantitative methods. Resources and findings will be disseminated to educators,
stakeholders, the public, and researchers through websites, conferences,
webinars, newsletters, research articles, and social media.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.