* 2344788
* BEE:  Unraveling the ecological and evolutionary factors shaping host-associated microbial communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Kasie Raymann, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 144,912.00

A major question in both ecology and evolution is: what factors shape microbial
communities? Understanding the factors that shape microbial communities is
important because microbes play key roles in ecosystem function and in human and
animal health. Despite numerous studies, our understanding of what drives
microbial community assembly, composition, and dynamics are still lacking. Our
gap in knowledge is, in large part, due to a lack of integration between the
fields of ecology and evolution. Because microbes evolve so quickly both
ecological and evolutionary pressures must be considered when studying microbial
communities. Environmental factors, species interactions, and evolutionary
dynamics all play a role in shaping communities. However, the relative
contributions of each of these factors in driving microbial community
composition remain unclear. This research will combine concepts of ecology and
evolution to investigate what drives the composition of animal-associated
microbial communities using the honey bee as a model system. The honey bee is an
ideal model system for addressing fundamental questions about animal-associated
microbial community dynamics for several reasons: 1) there are only a few
microbes that live inside the bee gut, 2) all honey bees worldwide contain the
same microbes inside their gut, 3) honey bees are easy to experimentally
manipulate, and 4) all gut microbes of honey bees are cultivable in the lab.

Key to this research is our ability to capture community dynamics not only at
the species level (alpha and beta diversity), but also at the strain level.
Artificially inseminated queen bees will be used to create genetically
controlled colonies that will be used for in vivo experiments (natural and lab).
Community dynamics will be followed across different controlled environmental
conditions (i.e. different genetic backgrounds and lifestyles) in which a host-
associated microbial community can develop. Results will determine how each of
these ecological factors influence microbial composition. The role microbial
competition or colonization order (i.e. neutral vs niche dynamics) plays in
dictating the community composition will be assessed via in vivo co-colonization
experiments. The entire gene content (i.e. functional capabilities) of microbial
communities will be analyzed to test the functional equivalency hypothesis,
which is at the cornerstone of the neutral theory in community ecology.
Additionally, the extent of microevolution that occurs within a host, and how
this impacts community structure over time will be evaluated. Age, lifestyle,
and genetically controlled bees will be co-inoculated with defined communities
(different combinations of strains and species) and temporally assessed for
strain and community level changes. Unlike most microevolution studies which are
done on single organisms under in vitro conditions, this project will follow
evolutionary processes within a natural microbial community. Overall, this
proposal will bridge ecology and evolution by integrating concepts and
approaches from both fields to investigate the forces that govern the
composition of host-associated microbial communities. The broader impacts of
this proposal have three major components that are set in the context of an
institution that is minority serving. The first (i) component is faculty and
student participation in, and organization of, outreach events through formal
partnerships between K-12 schools and informal outreach activities. The second
(ii) component consist of curriculum development to create authentic classroom
research experiences for undergraduates, and the third (iii) component involves
research training for underrepresented minorities in science (URM).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.