* 2344742
* Research Initiation Award: Highly Stable Nanoparticle-Doped Metal-Organic Frameworks for Applications in Water Purification
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Karl Jackson, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 03/31/2024
* USD 38,836.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Virginia
Union University will seek to determine the best synthetic protocols to analyze
nanoparticle-doped meal-organic framework (NP@MOFs) systems for their water
filtration and sanitation properties and to make structural modifications of
these material based on observed performance.

The proposed work explores the simultaneous elimination of biological and
chemical contaminants in water through one composite system. The objectives are
to investigate the impact of the encapsulation of metal nanoparticles inside
water stable MOFs on water purification properties and determine the stability
and recyclability of new and existing NP@MOF systems when used for water
purification applications. The study will be done in four phases with efforts to
offer a system which allows minimal diffusion of doped nanoparticles in the
filtration process. The broader impacts of the proposed work will be the
application of the proposed NP@MOF systems into an advanced mechanism for water
filtration which is essential in underdeveloped civilizations and undeserved
citizenry. Moreover, the proposed work will enhance the infrastructure of
research at VUU, while creating opportunities and access to underrepresented
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.