* 2344820
* CAREER: Tailoring the Selectivity of Electrocatalytic Reactions in Seawater and Brine
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Kelsey Stoerzinger, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2025
* USD 412,782.00

Renewable electricity from energy sources such as wind, solar, wave, and tidal
can be used to drive chemical reactions, including the generation of hydrogen
from water. The hydrogen can be further reacted with other molecules to produce
chemical fuels that are more easily stored and transported compared to
electrical energy. Seawater is an abundant water resource, but electrochemical
hydrogen generation from seawater can generate harmful byproducts from seawater
salts that pose environmental and safety concerns. The project will design and
test materials and electrochemical reaction conditions that selectively promote
hydrogen generation while avoiding the production of undesirable chloride-
containing byproducts. The scientific outcomes will aid the development of
improved energy storage and chemical manufacturing strategies that reduce our
nation’s reliance on non-renewable resources. Furthermore, the research will be
integrated with educational and outreach initiatives emphasizing participation
by underrepresented groups.

The project focuses on selective electrocatalytic water oxidation in systems
containing chlorine salts. By manipulating the electronic structure of an oxide
catalyst, the active sites for water and chlorine-oxidation processes will be
decoupled when the pH-dependent activation of oxygen redox is triggered in
highly covalent materials. This sidesteps the coupling between binding strengths
of chlorine- and oxygen-containing intermediates at transition metal sites,
hindering independent optimization of the reaction pathways. In situ and
operando spectroscopic approaches (X-ray, vibrational) will identify adsorbed
species, their dependence on applied potential and electrolyte composition, and
their interaction with co-adsorbates. Comparison of adsorbate affinity with
theoretical calculations will establish a tradeoff in desired reaction pathway
as a function of surface energetics. Furthermore, the study will generate
mechanistic understanding of the role a secondary manganese-oxide based coating
atop an electrocatalyst can play in limiting the transport of chloride ions and
manipulating adsorbate binding at the buried interface. Design parameters will
be developed for the coatings that enable selective oxidation in brines with
minimal cost to catalytic activity. The findings of the proposed work will be
incorporated into undergraduate reaction engineering courses and K-12 STEM
outreach programs designed to teach students about electrochemical systems. Peer
teaching will be employed to solidify understanding and increase confidence in
science and engineering skillsets, particularly in groups typically
underrepresented in STEM.

The project is supported jointly by the Catalysis program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems, and the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.