* 2344705
* CAREER: qBio+cBio=sBio; Identifying the role of cross-family signaling in angiogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Princess Imoukhuede, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2024
* USD 119,384.00

PI: Imoukhuede, Princess Proposal #: 1653925

A critical challenge in biomedical engineering is a need to control the process
of blood vessel formation, also known as "angiogenesis." Controlling
angiogenesis is important, because blood vessels supply the nutrients necessary
for our organs and tissues to function properly. Efforts to control angiogenesis
in cancer focus on starving and possibly killing the tumor by cutting off tumor
blood supply, typically by looking at a single protein. This project proposes to
overcome current limitations in this type of cancer therapy and meet the general
challenge of controlling angiogenesis by tackling a more difficult, "big-
data"-like problem: understanding how combinations of proteins control
angiogenesis. This project will tackle the problem by: 1) experimentally
determining important protein characteristics; 2) determining mathematical
equations that describe the behaviors of these proteins; and 3) developing
computer simulations that include both the experimental data and the
mathematical equations to determine how the proteins work to cause angiogenesis.
The education and outreach portion of this project will introduce sophomores to
research and computer modeling in an introductory-level course in order to
excite them about STEM. The activities will include mentoring of
underrepresented students to increase their interest and persistence within STEM
majors.

The directed control of angiogenesis remains a pressing need due to its
involvement in the pathology of over 70 diseases. A promising approach for
angiogenesis control involves going beyond the traditional emphasis on the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-VEGF receptor (VEGFR) axis towards a
new focus: cross-axis signaling (protein binding across families). The objective
in this project is to pioneer a shift towards understanding cross-axis
angiogenic signaling via three aims grounded in quantitative biology (qBio),
omputational biology (cBio), and integrative systems biology (sBio).
Quantitative biology will be used to measure cross-axis binding and
concentrations or relevant protein ligands, including through the development of
new quantitative tools for multiplex measurement of receptor concentrations.
Computational biology will be used to construct validated cross-axis models that
will predict how adapter activation contributes to angiogenic hallmarks, cell
proliferation, and migration. Systems biology will be used to predict the role
of cross-axis signaling in angiogenesis by applying the qBio and cBio tools to
angiogenesis in vitro. Ligand, receptor, and adapter concentrations will be
measured, and the magnitude of cross-axis signaling will be predicted. These
predictions will be validated by demonstrating control of vessel formation
(inhibition and stimulation) in vitro. This research will be integrated with
teaching by creating undergraduate research pathways via a core course. This
will introduce systems biology to sophomore students who will develop
computational models of ligand-receptor signaling in angiogenesis. Students will
also be offered opportunities to continue their work within the PI's research
laboratory. Additional mentoring will be provided to underrepresented students
to support their persistence within STEM fields.