* 2344578
* CAREER: Communication-efficient and topology-aware designs for geo-spatial analytics on heterogeneous platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Satish Puri, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 07/31/2027
* USD 199,917.00

Geospatial datasets are growing in volume, complexity, and heterogeneity. The
current era of geospatial big data combined with advancements in data science is
enabling public and private organizations to gain new insights and build new
capabilities. Various agencies and scientific communities rely on spatial data
management and analysis to gain insights and produce actionable plans. This
project will design efficient algorithms for spatial data analytics that can
serve as a crucial tool for solving a wide set of research problems from
different scientific areas. The algorithms and implementations will leverage
high performance computing (HPC) to speedup compute and data intensive workloads
in domains that employ spatial data. The computational geometry algorithms
chosen are broadly applicable in various domains that make use of spatial data,
including sociology, epidemiology, pathology, climate science, solar physics,
etc. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to carry out high
performance computing research. Educational materials relevant to the research
agenda will be developed and disseminated through educational workshops in the
parallel computing and spatial computing domains.

Most of the existing work in the literature for geospatial analytics is limited
to exploiting basic thread-level and data parallelism. Existing work on I/O
efficient algorithms are mostly based on shared memory parallelism and data on
disk. Data movement due to communication among processors is a dominant cost
incurred by an application running on a high performance computing (HPC) system.
We propose communication efficient designs for geospatial analytics on
heterogeneous platforms. A second area of research is topology aware designs for
spatial computing systems that can seamlessly leverage Data Processing Units
(DPUs). A DPU is a new class of coprocessor that evolved as a successor to
programmable smart network interface cards. This project will develop
distributed memory parallel algorithms for filter and refine-based spatial
analytics kernels. Motivated by the heterogeneity in a compute node, there is a
new opportunity for design space exploration for geospatial applications. New
parallelization techniques based on communication vs. computation tradeoffs will
be investigated. The new design will leverage network topology aware spatial
data partitioning and remote direct memory access (RDMA) capability in DPUs for
implementing hierarchical filter and refine techniques. The implementation of
parallel algorithms will be incorporated into publicly available MPI GIS
software. These libraries will be implemented to be scalable in heterogeneous
computing systems. For broader impact, the new software libraries will be
integrated with CyberGIS geospatial packages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.