* 2344994
* RAPID: Land surface hazards under accelerating climate change: Example from 2023 Hurricane Hilary
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Marin Clark, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,928.00

The climate impact on solid earth hazards, such as landslides, debris flows,
river aggregation and flooding, has historically received little attention, but
in recent years, this impact is disrupting communities and altering the
environment we live in. There is an urgent need to understand how new climate
regimes are generating storms that unleash unprecedented episodes of erosion,
ground failure and deposition. For example, arid environments are shaped by long
periods of slow geomorphic activity, punctuated by major events that can
transform landscapes in a geological instant. These events, often triggered by
major storms, also present a range of hazards, including floods, landslides, and
debris flows that can damage major infrastructure (e.g., roads, buildings) as
well as natural and cultural heritage sites. The August 2023 Hurricane Hilary
was a Category 4 Pacific hurricane that triggered an unprecedented tropical-
storm-warning for Southern California, extending from the Mexico-US border to
regions north and east of Los Angeles County. Unlike most of the wintertime
precipitation that arrives in this region in narrow, concentrated bands,
Hurricane Hilary distributed heavy rainfall across a wide swath of southern
California, providing an opportunity to study the widespread geomorphic and
societal impact of a major precipitation event. The most severely affected
regions have been the normally arid desert regions, which suffered heavy
rainfall in excess of typical annual totals with triggered debris flows, flash
flooding and sediment debris waves.

Collection of perishable field data is the main goal of this award, to gain
insights into the debris flow observations that enable longer term predictions
of the hazard cascade. Such direct observations that can test models and drive
new understanding of land surface hazards are sparse in part because major
landscape-changing events, although potentially catastrophic, are rare and thus
few natural examples are well documented using modern technologies. Technologies
like Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR, or laser scanning) and Structure-from-
Motion (SfM) enable change detection and quantification that provide previously
elusive insights. Such data include detailed records of land surface change, the
properties of ground materials that were eroded and redeposited, and impact on
infrastructure. The research will be conducted within the structure of the
Center for Land Surface Hazards (CLaSH), thereby supporting community building
initiative and engaging researchers across disciplines in hazard-related
science, by including new researchers, and students who were not previously
involved in CLaSH. Data generated from this research will be made publicly
available via open access repositories, enabling use by the wider research
community to empirically understand the impact of Hurricane Hilary on the
geologic environment, but also guide next-generation hazard cascade models that
can be validated against the field data collected from this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.