* 2344831
* LEAPS-MPS: Metal-Free Carbons as Efficient Antibacterial Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Wanlu Li, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2024
* USD 192,006.00

LEAPS-MPS: Metal-Free Heteroatom-Doped Carbons as Antibacterial Materials

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Bacterial contamination in wastewater systems presents a significant threat to
public health. Effective water treatment is crucial due to society's rapid
industrialization and urbanization, and drinkable water should be fecal and
total coliforms free. This project aims to investigate the antibacterial
activity of porous carbon materials that are doped with sulfur or/and nitrogen-
containing species. It will open a new perspective on these metal-free materials
in antibacterial studies. By linking the properties of the carbon to their
performance in bacterial inhibition, the most effective features of the carbons
will be identified. Why these species are effective will be explored too. This
project will lay a solid foundation for the long-term material development of
potent metal-free antibacterial materials. Metal-free materials offer the
advantage of reduced cost for the water treatment process. Besides, they can be
potentially applied to the existing filtration systems if they possess effective
antibacterial effects. The project will provide an early-career faculty to
develop a research lab and launch research programs. It will also help the
undergraduate students achieve their educational and career goals, especially
those from underrepresented minority groups.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This interdisciplinary project is to investigate the antibacterial activity of
heteroatom-doped porous carbon materials systematically. The relationship
between the properties (surface chemistry and texture) of carbons and their
performance in bacterial inhibition will be mainly studied. By using in-situ
doping or post-treatment methods, a series of doped-porous carbons will be
prepared and functionalized of doping sulfur or/and nitrogen groups. Escherichia
coli (E. coli) and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) are specifically selected
for testing since they are the most prevalent species of gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria, respectively. The bacteriostasis rate of the carbons will be
calculated. A typical inactivation pathway for bacteria on a carbon-based
material is oxidation stress. The mechanism of the antibacterial process will be
explored by identifying the types of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated
from the carbons. The materials will be intensively characterized by X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy analysis, thermal analysis, porosity analysis,
potentiometric titration, and electron microscopy imaging. The project will
focus on identifying dopant species that are efficient in bacterial inhibition,
thus establishing carbon materials as effective antibacterial materials. For the
photoactive carbons, their antibacterial activity and mechanism will also be
evaluated under visible light radiation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.