* 2345272
* RAPID: Characterizing and Understanding Smoke Transport in 2023 Hawaii Wildfire Event Using Geostationary Satellite Observations and Numerical Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Yun Lin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The raging, wind-whipped wildfires starting on August 8, 2023, destroyed much of
the Lahaina community of the Island Maui and caused hundreds of deaths and
injuries associated with smoke. Smoke emitted from wildfires can exert adverse
effects on air quality and climate over a broad range of temporal and spatial
scales through its transport. However, accurately characterizing vertical
distribution of wildfire plumes is still challenging, leading to large
uncertainties in smoke transport simulations. To date, there has not been an
observation alone-based method to efficiently capture the fast-changing patterns
of smoke transport. Therefore, a comprehensive characterization of smoke
transport and wildfire plume vertical distributions from observational
perspective will greatly advance the fundamental understanding of wildfire smoke
transport pattern like moving direction, distance, and affected area, and at
same time, improve smoke transport simulations by directly addressing one of the
key processes that impacts its modeling. This research will mitigate the
increasingly devastating impacts of wildfire smoke on properties and human
lives, given increasing wildfire activities under climate change. The project
will also help to develop a near real-time forecast system on smoke movement and
facilitate a warning framework to alert local residents in advance of the
arrival of wildfire smoke.

By examining the intensive smoke emissions and rapid smoke movement associated
with the 2023 Maui wildfires, this project will provide a systematic assessment
of smoke transport patterns and of wildfire plume vertical distributions impacts
on smoke transport, utilizing satellite observations and numerical modeling. The
key scientific questions include 1) What are the specific characteristics and
temporal variations of smoke transport pattern and wildfire plume vertical
distributions in the 2023 Maui wildfires? 2) How do the vertical distributions
of wildfire plume affect the smoke transport pattern? Specifically, this project
will employ high-frequency geostationary satellite measurements to characterize
the smoke transport during the 2023 Maui wildfires using an advance computer
vision technique, i.e., optical flow analysis, and then estimate wildfire plume
rise based on the diurnal cycles of fire radiative power derived by
geostationary satellite to characterize the plume vertical distributions. The
modeling sensitivity studies will be performed using the WRF-Chem model to
evaluate how the plume vertical distribution affects smoke transport. Finally,
the model simulations will be validated against the observation-based analysis
to identify and reconcile the possible discrepancies between them and gain a
more precise description of smoke transport patterns. This research actually
represents the first-time attempt to quantify smoke transport using observations
exclusively. Evidence from observations will be used to constrain and evaluate
model simulations on smoke transport during the 2023 Maui wildfire event, and
improve the modeling simulations by better representing wildfire plume rising
process in the model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.