* 2345643
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Integrated Sociotechnical Investigations of the Compounding Impacts of Maui Wildfires fueled by Hurricane Dora
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Haizhong Wang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project collects ephemeral data
to better understand the compounding impacts of Maui wildfires and Hurricane
Dora and reveal the differences between residents and tourists in their
behavioral responses as affected by infrastructure failures. It examines the
sources of warning information, protective action decision-making, and
evacuation logistics at the individual level. In the meantime, the project
captures the operation states of disaster warning operations in Maui under the
loss of cell and electric power services. Failures at each system are
documented, as well as the cascading effect among inter-connected infrastructure
systems. The research outcomes expand the existing body of scientific knowledge
on warning and evacuation while advancing the understanding of informal networks
and decision-making in the absence of official guidance.

The hurricane-fueled fast-moving Maui wildfire offers a unique research
opportunity to explore the intricacies of decision-making in the absence of
official warnings. This event has three unique characteristics. First, Maui has
a large percentage of tourists who may exhibit different patterns in warning
reception, protective action decision-making, and evacuation logistics. Second,
none of the 80 warning sirens placed around the island were activated in
response to the wildfire threat. Its absence, coupled with the loss of cell
phone and power services, severely limited access to timely official warnings.
Third, the cascading failures of critical infrastructure systems highlighted the
interdependencies among them and the devastating consequences. This project
collects and analyzes multi-dimensional data on heterogeneous behavioral
responses by residents and tourists with varying degrees of warning information,
as well as the ways in which these responses were affected by critical
infrastructure failures (i.e., damages/disruptions to transportation, power, and
communication network interoperability). The rich datasets not only bolster
future digital twin-empowered applications but also contribute to the
enhancement of emergency management in cyber and physical domains. In addition,
the project engages and trains multiple Native Hawaiian students in data
collection and analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.