* 2345813
* Investigation of Protein Transport in Functionalized Polymeric Nanopores
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Xiyun Guan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2025
* USD 333,503.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Xiyun Guan and his research team at the
Illinois Institute of Technology are investigating protein transport in
functionalized polymeric nanopores. Facilitated translocation of molecules
through channels and pores is of fundamental importance for transmembrane
transport in biological systems. The Guan group will focus their research
efforts on investigating the interactions between proteins and synthetic
nanoscale-sized pores fabricated in poly-(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) films,
and developing new strategies to improve the resolution and sensitivity of PET
nanopores and expand their utility. Results from this work have the potential to
advance understanding of PET nanopore systems and provide insight into rigorous
design of PET nanopore stochastic sensors. The proposed research has the
potential to have a broad impact on a variety of areas, such as biomaterials,
biosensing, nanotechnology, and electrochemistry. This project provides unique
research opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high-school students,
including individuals actively recruited from underrepresented groups.

In this research project, the Guan team at the Illinois Institute of Technology
aims to address a bottleneck, i.e., poor resolution and sensitivity, which has
limited the utility of PET nanopores as single-molecule stochastic sensing
elements for various applications in the past decade. The intent of this project
is to systematically examine the effects of various factors on the interaction
between proteins and the PET nanopores, and establish the relationships between
the kinetic and thermodynamic properties of proteins inside a PET nanopore and
the pore diameters, pore inner surface functions and physical conditions.
Specific objectives include (i) developing a simple, cost-effective, easy to
create, stable, transportable and reusable functionalized single-track etched
conical-shaped PET nanopore platform for protein characterization at the single
molecule level; (ii) developing a new label-free strategy to investigate the
dynamic structural information (e.g., conformational change) of biomolecules in
real time; (iii) understanding the mechanisms regarding how various factors
affect the kinetic and thermodynamic properties of protein interactions with the
PET nanopores; and (iv) the using existing physico-chemical models or developing
new models, as needed, for nanopore systems to predict the kinetic and
thermodynamic properties of protein transport in nanopores.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.