* 2345215
* Matching and Data Integration
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Zongming Ma, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 165,536.00

Demand for matching and integrating datasets arises in a wide range of
application fields where the data collection process is distributed and
cumulative, where data related to different aspects of a complex system must be
collected separately through different protocols, and where anonymity is
maintained in data communication. There is a great need to develop efficient
algorithms and sound theoretical understanding for matching in these settings.
Ideally, these developments should be based on concrete application scenarios,
such as those arising in single-cell biology and privacy-aware social network
analysis. The project will provide modeling, methods, theory, and software
implementations for matching and data integration to researchers in the broader
scientific community, including but not limited to cell biology, psychology,
telecommunications engineering, and medicine. These methods will be especially
attractive to medical researchers and cell biologists as they bear the potential
of unleashing the full power of single-cell data these researchers have
accumulated over time with substantial human resources and financial costs. This
project will also make contributions to human resource development. The
investigator will focus on improving diversity in statistics and data science
research through active recruitment of students to work on the project.

This project will pursue three progressively more challenging goals. The first
is to study the matching of two datasets with partially overlapping features,
emphasizing the benefit of including non-overlapping features. The second is to
develop methods for matching two datasets with disjoint feature sets. They
jointly serve as preparatory steps toward the third goal: to develop
theoretically and/or empirically justifiable pipelines for matching more than
two datasets and integrating them into a single dataset to be used in downstream
analyses. The developed methods and pipelines will be benchmarked and validated
on real data through close collaborations with field experts and research labs
at Stanford University, the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of
North Carolina.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.