* 2345649
* RAPID: Monitoring water quality changes in an agricultural karst aquifer after a major storm
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Patricia Spellman, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2024
* USD 40,400.00

Tropical systems such as hurricanes, have the potential to generate extremely
high winds and can also generate heavy and substantial rainfall for several
days, over large spatial scales. When these storms pass over agricultural
landscapes in karst, which are carbonate rock environments, they can have
profound impacts on the quality and quantity of the ground water that recharges
the karst aquifers. This is significant because karst are unique environments
where easier to dissolve bedrock creates characteristic porosity that can
respond to changes in surface water dynamics rapidly. In karst agricultural
landscapes, where nutrients are leached and mobilized by heavy flooding from
hurricane size storms, their impact on groundwater quality can be profound.
However, the impact of extreme storms, such as hurricane Idalia, on nutrient and
agricultural solute mobilization in karst aquifers has not received much
attention. Therefore, it is unclear what immediate, short, and long-term effects
of these tropical storms are on the quality of groundwater and receiving surface
water bodies. The researchers will investigate mobilization of polluting
nutrients in a karst agricultural system in northern Florida. Outcomes will
contribute to improve water quality management and inform hydrologic and solute
transport modelling that support the restoration of agriculturally impaired
water systems.

The researchers will monitor nutrient and solute concentrations and quantify
groundwater recharge from Hurricane Idalia in the karstic Floridan Aquifer
System (FAS) in northern Florida. They will collect water samples at different
spring basins impacted by the Hurricane and at the terminus of the Suwannee
River, at the Gulf of Mexico, to monitor the extent of nutrient loadings to the
Gulf. In addition to their measurements, they will use legacy data to quantify
excess nutrient and solute loading compared to average conditions. These
investigations will inform answers to questions about the impacts of tropical
systems on nutrient and solute loading to receiving water bodies. The project
outcomes will be shared with Suwannee River Water Management District and also
in the education of undergraduate students in hydrology at the University of
South Florida.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.