* 2345201
* RAPID: Coral reef stress responses to an urban fire
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Andrea Kealoha, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jayne Gardiner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,948.00

Maui’s coral reefs support subsistence, recreational, and commercial fishing,
particularly for the large Native Hawaiian population. In August 2023, hurricane
winds and low humidity combined with the recent drought to cause an
unprecedented fire in Lahaina, an urban coastal town on the island of Maui. The
fire quickly burned over 2170 acres and 2200 structures, releasing ash,
particulate matter and potentially toxic materials into the adjacent coastal
waters. This project provides novel information on the ecological impacts of
wildfires to coral reefs to aid in climate change adaptation and emergency
response planning. Cultural perspectives and traditional knowledge of Native
Hawaiian community members are incorporated throughout the research process. The
project directly supports four students, including a Native Hawaiian student, to
participate in activities including field work, data collection, analyses and
interpretation, and communication of research results.

A wildfire in an urban city located adjacent to a coral reef is unprecedented
but may become more common as expanding shoreline development intersects with
potentially increased fire risk with climate change. The overall objective of
this study is to examine the direct effects of urban wildfires and associated
potential stressors - such as reduced water quality, acidification, hypoxia, and
heavy metals - on coral reef ecosystem function and the potential for regime
shifts favoring benthic algae instead of corals. Using the 2023 Lahaina wildfire
as a case study, the project employs a “before-after control-impact” design to
compare three west Maui reefs both affected and unaffected by wildfire, with
special attention to the anticipated remobilization of organic matter, toxic
compounds (e.g., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) and metals following rain
events in autumn. Physical and chemical water parameters will constrain the
reef-scale carbon cycle and coral metabolism before, during and after runoff
events to document the ecological responses to urban fire impacts. This project
will support three Early Career Researchers, contribute toward research training
for multiple graduate and undergraduate students, and provide valuable
information about contaminants and water quality to a community that relies
heavily on coral reef resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.