* 2345563
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Automatic Exploits Detection and Mitigation for Industrial Control System Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Muhammad Mehdi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 33,017.00

Industrial control systems (ICS) operates critical industrial infrastructure
such as water and power, oil and gas, manufacturing and logistics, and other
essential industries. Such systems consists of a complex network of interactive
systems that control the critical aspects of the physical world. Traditionally,
these control systems have been designed for isolated environments with no
communication with the outside world. The advent of the Internet of Things (IoT)
has played a key role in connecting ICS elements to the Internet. Their
governing protocols, however, have not fundamentally changed to incorporate
security principles into their design. There is a need for performing
comprehensive security analyses on ICS protocols for their safe and secure
operations over the Internet. The broader impacts include partnerships with
industry, and broadening the research participation of students from
underrepresented backgrounds.

This project aims to explore a viable path to conduct a security analysis on ICS
system protocols. This is challenging as ICS systems implement a mix of closed
and open-source protocols and logging all execution paths of these protocols is
not feasible. The project leverages model inference techniques to gain insights
into the working of ICS protocols. The key technique is to record the Finite
State Machines (FSMs) of ICS protocols to infer their implementation models. The
inferred model is then used to identify the protocols’ states and their
transitions which are then validated against the security properties for
analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.