* 2345898
* CAREER: Understanding the Relationship of Covert and Overt Attention Using Concurrent EEG and Eye Tracking
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nicholas Gaspelin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2026
* USD 348,581.00

In humans, visual search is crucial for everyday goal-directed behavior. Whether
scanning the road for hazards while driving or looking for a can of soup in a
grocery store, people constantly search through complex visual environments to
locate objects of interest. Despite its importance, many basic questions about
the brain processes involved in visual search remain unanswered. One such
question is how eye movements are controlled by the brain during visual search.
Humans generate rapid, ballistic eye movements called saccades which are used to
focus attention on important objects. These eye movements occur about 2-3 times
per second and are generated approximately 100,000 times per day. However,
scientists are only beginning to understand how these saccadic eye movements are
controlled by different brain areas. The current project aims to bridge this gap
in knowledge by developing a new technique to simultaneously measure eye
movements (via infrared eye tracking) and neural activity (via
electroencephalography; EEG). Combining these two types of data will allow us to
directly examine attentional processes in the brain that occur just before eye
movements are generated. This project will lead to a better understanding of the
basic neuroscience underlying eye movements. The knowledge gained from this
project will also help provide key insights about visual search in applied
settings such as radiological screening, transportation baggage security, and
motor vehicle traffic control.

This project will explore how the brain controls eye movements to search through
complex images. Prior research has identified two mechanisms of visual attention
in humans. First, saccadic eye movements are used to rapidly fixate objects of
interest. These ballistic eye movements occur many times per second and can be
directly monitored using infrared eye-tracking cameras. Second, humans can also
covertly attend objects without moving the eyes. That is, people can monitor an
object “out of the corner of their eye” without directly looking at the object.
Interestingly, previous research has developed techniques to directly measure
covert attention using EEG to noninvasively monitor neural activity from visual
cortex in the brain. However, a major shortcoming of this past research is that
it used search tasks that prohibited eye movements because they result in noisy
voltage fluctuations that make EEG waveforms impossible to interpret. As a
result, little is known about how the brain uses covert attention to coordinate
eye movements during everyday visual search. The current project aims to resolve
this by developing a new technique to measure brain activity that occurs just
before eye movement are generated. The PI will measure shifts of covert
attention (via EEG) and eye movements (via infrared eye tracking) concurrently.
During analysis, the PI will then examine the EEG waveform during the period of
time prior to the eye movement for markers of covert attentional selection.
Specifically, the PI will assess whether the N2pc component—a gold-standard EEG
measurement of attentional orienting—occurs just before eye movements are
generated to a visual stimulus. Additionally, this project will involve a
virtual workshop to train promising young researchers approaches computer
programming in cognitive neuroscience. The ultimate goals of this project are to
understand how covert attentional systems in the brain are used to guide eye
movements during visual search and to develop better cognitive neuroscience
models of visual attention in humans.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.