* 2345383
* RAPID: Learning from the Maui community to understand layers of trauma and trauma-informed STEM education as a tool to support processing, recovery, and healing
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Monique Chyba, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Youth and their caregivers can play a critical role in rebuilding communities
that are heavily impacted from natural disasters. Trauma informed STEM education
can support youth and their communities to heal and recover during the aftermath
of disasters. In this project, the Maui community and University of Hawaii
researchers will collaborate to understand the role of STEM education in helping
youth process the events in their community via content related to wildfires and
their environmental impacts. â€œIn order to understand the causes and impacts of
wildfires, youth need to be able to use environmental science concepts,
mathematical practices, and data science tools. In traumatic situations, it is
also important to work with the impacted community to develop and implement
programs that will meet their needs. The project will begin by listening to and
engaging with organizations and schools in the Maui community. The work in this
RAPID project engages with the community in the early stages of the recovery
process to understand what needs and resources will support STEM learning
experiences.

The research for this project will investigate a process of collaboration with
the community to engage trauma-informed STEM education. The research team has
prior experience using the STEMS2 (Science, Technology, Engineering,
Mathematics, Social Sciences, and Sense of Place) framework for trauma-informed
STEM education that engages community members in the process of learning about
their resources and needs followed by the co-design of learning experiences.
This process is potentially applicable to other contexts that have recently
faced natural disasters as one way to help youth and their communities recover
while engaging STEM content and practices. The research will rely on a set of
qualitative talk stories, group conversations and interviews to understand the
experiences and needs of youth, the community members, and educational
organizations. The research in this phase represents the immediate responses and
reactions to the wildfire and its impact on youth, their caregivers, and their
communities. The project will work with K-12 students and partner organizations
(e.g., schools, non-profit organizations).

This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.