* 2345468
* RAPID: Concentration and Form of Metal and Metal-Baring Nanomaterial Contamination in Maui Fire Ash and Soil
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2024
* Mohammed Baalousha, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 10/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Wildfire activity and associated environmental impacts have increased
dramatically in recent years as a result of climate and societal changes. Fire
liberates and alters the properties of metals stored in plants, soils, and
structural materials, rendering them more soluble, reactive, and potentially
more hazardous to environmental and human health. This Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) project will collect time-sensitive samples and data related to the Maui
fire. In particular, this research will examine the 1) concentration,
composition, and properties of metals and metal-bearing nanomaterials, and
environmentally persistent free radicals in fire ash and soil collected
following the Maui fire, 2) estimate the lung bioaccessibility of metals from
fire ash, and 3) the mobilization of metals and nanomaterials in fire ash into
surface water receiving runoff from burned areas. The data generated in this
project will be shared with local Maui residents and communities in a timely
manner to assist the Maui community in understanding the contaminants left over
on the ground in their homes, businesses, and land following the catastrophic
Maui fire and the potential environmental and human health risks of such
contaminants. This project will support the training of two graduate students.
Methods, data, and tools generated in this project will be integrated into
existing undergraduate and graduate curricula at the University of South
Carolina and California State University.

The combustion of vegetation and structural materials in the wildland-urban
interface leaves behind fire ash which is typically enriched in metals and
metal-bearing nanomaterials. Additionally, the high temperature, limited oxygen,
and release of reducing agents due to pyrolysis of organic matter in the fire
environment alters the properties of metals and metal-bearing nanomaterials,
potentially transforming them to more mobile and reactive materials compared to
their native counterparts. Rainfall generates overland runoff which further
mobilizes metals and nanomaterials in the fire ashes to downstream surface
waters, potentially causing environmental and human health concerns. This Rapid
Response Research (RAPID) project will collect time-sensitive ash, soil, and
water samples and data related to the Maui fire with the aim to 1) quantify the
concentration metal, metal bearing-nanomaterial, and environmentally persistent
free radicals in the wildfire-urban interface fire ash and soil collected
following the Maui wildland-urban interface fire, 2) characterize the
properties, with particular focus on metal speciation, of metal-bearing
nanomaterials in fire ash and soil, and 3) estimate the lung bioaccessibility of
metals from fire ash using established metal solubility assays in artificial
lung fluids. The proposed research will provide a comprehensive understanding of
the nature, concentrations, and transformations of metals, metal-bearing
nanomaterials, and environmentally persistent free radicals in the fire
environment. These data will be generated by adopting a state-of-the-art multi-
method approach to characterize the properties of incidental nanomaterials
including single particle-inductively coupled plasma-time of flight-mass
spectroscopy, high resolution-transmission electron microscopy, X-ray
diffraction, X-ray absorption spectroscopy, and electron paramagnetic resonance.
The major and most important broader impact of the proposed research is to
assist the Maui community in understanding the contaminants left over on the
ground in their homes, businesses, and land following the catastrophic Maui fire
and the potential environmental and human health risks of such contaminants.
Other broader impacts of the proposed research include: 1) identifying novel
questions and guiding future research in the area of fire-borne contamination;
2) generating datasets useful to other fields such as public health to better
understand diseases linked to exposure to fire-emitted contaminants; and 3)
enabling use of the generated data by public utilities such as drinking water
treatment plants, to ensure appropriate processing of drinking water.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.