* 2345035
* Covariate-adjusted Expected Shortfall under Data Heterogeneity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xuming He, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 330,000.00

The expected shortfall of a random variable is the tail average below or above a
given threshold specified by a quantile, and it becomes a natural and useful
summary statistic when low- or high-valued outcomes are of primary interest, as
is often the case in risk assessment and treatment effect detection. Given the
emerging importance of the expected shortfall as a summary measure, the recent
literature in financial econometrics, statistics and operations research has
focused on the expected shortfall regression, which enables one to evaluate the
tail differences after adjusting for the covariates or possible confounding
factors. The project will study the estimation of covariate-adjusted expected
shortfall, identify new approaches for estimation, and study the statistical
properties for its adaptation to data heterogeneity. The proposed research will
provide toolkit for data-driven and evidence-based analysis in diverse fields,
including concussion research, health disparity research, and climate studies.
The project will also contribute to the training of a new generation of
statisticians and data scientists.

The project will develop a new approach to estimation of covariate-adjusted
expected shortfall that is computationally feasible and flexible, adapts well to
data heterogeneity, and allows effective statistical inference. The proposed
approach is built on a characterization of the expected shortfall based on a
quantile loss function, but without reliance on the quantile function itself.
When the expected shortfall function takes a parametric form, the proposed
approach will start with an initial estimator of the expected shortfall at
possibly a sub-optimal rate of convergence and obtain a much better solution
from convex optimization. The proposed method works under weak modeling
assumptions and opens a new window of opportunities for better statistical
inference for expected shortfall regression.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.