* 2345030
* Techniques in Symplectic Geometry and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Guangbo Xu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 165,018.00

The central goal in geometry and topology is to understand mathematical spaces.
A mathematical space can be characterized by both local and global information,
such as how curved it is (local) and how connected it is (global). As a
subfield, symplectic geometry studies a special kind of space called a
symplectic manifold. These spaces are all the same locally but can have a
variety of global shapes. The main tools of study fall into two categories:
algebraic and analytic. The algebraic tools are the frameworks of wrapping up
global information and making calculations, while the analytic tools are
techniques for solving differential equations and for constructing the algebraic
frameworks. This research project aims to improve existing techniques and
develop new tools to solve longstanding difficult questions, with emphasis on
analytic methods. At the same time, the project will enrich the K-12 outreach
(Math Circle) program at Texas A&M University, build a community of researchers
in Texas and Central South America, and enhance connections among mathematics
faculty and students.

On the technical level, the project involves three topics. First, using the
technique of virtual cycle and adiabatic limit, the research aims to establish
the relationship between Witten's gauged linear sigma model and the nonlinear
sigma model. In contrast to many algebraic approaches, the method is analytic,
allowing one to extend to the open-string case where algebraic methods are not
yet available. Second, using a new method, the PI plans to prove compactness
results in situations where traditional approaches do not apply. This includes a
compactness result in Atiyah-Floer conjecture, compactness for pseudoholomorphic
curves regarding reversed surgery for cleanly-intersecting Lagrangian
submanifolds, and compactness for pseudoholomorphic curves with certain singular
Lagrangian boundary conditions. Third, the project aims to develop a new
counting method to define Gromov-Witten invariants and Floer homology over
integers. The PI will also train PhD students and advise undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.