* 2345433
* CAREER: Continuum Kinetic Studies of Hydrodynamic and Magneto Hydrodynamic Instabilities
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Bhuvana Srinivasan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 347,193.00

Observations of supernovae explosions that occur upon the death of a star have
been made and documented for thousands of years. Such observations have
motivated laboratory experiments to replicate astrophysical phenomena.
Concurrently, there has been development of computational modeling capabilities
aimed at reproducing results from both observations and experiments. The goal of
this project is to conclusively address the existing discrepancies between
numerical simulations and real world measurements in regimes of relevance to
astrophysics. Novel numerical tools to be developed as part of this study will
have broad applicability to fundamental science questions, national security,
energy, and spacecraft engineering. The strongly integrated education plan will
engage students from K-12 through graduate school in research and career
opportunities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
through an online user experience. The education and outreach activities will
also strive to encourage women and under-represented groups to pursue STEM
careers through collaborations with the Center for the Enhancement of
Engineering Diversity at Virginia Tech and minority-serving community colleges
in Virginia.

In high-energy-density regimes, numerical simulations have been unable to
reproduce the results from experiments and observations for decades. The state-
of-the-art in numerical simulations of high-energy-density astrophysical and
laboratory plasmas uses fluid models, specifically radiation-hydrodynamic and
radiation-magnetohydrodynamic models. Significant deficiencies in these single-
fluid models include the inability to capture physics effects included in more
advanced high-fidelity multi-fluid models. The missing physics can notably
impact plasma transport, which may have significant anisotropies. Furthermore,
the effect of non-thermal particle population on plasma transport may be missed
even by most advanced fluid models. The key to matching experimental data has
been to include ad hoc tunable parameters in fluid simulations. What is
necessary, but has been impractical until recently due to computational
limitations, are first-principles high-dimensional kinetic calculations that can
address conclusively whether the discrepancies between experiments and
hydrodynamic codes could be explained using kinetic physics. The present study
will include first-principles kinetic calculations using a novel, continuum-
kinetic, high-order accurate, and computationally efficient algorithm to study
plasma dynamics and transport in the presence of hydrodynamic and
magnetohydrodynamic instabilities in high-energy-density plasmas. This project
will address long-standing discrepancies between high-energy-density experiments
and simulations and, as a result, could significantly advance our understanding
of plasma transport with implications in a number of research areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.