* 2345339
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Reconfigurable Kernel Datapaths with Adaptive Optimizations
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Ang Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 541,887.00

Operating systems are a key part of every computer system. They sit between
applications and hardware to provide security isolation as well as the sharing
of physical resources such as the CPU, memory, and disk. Since operating systems
run security critical code, they are hard to change safely, yet the policies
they use for resource management can have a large impact on application and
user-perceived performance. This project aims to develop an easily deployable
architecture for lightweight data collection in the kernel, and then to use
machine learning on that data to discover and deploy better kernel policies
without compromising kernel security.

The key idea is called reconfigurable kernel datapaths. Many parts of the
operating system kernel process requests - to send network packets to the
Internet, to store or look up file data, and to start and stop applications.
Each of these involves a number of policy questions that could potentially
benefit from machine learning. For example, the file system is often used in a
repeated way, and by learning those patterns, it can potentially anticipate
application behavior to bring data from disk into memory before it is requested.
Operating systems do this to some extent already, but the policies they use are
only weakly informed by data and can be counterproductive on certain access
patterns. Reconfigurable kernel datapaths aims to address this, by providing a
standardized architecture for instrumenting kernel datapaths, gathering data on
the effectiveness of kernel policies, using machine learning to discover better
policies, and finally deploying those policies using the same reconfigurable
kernel datapaths used to gather data in the first place.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.