* 2346568
* RAPID: Evaluation of an Artificial Intelligence-enhanced Edge Sensor System for Multi-Hazard Monitoring and Detection
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Jason Leigh, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

On Aug 8, 2023, Lahaina faced a massive fire, exacerbated by regional drought,
high temperatures, and winds influenced by Hurricane Dora. This project combines
University of Hawaii's Climate Mesonet system with Northwestern Universityâ€™s
Sage Artificial Intelligence-enhanced instrument platform to build a multi-
hazard monitoring and detection station for natural disasters such as fires,
high winds, and floods. The system is being deployed as near as possible to the
burn site in Lahaina/Maui, to gather data vital to the recovery effort.

The work is being conducted by a team with over 80 years of experience in
research, development and deployment of scientific instrumentation and cyber-
infrastructure used by government agencies, businesses and the general public.
The project integrates cutting edge climate science with cutting-edge computer
science approaches for enhanced instrument design, gathers essential climate and
pollutant data to aid clean-up activities in Lahaina, and obtains performance
and reliability data, guiding both instrument enhancements and Lahaina's
recovery planning.

This project provides essential data for informing Lahaina's recovery, while
highlighting to the community the advantages of adopting recent climate science
and cyber-infrastructure advancements. Local students in Maui are being
recruited to participate in the instrument construction, data gathering,
analysis and visualization effort.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.