* 2346689
* Collaborative: Terahertz Spectroscopy of Clathrates
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Michael Ruggiero, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 164,120.00

This project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, a collaboration between Professor Daniel
Mittleman of Brown University and Professor Michael Ruggiero of the University
of Vermont, focuses on the study of the vibrational motions of clathrate
materials. Clathrates are porous materials consisting of small molecules, often
called ‘guests’, held within a cage formed by a network of ‘host’ molecules. The
host molecules can be of many different types, including the crucial example in
which the host cage structure is formed by water molecules. These water
clathrates can enclose various guest molecules such as methane and other
greenhouse gases. Methane clathrates of this type can form naturally in the
environment, and are plentiful in the permafrost and at the bottom of the ocean.
They are also one of the primary sources of clogs in natural gas pipelines. It
is now understood that the vibrational modes of these macromolecular structures,
especially those vibrations which oscillate at relatively low frequency, are
intimately related to many properties of clathrates including their formation
and dissociation dynamics and their chemical reactivity. The collaborative
research team is using radiation in the terahertz range of the spectrum (higher
frequency than microwaves, but lower than most infrared measurements) to study
how these vibrational motions are influenced by temperature, pressure, and the
local chemical environment. They are understanding critical chemical reactions
involving clathrates, such as the reaction in which an existing guest molecule
(e.g., methane) is exchanged with a new one (e.g., carbon dioxide), thus storing
the carbon dioxide while extracting the methane. In parallel to these research
efforts, the project personnel are coordinating summer workshops for high school
students that are offered at both Brown and the University of Vermont, expanding
the reach of this research to the next generation of early career scientists.
The goal of this research program is to investigate fundamental questions about
the kinetics and dynamics that drive the formation and properties of clathrates
using terahertz (THz) spectroscopy (0.3 – 4 THz), and to develop a new
theoretical framework for interpreting these measurements which accurately
accounts for the anharmonicity of the relevant modes. The thermodynamic and
structural properties of clathrates are generally well characterized, but the
microscopic origins of these macroscopic phenomena remain unknown. As a result,
there are many open questions concerning their kinetics of formation and
dissociation, vibrational dynamics, structural phase transitions, and stability.
This research is employing recently developed techniques for pressure- and
temperature-dependent terahertz spectroscopy to characterize the low-frequency
modes of various clathrate compounds, and to observe the evolution of the
vibrational landscape as reactions such as the guest exchange reaction unfold.
The researchers are developing new theoretical tools for the ab initio
prediction of these spectra. This approach incorporates a rigorous description
of anharmonicity into the vibrational analysis, which is critical for accurately
describing the relevant low-frequency modes, as well as many thermodynamic
quantities. Finally, the project personnel are also developing a new
interdisciplinary course for undergraduate and graduate students covering
ultrafast spectroscopy in the chemical sciences, which serves both institutions,
as well as the greater STEM community, by filling in this important area of
modern chemical research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.