* 2346680
* Combinatorics of Filters, Large Cardinal and Prikry-Type Forcing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Tom Benhamou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2026
* USD 117,782.00

Our understanding of the mathematical universe, or more precisely, the behavior
of the infinite, is quite limited. The main reason for this limitation is the
incapability of the Zermelo-Fraenkel axiomatic system of set theory (ZFC), which
is the global standard for the formal foundations of mathematics, to determine
basic questions about the infinite. This channeled the research in modern set
theory to mainly two directions. The first direction is the search for new
restraints imposed by ZFC on the behavior of the infinite. This direction had
great success in the realm of singular cardinal arithmetic where new surprising
principles were discovered by Silver and later by Shelah. This project aims to
study some of these principles. The second direction is the subtle interaction
between extensions of ZFC to stronger axiomatic systems and statements which are
unsettled by ZFC. Perhaps the most prominent axiomatic systems are extensions of
ZFC by the so-called large cardinal axioms. This project contributes to the
development of new constructions with large cardinals, implementing them to
analyze the interaction between those large cardinal axioms and unsettled
statements. The PI will lean of his extensive experiences of mentoring
underprivileged students in his teaching activities.

This project deals with several central areas in set theory: (i) forcing theory
and more particularly Prikry-type forcing; (ii) cardinal arithmetic; and (iii)
infinitary combinatorics. Forcing with a Prikry-type forcing notion is perhaps
the most important technique to generate models with non-trivial patterns of
singular cardinal arithmetic. This project contributes to the investigation and
sophistication of these techniques through several aspects: the development of
combinatorics of ultrafilters, the discovery of new connections of this theory
with other areas of set theory such as inner model theory and infinite
combinatorics, the characterization of intermediate models of several Prikry-
type models such as the Magidor-Radin model and the tree Prikry forcing, and
obtaining stationary reflection at the successor of the first singulars of
uncountable cofinalities. One particularly interesting combinatorial property of
ultrafilters which is investigated in this project is the Galvin property which
recently gained renewed interest due to the surprising connections of this
property to the structure of ultrafilters in canonical inner models, the Tukey
order, Prikry forcing, partition relations and more.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.