* 2346114
* National Ecological Observatory Network Governing Cooperative Agreement
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2028
* Paula Mabee, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Charlotte Roehm
* 10/31/2028
* USD 1.00

The future health, welfare, and security of the U.S. depend upon diverse natural
systems that can be altered by the changing world. The National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON), the first continental-scale facility of its kind in
the world, addresses the nature of these changes and their causes by acquiring
standardized biological and environmental measurements from the local to
continental scale. It provides key data to enable scientists to understand and
predict the changes and enable policy makers potentially to lessen detrimental
effects. NEON is democratizing access to this area of science in unprecedented
ways by providing high-quality data free of charge to anyone interested in
pursuing advanced ecological and climate research. NEON provides outreach
nationwide in each of its 20 ecological regions to build a diverse, inclusive,
and interdisciplinary next generation of researchers. With its partners, NEON
provides data skills training and educational materials to a wide variety of
stakeholders.

The NEON mission is to enable better understanding and prediction of the drivers
of, and responses to, ecological changes by providing freely available, high-
quality continental and decadal-scale ecological data and samples informed by
broad scientific engagement. The managing entity for this project realizes this
mission and advances the potential for discovery by providing rapid and
broadened access to high-quality NEON data and samples through robust, secure,
and accessible cyberinfrastructure, educational and outreach programs, findable,
accessible, interoperable, and reusable – FAIR - data partners, and the NEON
Biorepository. The robust NEON cyberinfrastructure that provides free and open
access to data and analytic tools will continue to empower a community of
practice to develop open-source code, analytic tools, standardized protocols,
and derived ecological data products. NEON infrastructure is continuously
operated at 81 sites in 20 distinct ecological regions spanning the continental
United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Over 180 data products are
collected using a sensor network, airborne remote sensing, and manual field
observations and collections. These free and openly available data are provided
to scientists, educators, and the public for societal benefit through the NEON
data portal (https://data.neonscience.org/). Physical samples are collected and
made available for use through the NEON Biorepository
(https://biorepo.neonscience.org/portal/). NEON provides customized access to
many parts of its infrastructure, including personnel, through a cost-
recoverable Assignable Assets program. Centralized planning drives efficient
management with consistency and quality in data; decentralized execution across
the 20 NEON Domains accommodates the diversity of environments in the US. The
potential for NEON to advance interdisciplinary knowledge will be amplified by
engaging in extensive strategic partnerships. NEON will build a diverse,
inclusive, and interdisciplinary next generation of researchers and workforce by
providing training in the use of NEON data, supporting NEON ambassadors and
partners, and conducting training in standardized ecological field sampling
protocols. Continual improvement of NEON operations, including training and
outreach activities, will be driven by regular external evaluation against
Observatory performance metrics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.