* 2346626
* Metabolites and microbes of Tetrastigma: the ecology of host choice in Rafflesia and potential applications in ex situ conservation of the worlds largest flower
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Jeanmaire Molina, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 136,540.00

Amidst the dwindling rainforests of Southeast Asia, Rafflesia’s rare but massive
malodorous maroon flower stands out, deceptively luring carrion flies, hence the
common name, “corpse flower”. Unlike most plants, Rafflesia is an obligate plant
parasite, bereft of stems, roots, and leaves, and devoid of photosynthesis,
which supposedly defines plants. Solely infecting the tropical grape vine
Tetrastigma—and only a few species of it—it is unknown why. Despite being a
charismatic icon of conservation, there is no western botanic garden that has
grown Rafflesia because it is still virtually unknown how. This project aims to
understand the ecology of Rafflesia’s host choice—what molecules and microbes in
Tetrastigma hosts make them susceptible to Rafflesia infection compared to non-
hosts, and how this basic information may be used to guide propagation.
Conversely, this project will yield data on the metabolic and microbial
processes underlying enhanced host immune function in Tetrastigma, why certain
species are not parasitized by Rafflesia, and how this knowledge can be applied
in grapes, Tetrastigma’s close relative, to resist parasitic infections.
Moreover, the project will engage underrepresented students and catalyze their
careers in biodiversity science, while providing capacity building to indigenous
communities in the Philippines where samples will be collected. This
understanding of the fundamental science may one day allow Rafflesia—the panda
of the plant world—to be in full bloom in botanic gardens, fostering education
and conservation. Timing is critical, because once extinct, the corpse flower
can no longer be revived.

Rafflesia (Rafflesiaceae, Malpighiales) is an endophytic holoparasite,
completely dependent on its host vine Tetrastigma (Vitaceae, Vitales) for
nutrition, living inside it throughout its life and only emerging to flower.
However, not all Tetrastigma species support a Rafflesia infection. The project
aims to understand the ecology of Rafflesia’s host choice, focusing on the
chemistry and microbiota unique to infected host species through metabolite
profiling and metagenomic analysis. Comparing multiple Rafflesia-Tetrastigma
species systems will clarify common patterns that make certain Tetrastigma spp.
hosts versus non-hosts, reveal how different Rafflesia spp. similarly alter host
ecology during an infection, as well as decipher the metabolic and microbial
idiosyncrasies between species systems that could explain Rafflesia’s host
choice. In agriculture, grafting success is dependent on how closely related the
scion and rootstock are, but how does Rafflesia, belonging to a different order
from its host, successfully evade host immunity, and how can this basic
information be applied in preventing graft incompatibility in crops? Resulting
data will also reveal the extent of convergent evolution compared to other host-
parasite systems, if there are similar host-degrading metabolites in the
evolution of heterotrophy in disparate lineages of parasitic plants. These data
will elucidate host chemotypes and plant-regulating microbial endophytes that
could facilitate and sustain a Rafflesia infection, and consequently, Rafflesia
horticulture for ex situ conservation while gaining insights that could
potentially benefit other agricultural crops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.