* 2346885
* NSF-DFG EChem: CAS: Mechanistic Interrogation of Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution by an Artificial Hydrogenase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Hannah Shafaat, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 01/31/2025
* USD 260,162.00

With support from the NSF Division of Chemistry, Hannah Shafaat of Ohio State
University and collaborators at the Technical University of Munich and the Max
Planck Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion will develop and characterize
optimized catalytic systems for production of hydrogen gas from water. The
development of catalysts that can efficiently convert electrochemical energy
into sustainable fuels such as H2 represents a critical obstacle that must be
overcome in order to replace fossil fuels with environmentally friendly
alternatives. Nature’s catalysts for hydrogen conversion, enzymes known as
hydrogenases, exhibit an unparalleled degree of activity; despite global
efforts, no sustainable synthetic catalyst has yet been developed that is
comparable in rate and efficiency to the natural hydrogenases. While practical
application of the natural systems is limited, decades of study on hydrogenases
have provided substantial understanding of the enzyme properties as well as the
catalytic mechanism, revealing key features that are necessary for function.
These general design principles will be applied to construct a highly efficient
catalytic system for electrochemical energy conversion. Through this project,
graduate students from all three teams will combine their expertise across areas
of biochemistry, inorganic chemistry, spectroscopy, and electrochemistry,
building interdisciplinary international collaborations. The insight obtained
from these fundamental studies is expected to be broadly applicable to the
generation of scalable materials for electrochemical energy storage, including
water oxidation, nitrogen fixation, and CO2 reduction, with potential for global
socioeconomic impact. Students and postdoctoral scholars conducting the research
will experience international exchange, including a workshop involving the
entire project team.

This approach to catalyst design from the group of Hannah Shafaat at Ohio State
University and her German collaborators focuses on the development of a robust,
artificial hydrogenase electrocatalyst. Using a model metalloenzyme as a well-
defined scaffold, the team will incorporate select molecular complexes as
intramolecular electron relays to functionally model the native redox-active
cofactors and establish their roles in electrocatalysis. The hybrid enzyme will
be anchored onto an electrode surface, designed to act as an electron transfer
partner, and system variables that impact interfacial charge transfer will be
probed. The specific objectives of the research program are to (i) design and
implement strategies for integration of the individual components; (ii) to apply
novel in situ spectro-electrochemical studies to interrogate the mechanism of H2
evolution by the hybrid constructs and (iii) to optimize these systems by tuning
secondary and outer sphere properties to enhance catalytic efficiencies. By
identifying the role that each component plays in catalysis, sluggish steps will
be improved upon and unproductive or degradative pathways can be eradicated to
systematically improve the catalytic system.

This research was funded under the NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in
Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem) opportunity NSF 20-578.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.