* 2346279
* RAPID: Identifying Drinking Water Contamination and Social Vulnerability Impacts from Urban Fires
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Thomas Giambelluca, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Christopher S. Lowry
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The devastating wildfires on the Island of Maui in early August 2023 led to
significant loss of life, structural damage, and a public and environmental
health crisis. The immediate impacts of the wildfires affected thousands in the
communities of Lāhainā and Kula, but the breadth of long-term impacts from
contamination of drinking water through heat-induced deterioration of building
plumbing and municipal water systems remains unknown. As of September 11th,
2023, an unsafe water advisory for these communities remains in effect. The
inaccessibility of safe water and uncertainty about the future, combined with
the grief, trauma, and collective suffering, heightens these communities’
vulnerabilities and impacts their resilience and adaptive capacity. Thus, it is
clear that in urban-wildfire disasters, knowledge that can expedite the
detection, isolation, and remediation of water system contamination is critical
for community response and recovery in an already tragic situation.
Understanding how social justice and equity can be incorporated into decision-
support tools to inform water policy solutions can facilitate Maui's rapid
recovery and management efforts to serve the socially, ethnically, and
economically diverse communities of Hawaiʻi and beyond.

This project will use new and innovative approaches to enhance capacity to
predict the extent and distribution of wildfire-related water contamination in
municipal water distribution systems, particularly for utilities that lack
hydraulic models. Using the knowledge gained from a prior contamination crisis
on Oʻahu and the networks and relationships developed there, this award will
also build on water contamination response and community collaborations to
facilitate equitable and timely response to the community's diverse needs.
Mapping the wildfire risk of vulnerable communities can support Maui’s future
recovery efforts to ensure equity across other socially and economically
vulnerable communities at high risk. Transport of wildfire contaminants in
drinking water systems remains an incredibly poorly-known issue globally. This
research can potentially inform other at-risk municipal drinking water
utilities, health departments, and emergency managers by exploring and
documenting the response of Maui’s water systems and communities to wildfire-
impacts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.