* 2347791
* Towards Quantum Speedup for Solving High-Dimensional Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Di Fang, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 65,374.00

Efficient simulation of high-dimensional partial differential equations has been
one of the core tasks in many scientific areas. Recent advances of quantum
technologies and algorithms revealed that quantum algorithms can be a new tool
to overcome the curse of dimensionality, with the potential of achieving
exponential speedups compared to classical implementations. The goal of this
project is to investigate potential applications of quantum algorithms on
efficiently solving high-dimensional differential equations. Taking advantage of
the power of quantum mechanics, the newly proposed quantum algorithms and
techniques are expected to significantly accelerate the simulation of such high-
dimensional PDEs and give a cost depending poly-logarithmically on the total
number of spatial grids and polynomially on the spatial dimension. The
development of proposed projects will provide new prospects to overcome the
curse of dimensionality in PDE simulations, to advance the state-of-the-art
quantum algorithm designed for differential equations, and to help pave the path
towards post-quantum scientific computing. On the educational side, the students
involved will get good interdisciplinary training in both mathematics and
quantum information science.

This project aims to develop efficient quantum algorithms for high-dimensional
differential equations for both quantum and classical problems, and to establish
rigorous error bounds and complexity estimates, and identify the problems that
can and can not be efficiently handled quantumly. Such high-dimensional
differential equations include the Schrodinger equation with applications to
molecular dynamics, and other classical differential equations, such as
reaction-diffusion equations emerging from biological applications. The
following specific aspects will be addressed. For quantum dynamics simulation,
the goal is to deal with dynamics simulation with unbounded operators, we
explore techniques such as the vector norm scaling analysis, quantum highly
oscillatory protocol in the interaction picture, and semiclassical/microlocal
analysis addressing the multiscale aspects of the problem. For classical
dynamics that can be non-unitary, we propose and explore time-marching
strategies using block encoding oracles, and aim to provide a pedagogical
description on quantum algorithms for stiff differential equations, pinpointing
the differences between quantum algorithm design and classical numerical
analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.