* 2347006
* RAPID: Short- and mid-term dynamics of water and sediment quality after Hurricane Idalia in the Apalachicola Bay
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Maryam Salehi, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

In August 2023, Hurricane Idalia created a unique opportunity to study the
impact of hurricane events on coastal water and sediment quality in estuarine
systems in terms of various parameters in short- and mid-term. The overarching
goal of this RAPID project is to collect perishable coastal water and sediment
quality data required for understanding short- and mid-term impacts of hurricane
events on estuarine systems through studying an ecologically rich system,
Apalachicola Bay in the Northern Florida Gulf. Although a number of studies have
found an association between hurricanes and coastal water quality, a very
limited number of studies have examined the relationship between post hurricane
sediment quality and a range of coastal water quality parameters, including
microplastics content. This RAPID project will investigate the aftermath of
Hurricane Idalia to help fill an existing knowledge gap in the current
understanding of such impacts. Collecting empirical data from this hurricane in
terms of both coastal water and sediment quality at high frequency will provide
a better understanding of the nature and impacts of hurricane events on
estuarine systems. The outcomes of this project can be used to: (1) guide
coastal planners to establish resilient estuarine environments; (2) provide a
foundation to develop quantitative models for predicting the dynamics of coastal
water and sediment quality after hurricane events in terms of a range of
parameters; (3) assist emergency responders and managers to have a better
understanding of indirect coastal water/sediment quality-related impacts of
hurricanes and support the development of timely strategies for ecosystem health
protection in estuarine systems; (4) inform and educate the public and
stakeholders about the impacts of hurricanes on coastal water and sediment
quality. Collaborating with the Apalachicola National Estuarine Research
Reserve's Coastal Training Program will facilitate dissemination of project
findings to a broader non-scientific audience.

A database will be created on a comprehensive range of parameters relevant to
both coastal water and sediment influencing estuarine health, which consequently
endanger aquatic habitats. These parameters include nutrients (nitrate, organic
carbon, ammonium, phosphate and chlorophyll-a), salinity, suspended solids, pH,
conductivity, dissolved oxygen and microplastics (MP) content for water and
organic carbon, and size distribution and MP content for sediment samples. This
empirical database will help pave the way to understand the short- and mid-term
impacts of hurricanes on coastal water and sediment quality. The project seeks
to answer the following scientific questions: (1) how do hurricanes affect
dynamics of estuaries in terms of various water/sediment quality parameters? and
(2) how does the impact of hurricanes vary with space and time in terms of
characteristics of various water and sediment quality parameters (physical,
nutrients, metals and MP)? The main hypotheses are: (1) hurrciane-induced
resuspension of sediments from the bay bed results in abnormal water and
sediment quality in terms of nutrients, organics and MP; and (2) short-term
impacts on coastal water and sediment quality due to hurricanes gradually
disappears days after the event for nutrients but more gradually for MP. To test
these hypotheses, the project will collect data and study them through
performing four main tasks. The investigators will work with an unfunded
collaborator—Apalachicola National Estuarine Research Reserve (ANERR)—who have
been collecting data on a range of water quality parameters in the Apalachicola
Bay for two decades and is well familiar with the estuarine system. The main
project tasks are: (1) deploy sensors to collect coastal water quality data; (2)
conduct coastal water and sediment quality grab sampling; (3) analyze coastal
water and sediment samples via laboratory experiments; (4) data processing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.