* 2348154
* Modeling Multivariate and Space-Time Processes: Foundations and Innovations
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Pulong Ma, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 195,596.00

Geophysical processes for temperature and pressure are often highly correlated
and are evolving in space over time with complex structures. For instance, many
atmospheric processes such as turbulent processes can exhibit long-range
dependence with correlation decays slowly as distance increases. While existing
covariance models are successful in describing the smoothness behavior of these
processes, the correlation in these models often decays exponentially fast and
hence is inadequate. The data resulting from many geophysical processes are
often continuously indexed and exhibit complicated dependence structures in many
disciplines, including geophysics, ecology, environmental and climate sciences,
engineering, public health, economics, political sciences, and business science.
This project will develop new multivariate and space-time covariance functions
with their theoretical properties to characterize complex behaviors such as
long-range dependence and asymmetry and develop robust estimation procedures for
estimating smoothness behaviors and long-range dependence. The project will also
develop and distribute user-friendly open-source software, facilitate its broad
adoption for complex data analytical problems, and provide training
opportunities for next-generation statisticians and data scientists. This
project is jointly funded by the Statistics Program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This project will develop
theoretical foundations and statistical models for inferring multivariate and
space-time processes with long-range dependence using a model-based framework.
This framework integrates and extends powerful techniques arising in the
literature on scale-mixture modeling and objective Bayes. A scale-mixture
technique is used to construct new multivariate and space-time covariance
functions and offers flexible properties including arbitrary smoothness, long-
range dependence, and asymmetry. Theoretical foundation will be provided to
study the practical usefulness of the resultant covariances in a principled and
unified manner in terms of several properties such as origin/tail behaviors and
screening effect and offer theoretical insights on prediction accuracy in both
interpolative and extrapolative settings. Objective Bayes inference is used to
enable robust parameter estimation for Gaussian processes under the confluent
hypergeometric covariance function with the reference prior in which the
smoothness and tail-decay parameters are allowed to be estimated. The developed
statistical theory and inferential tools will provide new foundations for
modeling multivariate and space-time processes in spatial statistics and related
areas that use covariance models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.