* 2348046
* CCSS: Uncertainty-Aware Computational Imaging in the Wild: a Bayesian Deep Learning Approach in the Latent Space
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xin Li, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

From microscopy and tomography to biometrics and surveillance, computational
imaging (CI) has greatly expanded mankind’s vision capability in various
scientific and engineering fields. In contrast to hardware-based solutions that
require expensive optics, data-driven or computational approaches powered by
deep learning have fueled the development of AI-enabled computational imaging
systems. The emerging paradigm of Bayesian deep learning endows the next-
generation CI systems more flexibility to handle various uncertainties in the
wild – no matter whether they are related to the adversarial conditions of image
acquisition (e.g., moving platform or bad weather) or unintentional mistakes
made by humans (e.g., the mal-functioned main mirror of Hubble Space Telescope
after the launch into the space). Developing uncertainty-aware CI systems have a
wide range of impact on both scientific exploration (e.g., imaging at extreme
scales such as microscopic and astronomical) and our daily lives (e.g.,
smartphone applications).

This project aims at taking a Bayesian deep learning (BDL) approach to modeling
uncertainty in real-world imaging scenarios. An important new insight brought
about by this project is to unify the flow-based uncertainty kernel estimation
(for likelihood modeling) with memory-based uncertainty image generation in
latent space (for prior modeling). Under a fully Bayesian framework but using
reparameterization to simplify the modeling process, the proposed BDL greatly
facilitates both degradation learning and image reconstruction in the realistic
scenario when uncertainty is inevitable. The proposed research consists of three
tasks: 1) Flow-based Nonuniform Kernel Estimation in the Latent Space; 2)
Memory-enhanced Deep Generative Models for Image Reconstruction; and 3) Real-
world Applications in Deep Tissue Imaging such as Superresolution Microscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.