* 2348381
* NRI: Addressing Safe Interaction Between Autonomous and Human-Driven Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Andreas Malikopoulos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2026
* USD 422,367.00

Connected and automated vehicles are robotic systems which exhibit significant
levels of computational capability and physical complexity. They have the
capacity to make contextually decisions independently, without human
intervention, while they interact in a complex environment. The data and shared
information through vehicle-to-everything communication are associated with
significant technical challenges and gives rise to a new level of complexity in
modeling and control. It is expected that connected and automated vehicles will
gradually penetrate the market, interact with human-driven vehicles, and contend
with vehicle-to-everything communication limitations, e.g., bandwidth, dropouts,
errors, and delays. However, different penetration rates of connected and
automated vehicles can significantly alter transportation efficiency and safety.
This grant will synergistically integrate human-driving behavior with control
theory and learning in developing data-driven approaches that will enable a
transformative new functionality of connected and automated vehicles to interact
with human-driven vehicles safely and efficiently. On the education front and
outreach, the research is an excellent catalyst for motivating interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines.

The outcome of this research will deliver new methods to address a fundamental
gap between optimal trajectory planning of and safe-critical control in
connected and automated vehicles. The researched framework is organized at the
intersection of three interdependent dimensions, namely, human-driving behavior,
control theory, and learning. The human-driving dimension will enhance our
understanding on how human drivers will respond to different driving scenarios.
The control theory dimension will create knowledge on the appropriate
prescription functions that will yield the optimal decisions and planning of
connected and automated vehicles with respect to human driving behavior. The
learning dimension will create knowledge of how connected and automated vehicles
can learn to adapt their decisions and planning in situations where they
encounter different behavior from what they already know about human driving.
Thus, this dimension will not only improve the robustness of connected and
automated vehicles but also their operation range with respect to any different
driving behavior that they might encounter. The expected outcome of this
research will aim at making connected and automated vehicles to coordinate with
human-driven vehicles to improve safety and reduce pollution, energy
consumption, and travel delays.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.