* 2348453
* Coherent Structure, Chaos, and Turbulence in Fluid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Jacob Bedrossian, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 209,439.00

Fluids that we interact with on a daily basis (such as water and air) display a
remarkable variety of dynamics. At one extreme is chaos and turbulence, wherein
the fluid forms complicated fractal-like patterns, the details of which cannot
be exactly repeated in experiments due to being very sensitive to small changes
in the initial conditions. Turbulence is observed often in fluids, such as in
the wakes of aircraft, vehicles, and even obstacles such as buildings and
bridges and in the large-scale dynamics of the ocean and atmosphere. At the
opposite extreme is the motion of vortex filaments, the most notable examples
being tornadoes and the wing-tip vortices commonly shed from wings and
helicopter blades. Vortex filaments tend to move in a predictable manner and
maintain their structural integrity for extended periods of time. The goal of
this project is to develop a better mathematical understanding of these opposite
phenomena in fluid mechanics. The accurate prediction of vortex filaments and
turbulence is crucial in a variety of scientific and industrial applications,
including in the design of air, land, and sea vehicles and in the understanding
of complex fluid systems such as the climate and weather. Having a firm
mathematical foundation could help other applied researchers obtain deeper
insights and lead to better modeling. Further, an understanding of these
extremes helps pave the way for a better understanding of the interactions and
intermediate regimes, where flows have a mix of structure and chaos. Finally,
overcoming the mathematical challenges to these questions will require
innovations that will be of interest to the wider mathematical community. The
research projects are also integrated with the training of graduate students and
younger scientists in mathematics and STEM.

The PI will develop a more mathematically rigorous understanding of two
behaviors observed in incompressible fluids at high Reynolds numbers: (1) the
coherent motion of vortex filaments; (2) turbulence under "generic",
statistically steady forcing. The fundamental questions motivating the PI are:
(A) how accurate are the commonly used geometric evolution models such as the
Local Induction Approximation (LIA) for the motion of a vortex filament in a
fluid with vorticity concentrated on a smooth curve? (B) can we provide a proof
for the experimentally observed positive Lyapunov exponents and anomalous
dissipation (e.g., as the celebrated Kolmogorov 4/5 law) from the stochastically
forced 3D Navier-Stokes in the high Reynolds number limit? These require a
number of unexplored mathematical ideas and currently, there exists no clear way
to attack them yet. Instead, the PI has identified several independently
interesting problems to build necessary mathematical foundations. For (A), the
PI and his collaborators will study vortex filaments in quantum fluids governed
by the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. The quantum case is expected to be easier than
the classical case due to the quantization of vorticity and slightly more
amenable linearized operators. First, the PI and collaborators will study the
stability of vortex solutions in 2d Gross-Pitaevskii, providing necessary ground
for understanding the filament core. Next, the PI and collaborators will show
that the LIA accurately describes the motion of nearly-straight, and potentially
more general, quantum vortex filaments long enough to make useful predictions.
For (B), the PI and his collaborators will: (1) develop novel qualitative theory
for Lyapunov exponents in stochastic PDEs inspired by ideas from random
dynamical systems; (2) develop better tools for quantitative hypoelliptic
regularity and Lyapunov exponent estimation in high dimensional systems; and (3)
study quantitative and nonlinear aspects of Lagrangian chaos, that is, how the
chaotic dynamics of particles in a fluid can be translated into nonlinear
dynamics of the fluid itself.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.