* 2348144
* RAPID: Abrupt, Coherent Increase in the Color of Arctic lakes of West Greenland: Investigating Contributing Factors
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2024
* Jasmine Saros, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 10/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

A simultaneous shift has occurred in lakes across West Greenland. At some point
since August 2022, lakes that were “blue” or very clear for decades have rapidly
and darkly turned brown. Unusually wet and cloudy conditions over the past year
likely led to this change in lake color, but the factors contributing to this
color change remain unclear. Preliminary data suggest that metal concentrations
have increased by an order of magnitude in these lakes, and a similar change in
water color has been observed recently in streams in the Brooks Range of Alaska,
raising the question of whether this will become a pan-Arctic phenomenon,
leading to widespread changes across Arctic freshwater systems. A key initial
step to understanding this major change is to quantify what factors are
contributing to this color change, and what their origin might be. This proposed
work aims to contribute to the broader understanding of this phenomenon. The
rapid, substantial change that we observed in these lakes presents yet another
example of how changing climate threatens the ability of Arctic communities to
ensure safe drinking water sources. We will analyze water and sediment samples
from the drinking water source of Kangerlussuaq, Lake Ferguson, to analyze trace
elements, including lead and arsenic, to assess whether these have changed as a
consequence of the recently altered hydrology. This work aligns with priorities
set forth in Greenland’s National Research Strategy by promoting international
cooperation and communicating results in multiple ways to make it broadly
accessible. The research will also be of benefit to other Arctic communities by
identifying potential emerging threats to drinking water. This project will also
provide support for a Ph.D. student and an early career scientist.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.