* 2348580
* LTREB: Legacy effects of compounding disturbances in the Amazon: implications for ecosystem carbon and water cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Paulo Brando, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 05/31/2026
* USD 207,388.00

The carbon stored in the Amazon’s forests is equivalent to ten years of current
global carbon fossil-fuel emissions. This large carbon reservoir has seemingly
grown over the past few decades and mitigated some of the negative effects on
the global climate system associated with greenhouse gas emissions. At the same
time, Amazon forests transfer enough moisture to the atmosphere to influence
regional precipitation patterns. Interactions between climate change,
deforestation, logging, windstorms, and wildfires have threatened the carbon
stocks and climate regulatory functions of Amazon forests. Growing concerns that
ongoing climate change combined with human disturbances will change Amazon
forests into open savannas across large regions. This long term experiment in
environmental biology award focuses on a forest that lies at the edge between
continuous neotropical forests and savannas. This is an area where native
vegetation has been fragmented and is frequently subject to interactions between
human and natural disturbances such as fires, droughts, and windstorms. This
award evaluates forest resilience from seasonally dry evergreen tropical forests
to multiple disturbances based on long- term ecological measurements of a highly
threatened Amazon forest. The project’s outcomes could inform regional land and
fire management, particularly the development of new strategies to avoid
catastrophic wildfires that reduce the capacity of forests to provide ecosystem
services. This award will also connect US-based research with researchers and
institutions in Brazil, in the process helping to train a diverse group of US
students. Finally, the award represents important benchmarks for land surface
models and remote sensing techniques that have been widely used to understand
potential trajectories of tropical forests

This award tests the hypothesis that forests subjected to novel compounding
disturbances use different pathways to recover climate services. Disturbed
forests that experience minor, short-term reductions in climate functions such
as ET and net carbon uptake, have high forest resilience and low probability of
large-scale forest replacement by scrubland. However, repeated disturbances
triggering long-term losses of forest climate functions would point to low
forest resilience. This award will add a decade of ecological data to a long-
term, large-scale experimental site in southeast Amazonia that has been degraded
by edge effects, recurrent fires, two windthrow events, and multiple droughts.
These extended data measurements will permit a comprehensive assessment of how
potential future pathways of the experimentally disturbed forests affect
ecosystem-level climatic functions across different successional forest pathways
and as plant traits change. The experimental site is located in one of the most
threatened regions of the Amazon, on the boundary between a dense evergreen
rainforest and seasonally dry forests and where native vegetation has been
fragmented and subjected to anthropogenic (fire, edge effects) and natural
disturbances (droughts and windthrow events). How forests’ long-term climate
functions change as a function of novel disturbances and climate change has
direct implications for the future of the world’s largest tropical forest. This
award will rely on long-term ecological measurements to build a clearer
understanding of Amazon forest resilience to multiple disturbances. It will
evaluate how interactions between fire legacies to trees (e.g., wounds to tree
trunks) and extreme weather events (droughts, windstorms) affect forest climatic
functions. In the next ten years, this award will lead to a new understanding of
how forest successional pathways and plant traits influence ecosystem-level ET
and carbon stocks following compounding disturbances. This award will provide
new insights into the (as yet unquantified) thresholds that may lead to large-
scale ecosystem change under future climate and land use changes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.