* 2348765
* CAREER: Mitigating Detrimental Vibrational Effects in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Michael Ruggiero, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2026
* USD 161,289.00

Organic semiconductors are a promising class of materials with the potential to
revolutionize advanced electronic devices, from flexible displays to high-
efficiency solar cells. Their widespread use is currently limited by atomic-
level motions that, in many cases, reduce the effectiveness of the material. In
this project, these motions – specifically those that occur at terahertz
frequencies – will be investigated using a combined experimental and
computational approach. The PI will investigate and quantify the precise
dynamics that influence the performance of organic semiconducting materials with
atomic-level precision. Through this research an unprecedented level of insight
will be gained, which translates to the ability to rationally engineer new
materials that suppress detrimental phenomena. This research is strongly
connected to the training and education of young scientists, with trainees
directly involved in the research from all career stages, from undergraduates to
postgraduates. In addition, the PI will develop a university-level course that
incorporates the results of this research in order to further enhance the
training of young scientists. The trainees involved in the research, in
conjunction with the PI, are also directly involved in efforts to communicate
this cutting-edge research to the wider community. Through a collaboration with
a local art museum, the PI is working to expand the reach of the developed
methods to aid in the characterization, identification, and preservation of
artwork in their collections. This is extended to K-12 education through a
partnership with a local school district, where workshops and training
opportunities are offered, providing a convergence of cutting-edge research with
the development of the next generation of STEM professionals.

The role that low-frequency (terahertz) dynamics play in a wide-variety of bulk
phenomena in organic semiconductors has been elucidated in recent years.
Specifically, large-amplitude vibrational motions occurring at terahertz
frequencies have been shown to be pivotal to rationalizing the charge-carrier
dynamics of these materials. In many cases, detrimental electron-phonon coupling
from a single-terahertz vibration is sufficient to significantly reduce charge-
carrier mobility, a critical parameter for realizing advanced electronics. This
research leverages experimental terahertz time-domain spectroscopy with quantum
mechanical simulations to explore the crucial role that terahertz phonons play
on the properties of organic semiconducting solids. This project involves the
design and implementation of new experimental and theoretical methods – methods
that are also applicable to solid-state materials in general. Specifically,
optical pump-terahertz probe spectroscopy is used to directly sample both
charge-carrier dynamics, as well as electron-phonon coupling, while anharmonic
density functional theory simulations are performed to predict temperature- and
pressure-dependent properties. The results of these experiments are used to
rationally design new materials, using experimental organic synthetic methods as
well as computational crystal structure design. This research also integrates
multiple educational activities that are a benefit to a wide cross-section of
society, including future STEM leaders and the non-scientific community. Through
a collaboration with the Fleming Museum of Art, terahertz imaging methods are
applied to reveal hidden features in artwork, such as a signature obscured by
layers of paint. An exhibit based on this research is planned to be put on
display at the museum, along with workshops for the general community and K-12
students. Additionally, a new course for advanced undergraduates and graduate
students is being developed based on this project, which will translate to
growing expertise in this important area of the materials sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.