* 2348583
* Collaborative Research: Apatite petrochronology and microtextural analyses: a new tool to directly date subduction processes at the base of the seismogenic zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Margaret Odlum, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2025
* USD 362,268.00

Subduction zones are the locus for the most destructive geological hazards on
earth including megathrust earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and tsunami. The
portion of the subduction zone where large earthquakes nucleate and slow
earthquakes occur, known as the base of the seismogenic zone, is also an area
where intense chemical change and fluid flow occurs. Understanding the timing
and processes associated with these rocks deformating and interacting with
fluids in this part of the subduction zone is critical for further constraining
these earthquakes and global element cycling. However, we currently lack robust
tools to do so. This project aims to develop apatite petrochronology, the
integration of chronologic, chemical, and textural data from single grains of
the common mineral apatite, to directly date chemical and mechanical processes
that occurred at the base of the subduction seismogenic zone. The proposed
research will provide new tools for researchers studying subduction zones as
well as deformation and fluid-rock interactions more broadly. The broader
impacts of this work center around providing education and research
opportunities that increase inclusivity and accessibility in geoscience through
the development of virtual field video game modules that integrate field and lab
observations and with petrologic, microstructural, and chronological results
from this research. These video games will give students opportunities to gain
field skills and link outcrop to microscale observations, while being inclusive
and accessible to all students (i.e., no barriers associated with cost or able-
bodiedness). This research supports two early career female scientists, a female
postdoctoral researcher, and will support an undergraduate and graduate student
at UNLV.

The base of the subduction seismogenic zone, which occurs at depths of 30-50 kms
and temperatures ~200-500°C, is where both large megathrust earthquakes nucleate
and enigmatic fault zone behaviors such as episodic tremor and slip occur. This
is also an area of intense chemical transformation including devolatilization,
fluid flow, and metamorphism. Chemical, mechanical, and fluid processes
occurring along the plate interface likely play an important role in influencing
the deformation style of the base of the subduction seismogenic zone within the
relatively cool greenschist and blueschist metamorphic facies (250°C - 500°C).
We currently lack well constrained in situ chronometers in these relatively cold
metamorphic rocks, making it challenging to place direct timing constraints on
these chemical and mechanical processes in exhumed subduction complexes.
Apatite, a common accessory mineral in many subduction zone lithologies,
dynamically recrystallizes during deformation, dissolves and reprecipitates
during fluid flow, and chemically tracks metamorphic and metasomatic reactions
making it a potentially transformative tool for recovering linked
microstructure-metamorphism-Temperature-time data. This project tests the
hypothesis that apatite U-Pb petrochronology can directly date deformation,
metamorphism, and(or) fluid flow in rocks exhumed from the base of the
subduction seismogenic zone. Through coupled microstructural (petrographic,
EBSD), geochemical (EPMA, LA-ICP-MS), and geochronological (LA-ICP-MS)
techniques the researchers will directly date these processes in four exhumed
subduction complexes (C. Alps, Catalina Schist, & Crete/Andros, Greece)
representing different stages of the subduction evolution across a range of P-T-
fluid conditions and lithologies. Their results will systematically constrain
the physical and chemical behavior of apatite across different P-T and fluid
conditions and facilitate method development of EPMA mapping of apatite,
yielding transformative tools for recovering linked microstructure-T-t data.
Ultimately, this will provide rheologic, geochronologic, and geochemical
constraints on from exhumed subduction related rocks that can be integrated with
remote observations (e.g., seismology, geodetic data) to better understand
complexities of subduction earthquakes, creeping deformation, slow slip events,
and chemical transformations during metamorphism, metasomatism, and fluid flow.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.