* 2350225
* LEAPS-MPS: Long-time behavior for nonlinear dispersive equations
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Jason Murphy, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 101,483.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Nonlinear dispersive partial differential equations
arise in many physical settings and are characterized by the tendency of waves
of different frequencies to travel at different velocities. In such models there
is often a competition between dispersive and nonlinear effects, resulting in a
rich set of possible solution behaviors. These include decay and scattering, the
presence of coherent structures known as solitary waves, or even wave collapse
(or blowup). This project includes consideration of problems related to the
long-time behavior of solutions to nonlinear dispersive equations, including the
stability properties of solitary waves, global decay estimates for low
regularity solutions, and the behavior of solutions living at or near certain
sharp scattering thresholds. The project focuses on several specific models that
are physically meaningful but still simple enough to admit deep analysis. Such
choices allow for the distillation of the essential mathematical difficulties
underlying some important problems in the field of dispersive equations. In this
way, the proposed research has the potential to pave the way for future progress
even beyond the specific problems under consideration in this project. The
project contains problems that are suitable for the involvement of students at
the undergraduate, Masters, and PhD levels. The project includes several
activities to encourage participation of underrepresented or rural students in
STEM via outreach to public schools, organization of meetings and mentoring of
undergraduate research projects.

The project will first address asymptotic stability properties for solutions to
the one-dimensional nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLS) in the presence of an
attractive delta potential, a simple model arising in nonlinear optics. Some of
the main goals include establishing asymptotic stability for the entire family
of stable solitary waves, as well as the construction of stable manifolds in the
unstable regime. Next, the project will address the problem of global space-time
estimates for low regularity solutions to completely integrable models,
including the 1d cubic NLS. The project seeks to develop virial and Morawetz-
type estimates adapted to the novel microscopic conservation laws that have
recently played a key role in the low-regularity well-posedness theory for such
equations. Third, the project will address several problems related to threshold
behaviors for solutions to NLS models with broken symmetries, including the
inhomogeneous NLS and the NLS with external potentials. In addition to
classifying the possible solution dynamics at the sharp scattering threshold,
the project will involve the construction of solutions with traveling wave
behavior for models that lack a nonlinear ground state. Finally, the project
seeks to increase participation from underrepresented groups in mathematics by
fostering student interest in STEM subjects, beginning at the high school level,
as well as developing a supportive community for mathematics students at both
the undergraduate and graduate level. Specific steps towards this goal include
outreach to public high schools, the organization of regular meetings and
presentations for undergraduate math majors, the supervision of undergraduate
research, and the continued organization of research seminars and invitation of
research visitors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.