* 1500124
* PFI: AIR-TT: Prototype Scale-up for Traumatic Pelvic and Abdominal Injury Decision Support System (DSS)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Kayvan Najarian, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 308,933.00

This PFI:AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating and
accelerating commercialization of a patented Traumatic Pelvic and Abdominal
Injury Decision Support System (DSS) technology. This will enable physicians to
quickly and accurately extract complex patient data from all relevant biomedical
images, (e.g., CT scans with hundreds of image slices) trauma scores, diagnoses,
treatments, demographics, and injury specifics for each patient?while
integrating and analyzing the information to generate prediction, warning, and
treatment recommendations at every stage of patient care. This project is
important not only to help decrease medical complications and increase survival,
but also to optimize resource utilization- a key to reducing the approximately
$60B medical cost each year for treating complications in pelvic and abdominal
trauma cases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Traumatic Pelvic and Abdominal Injury
DSS technology has the following unique capabilities which provide competitive
advantages when compared to the existing state of the art for DSS tools: 1) it
segments and assesses damage to major abdominal organs; 2) it provides
recommendations and predictions for several specific, complex clinical
decisions; 3) it is fully automated and does not require an expert?s supervision
in analyzing patient data- providing an easier-to-use software interface and
potentially providing higher accuracy in pertinent recommendations for trauma
patient care. If the algorithms and software are successfully validated through
this project, a licensing pathway has been identified to commercialize the DSS
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clinical decision making shows its true
complexity when one is trying to quickly and accurately integrate complex types
of patient data in an emergency setting. This project addresses several
technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application. Existing "semi-automated" systems use only a portion of patient
data and do not analyze detailed information contained in digital images to
create recommendations; conversely, current image processing technologies
designed mainly to assist in analysis of CTs (or other images) are not optimized
to address the needs of trauma and/or DSS tools. This project will refine and
scale up the prototype, validate its clinical use, and accelerate its
commercialization to assist clinicians in traumatic pelvic and abdominal injury
cases. Key technical objectives are to: 1) expand the organ segmentation
software module (now covering only the spleen) to include the liver, kidneys,
and pancreas; 2) enhance the hemorrhage detection algorithms to find bleeding
close to bones; 3) further validate and improve the system using a larger and
more comprehensive dataset; and 4) rewrite the graphical user interface to match
requirements for the prototype and validate its effectiveness and ease of use by
clinicians. Key computational methods generated by this project include
automated image processing algorithms and machine learning methods to: 1) assess
a CT scan for bone fracture(s) and hemorrhage and measure their sizes; 2)
segment more major organs, identify damage, and quantitatively assess level of
injury; and 3) predict outcomes (survival, number of ICU days, home vs. rehab,
etc.) and form recommendations for care givers at each step of the treatment.
The graduate student involved in this project will gain experience in innovation
and technology translation towards commercialization through development of the
DDS tool, testing and validating the algorithms, and working closing with the
project team, clinicians, business developers, tech transfer professionals, and
a potential licensee to commercialize the technology as a viable product.