* 1500039
* SaTC-EDU: EAGER: Enhancing Cybersecurity Education through Peer Review
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Kathryn Fisler, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 229,280.00

Peer-review is a well-known process by which peers evaluate one another's work.
In educational settings, peer review involves students evaluating the work of
classmates. Peer evaluations can serve many educational purposes: they foster
comprehension skills (as students read the work of others), encourage self-
assessment and meta-reflection (as students contrast their solutions to
others'), demand synthesis of comments from multiple perspectives (as students
combine feedback from multiple reviews), and develop professional skills around
giving and receiving critique from colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The skills
that educational peer review attempts to foster are critical in cybersecurity:
code review is part of modern industrial software practice (and has identified
high-profile security bugs), security problems are multi-faceted and require
developers who can synthesize needs of many stakeholders, and developers must
prioritize among vulnerabilities identified through different sources and
processes. Peer review, with its emphasis on developing students' reflective
skills, thus promises to be a valuable mechanism in training security
professionals. There are, however, many configurations of peer review, each of
which could engage students in different ways. Educational research focused on
linking peer review configurations to learning outcomes in cybersecurity is thus
critical to using this mechanism effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will experiment with peer-review configurations in a variety of cybersecurity
courses. The courses span several areas of cybersecurity (software, system, and
policy), as well as both undergraduate and graduate students. The project will
explore how various cybersecurity-specific learning objectives manifest through
peer review. It will also yield software infrastructure for using and assessing
peer review across a variety of courses and configurations. Expected
deliverables from the project include observations about students' reviewing
practices, refined research questions about how to use peer-review successfully
in security education, and software tools that others can use for similar
projects (which will be made publicly available).