* 1500518
* Plasma-Surface Interactions During In-Situ Photo-Assisted Etching
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Demetre Economou, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 434,998.00

Reactive ion etching (or plasma etching) is a critical operation in the
manufacturing of integrated circuits (or 'chips') to produce extremely precise
features, at the nanometer (a billionth of a meter) scale. Without this process
we would have no portable cell phones, laptop computers and all the other modern
marvels we take for granted. Ever smaller feature dimensions will allow more
transistors to be packed onto chips, resulting in increased information storage
and faster computers. This evolution in chip speed and function has progressed
steadily over the past 50 years, following Moore's Law, which states that the
number of transistors on a chip doubles about every 18 months. Recently, while
studying reactive ion etching of silicon, a rather startling discovery was made:
silicon was etched, even when no reactive ions were present. Careful experiments
revealed that this etching was due to photons, originating in the plasma. This
in-plasma photo-assisted etching produced etched feature shapes that are not
optimum for integrated circuits and thus may prove to be a show-stopper in the
burgeoning field of etching with atomic precision. This project will combine
experiments and simulations to understand the mechanism of in-plasma photo-
assisted etching, and identify conditions to suppress this phenomenon. The study
will produce a fundamental understanding of the photo-physics and chemistry at
the plasma-semiconductor interface and will have a significant impact in the
microelectronics industry as well as the field of nanotechnology, with clear
societal benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This systematic investigation of plasma-
surface interactions will focus on in-situ photon-plasma synergism, and its
effect on etching of semiconductor materials in halogen-containing plasmas. A
combination of experiments and simulations will address questions such as: (a)
What are the synergistic effects of photons and i) positive ions, ii) electrons,
iii) negative ions, iv) halogen atoms? (b) does the sheath potential affect
photo-assisted etching rates and if so, how and what is the cause? (c) what is
the effect of surface plasmons (plasmonics) in the case of samples patterned
with sub-wavelength features? A novel dual plasma reactor will be employed, to
provide controlled fluxes of ions, UV-VUV photons, and radicals bombarding the
substrate. The UV-VUV light intensity, ion flux and ion energy striking the
substrate will be measured through a pinhole on the substrate holder, in a
differentially pumped analysis chamber. Self-consistent simulations of the
electric field distribution and species (electrons, holes, positive ions) fluxes
in the plasma as well as in the solid, and electromagnetic calculations of
surface plasmon propagation and absorption will be performed. Simulations
coupled with experiments will provide insights in the mechanism of photo-
assisted etching for varying substrate bias (potential of the sheath over the
semiconductor), photon flux and energy, dopant concentration, as well as
nanofeature size and aspect ratio. Finally, attempts will be made to exploit
photo-assisted etching of silicon to create nanoholes with dimensions (e.g., 3
nm dia.) much smaller than those produced by conventional reactive ion etching.