* 1500815
* EAGER: Rapid Screening and Identification of Organisms which Hyper-Accumulate Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* James Moberly, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 212,000.00

1500815&lt;br/&gt;Srivastava&lt;br/&gt;University of
Idaho&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rare earth elements (REE) are considered critical
materials because of their essential usage in a variety of business sectors and
their potential for supply shortages and scarcity. Recovery of REE from waste
streams and end-of-life products is an attractive technology, however separation
of REE from these materials can be costly and involve toxic and hazardous
chemicals. Microorganisms have the capacity to selectively accumulate and
fractionate metals including REE but have not been deployed as a separation
technology for REE. The PI proposes to develop a high risk high payoff platform
technology based on microfluidic separation using dielectrophoresis (DEP). The
proposed work is anticipated to transform the screening of biomaterials by
providing a highly adaptable means for high-throughput screening of superior
performing biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will be
accomplished through 1) utilizing computational fluid dynamics to design and
simulate a variety of DEP microdevices as a means for separation of OHMs and, 2)
construction and validation of the microdevice using two very different model
microorganisms, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and Cupriavidus necator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a rapid screening tool for identification
and separation of these high performing organisms would significantly enhance
and accelerate screening and development of microorganisms used in biosorption
of all types, not just specific to metals; providing a greener and potentially
more cost effective technological solution to separation challenges.