* 1500987
* Topological and algebraic combinatorics of posets and stratified spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Patricia Hersh, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 220,000.00

This research project is in discrete mathematics, namely, the area of
mathematics which provides the theoretical underpinnings for computer science as
well as more recently for some substantial parts of biology. The PI particularly
focuses on developing novel ways of combining geometric and topological
techniques and intuition with combinatorial methods. In recent years, the PI has
become particularly focused on finding effective ways to study topological-
combinatorial structures on spaces of real-valued matrices satisfying naturally
arising constraints, for instance matrices in which the determinant as well as
all minors are nonnegative. Such spaces arise both in areas of theoretical
mathematics such as representation theory and also in applications areas. For
instance, they play an important role to our understanding of the relationship
between current and voltage in electrical networks. The more theoretical results
can sometimes give surprisingly powerful insights into such applications. The
project also includes a study of how configurations of distinct points may move
around in space without bumping into each other, taking an abstract,
representation theoretic perspective. The PI will also continue her work in
helping develop the STEM pipeline both through the training of graduate students
in combinatorics and also through organizing workshops and other activities to
help inspire and foster the development of the next generation of scientists.

The specific projects include: (1) analysis of the homeomorphism type of fibers
of maps to totally nonnegative varieties; (2) stability properties for
configuration spaces related to the partition lattice via a mixture of poset
topology and symmetric function theory; (3) analysis of combinatorial
topological structure on spaces of electrical networks; and (4) development of
poset-theoretic approaches to polytope diameter bounds for particularly nice
classes of polytopes, motivated by complexity questions from operations research
regarding linear programming. Many of these projects are collaborative. This
work builds upon the PI's past research in topological combinatorics, and
particularly in poset topology and in combining ideas of geometric topology with
those of combinatorics to study combinatorial topological structure of
stratified spaces.