* 1500821
* Laplacian growth, Schwarz reflection, and random normal matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Nikolai Makarov, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2019
* USD 372,600.00

Laplacian growth (LG) is one of the most important types of dynamics at the
boundary between two objects. For example, LG arises naturally in the study of
certain problems involving a moving boundary. As a growth process, LG is widely
recognized as a model for the formation of various universal patterns observed
in physics and natural sciences such as the growth of bacterial colonies. A new
exiting development in this classical area of mathematical physics was the
recent discovery of the fact that on the microscopic level, the mechanism of LG
is very closely related to the behavior of particles in plasma ensembles. Plasma
is one of the four fundamental states of matter. A common form of plasma is seen
in neon signs and in fact plasma is the most common state of matter in the
universe. These plasma ensembles are described in terms of mathematical objects
call random matrices that have complex eigenvalues. The relation of LG and
random matrices has been intensively studied on the physical level but many
fundamental problems remain open on the mathematical side. The PI, Nikolai
Makarov, will focus on several such problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
topics and goals of the study will be the following: the proof of the
convergence of rescaled point processes and the description of the universality
laws for various types of boundary points in the random normal matrix model
(RNM); the proof of the laminarity of Hele-Shaw flows and the rigorous
derivation of their integrability properties;the analysis of the dynamics of the
Schwarz reflections associated with algebraic droplets in the RNM model. To
achieve these goals, the PI will bring together tools and ideas from various
areas of mathematics (complex analysis, conformal dynamics, probability theory)
and theoretical physics (conformal field theory, non-equilibrium growth
phenomenon, disordered systems). The educational component of the project will
be the development of new graduate courses and organization of scientific
workshops and conferences. The project will provide research and training
opportunities for graduate students and postdocs.