* 1500162
* Topics in Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Andreas Seeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Methods from mathematical analysis have found wide applications in understanding
physical phenomena in the natural sciences and engineering. This project is
concerned with topics in harmonic analysis that are designed to provide
effective mathematical tools for these disciplines and that could well
contribute to the unification of seemingly unrelated areas. The main goal of the
project is to expand the mathematical toolbox in harmonic analysis along these
lines. The project involves mentoring of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers.

The principal investigator will to work on several projects in harmonic
analysis. The first project is concerned with the functional calculus for
selfadjoint elliptic and subelliptic partial differential operators. The
research will focus on a model example in the subelliptic case, the Laplacian on
the Heisenberg group. The goal is to derive new multiplier results on Lebesgue
spaces, in particular for the model case of Bochner-Riesz means. In the
Euclidean case such multiplier results can be based on Fourier restriction
theory, which is not available on the Heisenberg group. A new approach is
proposed based on the fine structure of the wave kernel on the Heisenberg group.
A second project is motivated by a problem on the cost of mixing for
incompressible flows that are generated by time-dependent vector fields. It
turns out that this problem is related to boundedness questions on certain
bilinear singular integral operators. A general theory will be developed that
incorporates multilinear generalizations and is of independent interest. A third
project is concerned with problems in approximation theory that involve function
spaces of low order of smoothness. In many cases there are gaps between the
known results for the categories of Besov and Sobolev spaces. As an example, the
range for unconditional convergence of Haar wavelet expansions is well
understood for Besov spaces but remains open for Sobolev spaces. One goal for
this project is to determine the correct range for Sobolev spaces.