* 1500659
* Testing the Community Partnership Model through Lokono Language Documentation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,09/30/2020
* Racquel-Maria Yamada, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2020
* USD 115,228.00

Broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in science can have
transformative methodological consequences. That is the hypothesis that Racquel
Sapien Yamada of the University of Oklahoma (Norman) will test by implementing a
new collaborative fieldwork model which extends the notion of community-
inclusive field research by facilitating the documentation of one endangered
language (Lokono) by native and heritage speakers of another
(Kari'nja).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kari'nja and Lokono (Arawak-arw) speakers live
side-by-side in the Konomerume village of Suriname. They often intermarry. Data
on Lokono and Karinja will elucidate the processes of language contact evidenced
between these two languages. The data will also help the place of Lokono
(Arawakan family) and Kari'nja (Cariban family) within their respective language
families. Yamada and her team will document, analyze, and describe aspects of
Lokono to further investigate these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
at the forefront of a greater movement to encourage members of endangered
language communities to play more active roles in research that affects them.
The project team will provide training to build local infrastructure for future
documentation. A graduate student from the University of Oklahoma will receive
field research and international experience through participation in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by co-funds from the
National Science Foundation's International Science and Engineering Office.