* 1500991
* Twenty-Eighth Cumberland Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory, and Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Linyuan Lu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/29/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The 28th Cumberland Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory, and Computing
will be held at the Columbia Campus of the University of South Carolina, May
15-17, 2015 (see the conference web site:
http://imi.cas.sc.edu/events/cumberland/). This is the twenty-eighth in a
sequence of annual conferences that bring together students and researchers from
across the Southeastern region to discuss the latest progress in discrete
mathematics and computer science. Four featured speakers of international
standing will give one hour plenary presentations covering significant advances
in discrete mathematics. Estimated attendance is around 100 participants; about
forty contributed talks of length 20--25 minutes are planned. The Cumberland
Conference series features talks by leading experts, promotes applications of
discrete mathematics (particularly in computer science), provides settings that
are conducive to collaboration, and supports students and groups
underrepresented in mathematics. The conference series has developed a unique
role as a regional exchange for researchers at all levels, providing an
accessible forum for junior faculty and students to present their work. This
award supports the participation of the four principal speakers, of other
participants without federal support, and of students and attendees from
underrepresented groups.

Discrete mathematics is a rapidly developing and expanding field of mathematics
due to the fact that discrete models are appropriate for a great number of
phenomena in communication, network and information science, life sciences, and
engineering. The number of researchers and the number of universities offering
courses in discrete mathematics is steadily increasing, and so does number of
graduate students and undergraduate research students in this field. The
Cumberland Conference has established a unique role as a regional forum open to
a wide group of students and researchers in discrete mathematics and computer
science. This conference plays a significant part in the professional
development of graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s, for whom this conference
provides an opportunity to present their work, learn of recent advances, form
collaborations, and do networking. This year's conference will continue this
tradition. Four internationally-known featured speakers will attract a wide
audience, while researchers from around the region will present high quality
talks. The conference will cover diverse areas in combinatorics, graph theory,
and areas overlapping with computer science. This is the first time that the
Cumberland Conference will be hosted in South Carolina. It provides an important
opportunity to graduate students in South Carolina and nearby to attend a major
conference in discrete mathematics.