* 1500055
* SaTC-EDU: EAGER: CFEAR: Cyber Forensics Education via Augmented Reality
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Massoud Amin, Metropolitan State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,943.00

Creative educational and research programs need to be developed that will
inspire young adults (also known as millennials) to pursue critical skills
needed to drive our cybersecurity and STEM future and close the ever increasing
cybersecurity talent gap. In this regard, educators and researchers must develop
innovative curriculum incorporating emerging technologies, in addition to the
theoretical content, to help cultivate and retain a highly skilled cybersecurity
workforce. Along these lines, faculty and researchers at Metropolitan State
University and the University of Minnesota propose to explore and investigate
the use of Augmented Reality (AR) in imparting cybersecurity and forensics
education and conducting related research; the major focus of the proposed work
revolves around Smart- Glasses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creative ways to impart
cybersecurity and forensics education through smart-glasses, related apps,
and/or other AR devices will be explored using a Discovery (or inquiry-based)
Learning approach. This mode of delivery will allow students to interact with
cyber forensics theories in an innovative, interactive, and effective way,
enhancing their overall live experience and experiential learning. This
exploratory research work will be ultimately transformed into cybersecurity and
forensics curriculum at the undergraduate and graduate level. The efficacy of AR
and smart-glasses in attracting, motivating and retaining students (with special
emphasis on minorities and women) in cybersecurity and forensics will also be
explored. With the help of collected data [observations of first-person
(students) videos (live or recorded) while performing various cyber forensics
related tasks, pre- post-course tests and student satisfaction surveys], the
proposed work will identify unique skillsets for future cyber forensics workers
as well as deficiencies, and learning gaps. Various security and privacy issues
of smart-glasses (hardware, software, and available applications) will be
investigated. In addition, we will investigate case scenarios, exposing system
vulnerabilities due to smart-glass? integration with other wearable devices such
as insulin pumps or pacemakers.