* 1500856
* RUI: Extremal Combinatorics of Patterns, Correlation, and Structure
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Katz, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Combinatorics considers finite structures, many of which play a crucial role in
problems that arise in science and technology. Preeminent among these structures
are finite binary sequences (strings of zeroes and ones) that are used in the
communications networks, cryptographic systems, remote sensing, acoustic design,
and efficient operation of scientific instrumentation. Other finite structures
arising from polynomials, sets, and graphs also find use in a wide variety of
technological and scientific endeavors. To achieve an engineering goal or
understand a natural process, one must often find the structures that are
extremal (minimal or maximal) with respect to a certain feature. For example, we
might seek a family of binary sequences that resemble each other as little as
possible in order avoid mutual interference in a multi-user communications
network: this is the problem of low correlation. The solutions to such extremal
problems often involve mathematical objects with a large amount of structure.
This research project aims to investigate some problems in extremal
combinatorics and the mathematical structures involved in these extremal
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizing principle of this project is to
investigate important problems in pure mathematics involving highly structured
discrete objects, many of which are of great interest in science and technology.
For example, the problem of minimizing aperiodic autocorrelation of binary
sequences is of vital importance in engineering applications like remote sensing
and communication. Later, physicists noted that the minima describe the ground
states of certain systems in statistical physics. Yet the problem is also
related to questions in harmonic analysis raised by Littlewood in 1966 and still
actively researched, with recent contributions from the principal investigator
that are being further developed. Problems such as this are rich in connections
to other branches of mathematics, because the optimal or best known discrete
structures for them often come from fields like number theory, algebra, or
geometry. For example, the sequences with lowest known asymptotic aperiodic
autocorrelation derive from the Fekete polynomials in analytic number theory.
The Weil sums studied in this project originate in number theory and arithmetic
algebraic geometry: they provide a method for counting points on curves over
finite fields. In technology, they determine the nonlinearity of functions used
in cryptography, the weight distribution of error-correcting codes, and the
cross-correlation properties of linear recursive sequences over finite fields.
New techniques to bound the maximum number of instances of a pattern in a finite
set of points in the plane utilize diverse techniques that range from order
relations to topological arguments. The interplay of all these ideas, pure and
applied, leads to a mutual enrichment of mathematics, engineering, and science.