* 1500440
* Potential Theory of Functions of Bounded Variation and Quasiconformal Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Nageswari Shanmugalingam, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 297,800.00

When we view images of objects, what we see are various locations of the object
emitting different intensities of light. We can think of the image of the object
as formed by a collection of surfaces of different shapes, each with its own
uniform brightness. Similarly, in the study of various mathematical objects such
as functions that measure temperature at different locations, functions that
measure electro-magnetic intensities, and functions that measure the velocity of
fluid particles at various places in a fluid, can be understood in terms of the
shape of the level sets of the function. (A level set is a set where the
function takes on a given constant value.) This project in metric space analysis
explores the behavior of functions that arise in the study of potential theory
and quasiconformal mappings in terms of level sets. Applications of the the
research project include image processing and edge detection. Many components of
this project are suitable dissertation material for graduate students, and
therefore will contribute to the training of future members of the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned with links between
geometry of a metric space given in terms of its sets of finite perimeter on the
one hand, and nonlinear potential theory and quasiconformal mappings on the
other hand. The spaces considered are equipped with a doubling measure
supporting a 1-Poincare inequality. In the first part of the project the PI will
explore interactions between collections of sets of finite perimeter and
quasiconformal mappings, and between collections of sets of finite perimeter and
nonlinear potential theory. The second part of the project will explore "tangent
space" regularity of sets of quasiminimal boundary surfaces. The third part of
the project is to develop a potential theory for functions of bounded variation.
The last part of the project is to obtain a characterization of certain Poincare
inequalities in terms of modulus of families of sets of finite perimeter.
Applications of the research include further understanding of connections
between metric geometry related to sets of finite perimeter and solutions to
certain nonlinear partial differential equations. Such sets arise in the study
of image processing and edge detection, while abstract metric spaces arise in
Riemannian manifolds theory when considering Gromov-Hausdorff limit spaces as
found in the works of Cheeger, Gromov, and Perelman. Furthermore, these projects
will expand the current knowledge about geometry and the theory of sets of
finite perimeter in Carnot-Caratheodory spaces.