* 1500201
* Redox, Electronic, and Rectifying Response of Five- and Six-coordinate Metallosurfactants in Solution, as Films, and on Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Claudio Verani, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2019
* USD 449,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Cl√°udio N. Verani and his
research group at Wayne State University in Detroit are studying metal-based
molecules able to act as diodes for electric current rectification.
Rectification, or directional current flow from an electrode A to an electrode B
(but not from B back to A) is fundamental to the conversion of alternating into
direct current, and is absolutely necessary for electronic data computation.
This interdisciplinary proposal seeks to enhance our fundamental understanding
on the use of metallosurfactants for molecular diodes. Broader impacts include
scientific outreach to fourth and fifth graders and effort to promote Latino-
student inclusion in STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Verani and
collaborators are studying the redox, electronic, and rectifying behavior of
metallosurfactants, both in solution and as Langmuir-Blodgett monolayer films
deposited onto gold electrodes. Therefore, this interdisciplinary program
focuses on the use of amphiphilic coordination complexes towards current-
rectifying assemblies as measured by the asymmetry of current/potential (I/V)
curves aiming to understand (i) the predominant rectification mechanisms in
metallosurfactants; (ii) the possibility of electron-transfer mediation in
metal-based singly occupied molecular orbitals (SOMOs); (iii) the viability of
electron transfer mediation by metals between ligand-centered lowest unoccupied
&amp; highest occupied molecular orbitals (LUMOS &amp; HOMOs); (iv) the role of
metallosurfactant orientation in the mechanism of rectification; (v) the
influence of the metallosurfactant geometry in observed symmetric conduction,
unimolecular or asymmetric rectification, or insulation. This research is multi-
faceted, incluidng efforts to make strides in synthetic methodologies, and in
electrochemical, spectroscopic, computational, isothermal compression, and
microscopy methods.