* 1500460
* Particle Acceleration During Collisionless Magnetic Reconnection
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* James Drake, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 365,000.00

This project is focused on the understanding of particle acceleration during the
process of magnetic reconnection. Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental process
in which magnetic energy is converted into high-speed flows and energetic
particles. It underlies important phenomena in nature, including solar flares,
strong disturbances in the Earth's magnetic field, and disruptions in laboratory
fusion experiments. Magnetic reconnection is also the driver of space weather,
which can negatively impact satellite communications and threaten astronauts in
space. Great progress has been made on understanding the mechanisms for the fast
release of magnetic energy seen in nature and the laboratory during magnetic
reconnection. Solar observations suggest that a large fraction of the magnetic
energy released appears in the form of energetic particles. The mechanisms for
particle acceleration are not understood and are the focus of this research
project. The project will include active involvement of undergraduate students,
the training of graduate students, including female graduate students, and thus
further the broad educational goals of NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
goal of this research program is to understand electron and ion heating and
acceleration during magnetic reconnection and to develop a model for particle
acceleration that can be compared with observations. Particle-in-cell
simulations and analytic approaches will be used to address four key issues
related to electron and ion acceleration during magnetic reconnection: to
identify and quantify the dominant mechanisms for electron acceleration; to
establish the physics basis for the ubiquitous observations of power-law spectra
of energetic particles; to establish the mechanism for ion acceleration and
abundance enhancements in impulsive flares; and to develop a Fokker-Planck model
of particle acceleration that can be used to predict the hazards associated with
space weather. Collaborations will be continued with scientists working on
laboratory experiments and with satellite data to benchmark the theoretical
predictions with observations.