* 1500121
* Sparse Discrete Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Jozef Skokan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The extremal and probabilistic theory of combinatorial structures impacts
several areas of mathematics, including number theory, combinatorics, and logic,
as well as other fields such as information theory, coding theory, and
theoretical computer science. The study of random structures and randomized
algorithms has gained particular importance in recent years since they have
proved to be useful tools in dealing with the many large real world networks
that have emerged and are being actively investigated. Developing new techniques
to study these complex systems is a major task that will likely continue for
many years, and the theory of sparse combinatorial structures may form a
theoretical foundation for understanding their large scale behavior. Various new
methods in this theory will be applied in this project. One direction is to
prove analogues of classical theorems in the sparse environment. Another
direction is to apply the methods to various enumeration problems. At a high
level, most of the problems that will be investigated seek to understand the
quantitative relationship between the local and global behavior of a large
system. Additionally, the methods are well-applicable in percolation, which is
connected to statistical physics. Much of this work will be done with graduate
students, and some of the work may be integrated into courses to help bring
students into this exciting area of research.

One of the most important trends in combinatorics over the past twenty years has
been the introduction and proof of various random analogues of well-known
theorems in extremal graph theory, Ramsey theory, and additive combinatorics.
Recently, powerful general transference theorems, which the PI has helped to
develop, have been used to attack such questions. Even though these tools have
proved useful in resolving several central conjectures, many of their potential
applications have not been fully explored. For example, these methods seem to be
applicable to many enumeration problems. The investigators will address several
problems of this type, and they also expect that this project will lead to new
exciting questions and directions. In particular, the investigators will
investigate the following related areas: (i) Extremal questions in sparse
structures; (ii) Embedding in subgraphs of sparse random and pseudo-random
graphs; (iii) Ramsey-Turan questions; (iv) Applications of flag algebras; and
(v) Problems in bootstrap percolation.