* 1500837
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Between a tree and a dry place - How competition and drought tolerance constrain tree geographic ranges
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Janneke Hille Ris Lambers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,297.00

Identifying the main constraints on species ranges and how these constraints
vary across the globe has proven remarkably difficult; the degree to which the
environment alone or in combination with interactions with other organisms
imposes the limit is the crux of the problem. This project will combine
experiments, field studies, and species distribution models to test whether
plant species along a gradient from dry to wetter environments are squeezed
between death from drought on one side of their range and fierce competition
with species adapted to wetter conditions on the other. The results can help
explain when, where, and how tree range boundaries are constrained, thereby
advancing the state of the science. Such information may help guide land
managers who seek to prepare for a rapidly changing climatic future by
suggesting which conservation and forecasting tools are relevant in what
situations, and thus enhances national welfare. It will also improve science
education through activities for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
has long been hypothesized that plants are constrained by a fundamental trade-
off between competitive ability and environmental stress tolerance, because
adaptations to tolerate stress are energetically costly and limit maximum growth
rates. Using seedling experiments, dendrochronological techniques, and species
distribution modeling, this project explores whether tree species inhabiting
aridity gradients in the U.S. and Australia show a trade-off between fast growth
(a proxy for competitive ability) and drought tolerance. It then tests whether
this trade-off mirrors growth constraints on adult trees in the field, and
whether the observed trade-off and/or systematic growth constraints explain
species turnover across aridity gradients. For broader impacts a module based on
this research will be developed and piloted in cooperation with high school
teachers, and results will be communicated to the public through a university
teaching greenhouse.