* 1500455
* 2015-2017 SUNY LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at Binghamton University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2019
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to successfully complete high quality
degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (LSAMP-BD) activity provides two-
year support at the postbaccalaurate level for students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to matriculate in STEM graduate programs
with the ultimate goal of earning a doctoral degree in a STEM discipline.
Participants are selected from LSAMP institutions nationwide. The State
University of New York System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(SUNY LSAMP) under the leadership of Stony Brook University has chosen
Binghamton University as the host site for the 2015-2017 BD program in which a
cohort of twelve LSAMP certified students selected from the national pool will
engage in STEM research, academics and professional development activities
leading to STEM Master's and Doctoral degree completion. The BD program at
Binghamton University provides a comprehensive set of support services that
monitors student progress, builds a strong BD community, and increases BD
students' academic and professional skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nine cohorts
of students have matriculated in SUNY LSAMP graduate LSAMP-BD programs at Stony
Brook, Buffalo, Binghamton and Albany since 2006. The programs promote systemic
change in graduate education practices and policy in ways that increase the
success of individual students on the doctoral pathway and the effectiveness of
STEM graduate programs, continuing the goal of diversifying America's STEM
workforce. The program at Binghamton University will be externally evaluated and
students will be tracked throughout the program and into STEM careers following
completion of STEM doctoral degree programs. Collaborations with other STEM
networks and resources internal and external to the state as well as other
graduate programs, such as NSF's Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP),
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) and institutional
resources will further ensure that students complete the STEM terminal degree.