* 1500031
* Birational Geometry of Moduli Spaces and Bridgeland Stability
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Izzet Coskun, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

Important systems in many areas of science and engineering, ranging from
evolutionary biology to physics and from cryptography to computer science, can
be described by systems of polynomial equations. Algebraic geometry studies
solutions of such polynomial systems. Often, the solutions of these systems vary
in a continuous manner depending on parameters in the defining equations of
these systems, leading to parametrized spaces of solutions. A difficult-to-study
system may lie in the same parameter space as a system that is easy to solve,
allowing one to deduce geometric constraints on the difficult system. This
project studies the geometry of some parameter spaces that are ubiquitous in
mathematics and physics, so-called moduli spaces of vector bundles and moduli
spaces of curves. The research computes geometric invariants of these spaces by
relating them to simpler spaces. A recent breakthrough called Bridgeland
stability has allowed computation of many of the invariants that were previously
inaccessible. This research project aims to extend these results. In addition,
the project contributes to training the next generation of researchers in
mathematics through the involvement of graduate students and postdoctoral
associates in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridgeland stability
conditions provide a new tool for studying the geometry of moduli spaces of
sheaves. This project aims to combine Bridgeland stability conditions with
recent advances in birational geometry to study longstanding questions about the
geometry of moduli spaces of sheaves on surfaces and moduli spaces of curves.
These moduli spaces play a central role in many branches of mathematics.
Consequently, it is crucial to understand their cohomology and birational
geometry. The project involves three parts. First, building on work with
collaborators, the PI will study the birational geometry of the moduli spaces of
sheaves on surfaces. He will compute their birational invariants such as the
cones of ample, movable, and effective divisors, concentrating on Hirzebruch
surfaces, del Pezzo surfaces, and certain surfaces of general type. Second, the
PI will study resolutions of ideal sheaves of points and curves in projective
space in terms of other exceptional collections. In the case of the plane, the
geometry is significantly simplified if one resolves sheaves in terms of an
appropriately chosen exceptional collection; this work will apply the same ideas
to sheaves on higher-dimensional projective spaces. Third, the PI will continue
collaborative projects on the effective cones of higher codimension cycles on
moduli spaces of curves, the Kawamata-Morrison Cone Conjecture, and extremality
properties of cycles in homogeneous spaces.