* 1500652
* The Boot Camp for the 2015 Algebraic Geometry Summer Research Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Izzet Coskun, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2016
* USD 49,900.00

This award supports the participation of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers in the "Boot Camp" preceding the American Mathematical Society (AMS)
Summer Institute in Algebraic Geometry on July 6-10, 2015 at the University of
Utah, Salt Lake City. The algebraic geometry community has developed the now
longstanding tradition of running an institute every ten years with the purpose
of convening a majority of practitioners in the world to overview the
developments of the past decade and to outline the most pressing and far-
reaching problems for the next. The next AMS Summer Institute in Algebraic
Geometry will take place at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, on July
13-31, 2015. Increasingly, algebraic geometry has become so diverse and
technically demanding that it is daunting for graduate students and postdocs to
master the techniques and wide range of activity that occurs in the field beyond
their immediate areas of study. It has thus become imperative to run a "boot
camp" in the week preceding the institute designed exclusively for advanced
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. The purpose of the boot camp is
threefold:&lt;br/&gt;1) To familiarize the participants with a broad range of
developments in algebraic geometry in an informal setting, thus increasing their
ability to follow discussions and participate at the institute.&lt;br/&gt;2) To
introduce young algebraic geometers to their peers and the previous generation
of experts in order to increase collaborations and form a support group for
young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;3) To introduce young researchers to new techniques
and questions in order to make them more effective researchers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The boot camp will focus on several subjects in algebraic geometry
that have seen significant advances in the last decade, including birational
geometry, Bridgeland stability, the Hassett-Keel program, p-adic Hodge theory,
Shimura varieties, perfectoid spaces, the tautological ring of the moduli spaces
of curves, Boij-Soderbeg theory, and singularities in characteristic p. The
choices of topics are results of coordination with the organizers of the AMS
Summer Institute in Algebraic Geometry. The boot camp will have wide-ranging
broader impacts as it will introduce the most dynamic and brightest young
algebraic geometry graduate students and postdocs to each other. It is expected
that many new collaborations will result from this interaction. In addition to
the scientific benefits, young researchers will form a support network of their
peers, which can significantly improve retention and success in the STEM
disciplines. More details about the boot camp can be found at its website:
http://www.math.utah.edu/~defernex/Bootcamp2015/home.html.