* 1500195
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Video Collaboratory: A Platform for Active Viewing and Collaboration with Video Data
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Sybil Huskey, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 216,444.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an online
software technology (The Video Collaboratory) to fill the need for innovative
support in small group collaboration and discussion around video documents. The
Video Collaboratory is important because increasingly huge amounts of video are
being generated for business and personal use. And while there are currently
ways to distribute / watch video, it is still not easy to drill into, analyze,
and note important details from within the video as a means to an end,
particularly when working with others. From corporate training to healthcare,
education, and security, people need effective ways to privately converse about,
mark up and brainstorm around videos that are linked directly into the video
content itself. The project will result in a scaled-up and enhanced Video
Collaboratory platform with the following unique features: new ways for
precision interaction with video documents, direct connection of group
discussions to the video timeline, and private social networking to support
meaningful work with videos. These features provide the following advantages:
enabling clearer, deeper discussion; reducing error and confusion; and
increasing efficiency / saving time when compared to the leading competing
technologies in this market space, such as YouTube and Vimeo, that focus on
distribution rather than detailed analysis and use of video documents. This
project will develop a market-ready technology platform for next-generation
collaboration around video data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application: (1) social presence affordances and group analytics to
enable group-guided viewing and synchronous interaction around video documents;
(2) rich communication pathways to support multimedia annotations and video-
centric filtering of commentary as part of video-anchored discussion; (3)
responsive components for interface and video data to scale across platforms
(particularly mobile) with smart video streaming that adapts to user network
environments; and (4) elastic, scalable, and socially-aware metrics for
group/project organization, access/privacy control, and content management for
sharing. Significant contributions to the research and knowledge base are novel
techniques designed to address these gaps, validated through user study testing.
Contributions include techniques for synchronous interaction around video
documents; social discussion threading (integrating context from annotated video
segmentation, user interaction analytics, and discussion content); weighted
adaptive video streaming to prioritize transfer of content by discussion
activity; and a flexible, socially-aware model for access management and content
sharing. In addition, personnel involved in this project, graduate students and
post-docs, will receive technology translation and entrepreneurship experiences
through research development and discovery toward commercial reality.