* 1500525
* Studies in Moduli Theory and Birational Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Dan Abramovich, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2018
* USD 347,775.00

The area of study of this project lies within algebraic geometry, the branch of
mathematics devoted to geometric shapes called algebraic varieties, defined by
polynomial equations. Algebraic geometry has significant applications in coding,
industrial control, and computation. But the topics of this project are more
closely related to applications in theoretical physics, where physicists
consider algebraic varieties as a piece of the fine structure of our universe.
This is especially true with the first topic, moduli theory. This theory studies
a remarkable phenomenon in which the collection of all algebraic varieties of
the same type is manifested as an algebraic variety, called a moduli space, in
its own right. Thus in algebraic geometry, the metaphor of thinking about a
community of "organisms" as itself being an "organism" is not just a metaphor
but a rigorous and quite useful fact. The other topic studied in this project is
birational geometry, which is devoted to a certain abstract relationship, called
birational equivalence, among algebraic varieties, which lies at the foundation
of algebraic geometry.

The investigator will continue studying problems in moduli theory; the main foci
of the project are Moduli spaces of stable logarithmic maps and Artin fans.
Additional topics include the degeneration formula for KKO invariants, the
birational geometry of torus quotients, and logarithmic Kodaira dimensions of
fibered powers in relation to uniformity of stably integral points.