* 1500851
* Understanding Evidentiality and other grammatical phenomena through the expanded Documentation of Hupa
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Justin Spence, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2020
* USD 256,556.00

Hupa, a critically endangered Native American language of northwestern
California, has a rich system of grammatical markers called evidentials that
speakers deploy to indicate sources of information and viewpoint in narratives.
Details of the distinctive Hupa system are still largely unexplored but have
tremendous potential to improve our general understanding of how such meanings
are expressed in human languages.

In this three-year Documenting Endangered Languages project, Justin Spence of
the University of California, Davis and Ramon Excamilla of the University of
Central Arkansas will work with Hupa elder Verdena Parker to obtain narrative
interpretations of archival film footage and translations of yet unanalyzed
recordings. In conjunction with targeted elicitations, analysis of the resulting
Hupa language samples will help develop typologically and theoretically situated
descriptions of evidentiality and other aspects of Hupa discourse structure.

Public access to material produced by the project will be achieved through
improvements to an existing online dictionary and text database. Expanding the
quantity of accessible transcribed texts and the coverage of the dictionary,
together with improvements to the user interface, will allow users to perform
more sophisticated queries and to have greater confidence in the accuracy of the
results they obtain.

All recordings and transcriptions produced by the project will be archived with
the Survey of California and Other Indian Languages at UC Berkeley, ensuring
that they will remain accessible to future generations of users for many years
to come.