* 1500958
* Topics in Harmonic Analysis: Interplay between Time-Frequency Analysis, Additive Combinatorics and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Victor Lie, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 292,486.00

This research project focuses on the interplay between three major areas in
mathematics: harmonic analysis, additive combinatorics, and partial differential
equations (PDE), with the harmonic analysis component playing the dominant role.
The research plan has the following characteristics: (1) it is structured into
several classes of problems (some to be detailed in the next paragraph), on some
of which the principal investigator has already made relevant
contribution/advancements by developing new analysis methods; (2) it covers a
wide range of techniques, with levels of difficulty varying depending on the
nature of the subject that also allow partial progress; (3) it has two main
components, namely, a purely theoretical one dealing with problems that focus on
understanding the behavior of various so-called maximal operators with highly
oscillatory kernels and a more applied side, part of the area of fluid dynamics,
studying the problem of singularity formation for two-fluid interfaces. An
advancement in this latter direction will contribute to a better understanding
of the physical reality around us. Further aspects of the project are the
dissemination of the principal investigator's work through conference
participation, lectures, and graduate courses, interaction with other
researchers/experts in the areas of harmonic analysis and PDE, the training of
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.

This project investigates several problems that position themselves at the
interface either between harmonic analysis and additive combinatorics, or
between harmonic analysis and fluid dynamics. It is structured along several
major themes, among which we mention the following (items (2), (3), and (4)
represent joint projects with collaborators): (1) pointwise convergence of
Fourier series near L^1; (2) the maximal Schrodinger operator, Kakeya
extremizers, and sum-product estimates; (3) formation of singularities for the
two-dimensional, two-fluid interface in the absence of vorticity in order to
increase understanding of the "limiting" water-wave case; (4) the rotational
two-dimensional water-wave problem and quasilinear systems of Klein--Gordon
equations in three dimensions with nontrivial vorticity, with a focus on the
time of existence for small initial data. On the first topic the author has
already made contributions, developing new methods that either improved on known
results (e.g., the pointwise convergence along lacunary subsequences of partial
Fourier sums) or recovered the best known results stemming from the celebrated
work of Lennart Carleson. The approaches for both the first and second topics
combine techniques from time-frequency analysis and additive combinatorics. The
third theme investigates, for the two-dimensional, two-fluid problem, how the
geometry of the interface changes as the boundary approaches a "splash" scenario
from the water-wave case; the fourth one explores how the time of existence for
solutions (relative to small initial data) of the two-dimensional water-wave
case and three dimensional Klein-Gordon systems are affected by the presence of
vorticity, a new and hitherto mostly unexplored theme in the fluid dynamics
literature.