* 1500779
* Linguistic and ethnographic sound recordings from early twentieth-century California: Optical scanning, digitization, and access
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Andrew Garrett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 05/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

California has over 90 indigenous languages belonging to 21 different language
families, and is linguistically more diverse than any area of its size in the
western hemisphere. A hundred years ago, almost all California Native languages
still had speakers; in most cases there were active speech communities using
traditional narrative, oratory, ritual, teaching, and other speech practices in
addition to rich song cultures. During the early decades of the twentieth
century, beginning in 1901, Native people recorded songs and spoken texts on wax
cylinders in collaboration with anthropologists and linguists at the University
of California, Berkeley. The resulting collection of 2,713 cylinders contains
over 100 hours of recordings in 78 languages, including about half of
California's Native languages. For seven languages these are the only known
sound recordings, and in many other cases they include unique speech practices
and otherwise unknown stories and songs. Today, though fewer than half of
California's indigenous languages have any first-language speakers (in almost
all cases fewer than half a dozen), many Native communities have active language
restoration programs and would welcome access to sound recordings made a century
ago.

This project will apply new technology developed at the Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory to create audio transfers of all wax cylinders at UC
Berkeley. This involves optical restoration using a precision optical probe that
creates a high-resolution profile of the cylinder surface; this profile can be
formed into a three-dimensional digital image. An algorithm on a computer then
processes the image to calculate the stylus motion and numerically extract the
audio signal. The resulting audio transfers are superior to those produced
invasively (with a physical stylus), and can even be created from broken
cylinders. The entire cylinder collection will be scanned and digitally archived
within a three-year window, in a collaboration involving the Hearst Museum of
Anthropology (where the wax cylinder collection is housed), the University
Library (where the scanning and digitization will be done), and the Department
of Linguistics (which operates the California Language Archive, an online
resource where the resulting audio files will be archived and accessible).