* 1500166
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Lidar Technologies for Remote Underwater Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Geoffrey Crowley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2019
* USD 261,640.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project is a proof-of-concept project to
develop, demonstrate, and evaluate an innovative lidar (laser illuminated
detection and ranging) remote sensing technique, called the INtrapulse PHAse
Modification Induced by Scattering (INPHAMIS) technique, as a commercially
viable product for detailed mapping of shallow marine environments. The INPHAMIS
technique is a breakthrough technology in that it provides unprecedented,
centimeter resolution to map submerged objects in shallow waters, seamlessly
identifies land-to-water transitions, obtains high precision water depth
measurements, and provides precise description of bottom surface topography, all
from remote distances above the water. Submerged objects are the number one
cause of insurance claims in watercraft and the ability to detect them in
advance would take care of both a human safety concern and an economic concern.
Market research indicates this type of lidar system would contribute to growing
markets in the mapping of lakes, shallow glacial melt-ponds, mosquito habitat,
coastal erosion, and flood basins, and provide navigation information through
inlets and channels that is crucial in these ever evolving environments. The end
commercial goal is to develop a mobile lidar bathymetric unit to be used for
local surveys either by boat, handheld, or possibly on dirigibles or unmanned
aerial systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The INPHAMIS technique has the following
unique features: 1-cm resolution in resolving objects in shallow waters, simple
lidar components, noninvasive/non-contact, remote sensing technique based on a
differential measurement, continuous observing over land-water transitions, and
scalability to support several types of observing platforms. INPHAMIS is a
disruptive technology in that it achieves high resolution subsurface mapping in
water while reducing complexity and cost. Other remote sensing techniques are
limited to waters deeper than a meter or more, leaving a large portion of near-
shore waters unmapped. Existing lidar bathymetry systems are all quite similar
in terms of intended use and capabilities and all involve large, expensive
airborne systems. The INPHAMIS technique's unique features provide advantages in
performance, costs, mass, power, volume, and adaptability that opens a new
market in shallow-water water bathymetry by enabling the near-future development
of a hand-held system for underwater mapping and subsurface target
identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: 1) interactions of laser light with different surface water
conditions, submerged objects, and bottom surface types; 2) performance factors
and definition of system and measurement specifications; 3) trade analysis of
critical lidar components. A lab demonstrator of the technique will be advanced
to evaluate laser light interactions with water bodies and objects in real
environmental shallow-water conditions. This will also provide data on
establishing performance factors and component testing. A faculty member,
graduate student, and an undergraduate student will be involved providing a
unique learning environment in entrepreneurship and technology translation, with
support from industry partner, ASTRA LLC, and their staff and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages industry partner, ASTRA LLC,
which will contribute engineering experience and perform commercialization and
marketing studies to assess market space, competitive environment, explore
licensing opportunities and further commercialization of the technology. This
strong partnership is poised to move this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality.