* 1500911
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Consequences of sympatry and allopatry for variation in reproductive genes of Drosophila pseudoobscura
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Dean Castillo, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,143.00

Many factors influence mate choice in both plants and animals, including
choosing a mate that will provide the best quality offspring while avoiding
individuals of different species. The integration of these factors into a single
choice implies that traits involved in mate selection within species could be
the same traits that cause species to diverge from one another. Recently, the
investigators used genetically modified Drosophila melanogaster to show that the
same genes that control within species mate choice are also involved in species
discrimination. This project is testing this association in a natural system, to
understand how different populations accumulate changes in genes that control
mate choice and species discrimination. These data will provide insight into the
molecular mechanisms underlying natural variation in mate choice and the
formation of reproductively isolated populations, which are important factors in
understanding how new species arise over evolutionary time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will examine DNA sequence and gene
expression variation in reproductive genes in natural populations of the fruit
fly Drosophila pseudoobscura, using high depth nucleotide sequencing. The
experiment contrasts genetic changes that have occurred in populations that co-
occur with closely related species, and thus must discriminate against them
during mate choice, with changes in populations that are not exposed to other
species. Analyses will assess genetic variation across all reproductive genes,
as well as specifically in genes known to affect gamete competition. These
variants will be associated with phenotypic data on mate choice within and
between species, to differentiate genes that are important to mate choice, to
species discrimination, and to both reproductive behaviors.