* 1500262
* Iterated Fourier Series and Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Camil Muscalu, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

A fundamental question in mathematical physics is the so-called planar N-body
problem. In broad terms, it asks one to analyze the orbits of several
particles/bodies that initially move independently and circularly around a fixed
point in a plane, and then start to interact with each other, possibly in a
nonlinear fashion. The basic question of interest is the following: With the
passage of time, under what circumstances do the orbits of these
particles/bodies remain bounded? Examples include the Solar System, where the
planets are moving around the Sun, and the (planar) galaxies, where the stars
move around a black hole. Recently, it has been discovered that there are deep
connections between this problem and the field of harmonic analysis, and the
present project aims to explore and understand these connections more
quantitatively.

There are several extremely interesting nonlinear operators that one needs to
understand from a harmonic analysis point of view in order to give meaningful
answers to the question above, at least in some particular situations. Some of
them include Carleson-type maximal operators associated to iterated Fourier
integrals that are generated by combinatorial trees. The complexity of these
trees is naturally linked to the complexity of the nonlinear interactions
between the particles/bodies. For instance, quadratic interactions generate
binary trees, cubic interactions corresponds to ternary trees, and so on. In
particular, the simplest case of 1-ary trees is the one that comes from linear
interactions, and it was studied by the principal investigator in collaboration
with Tao and Thiele some years ago. This is the case that generated the standard
iterated Fourier series and integrals. The aim of this project is to develop the
necessary analytical tools to understand the boundedness properties of such
nonlinear operators.