* 1500907
* BRIGE: A Fully Distributed Multi-Agent System Based Energy Management Solution for Microgrids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2015
* Wenxin Liu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2015
* USD 44,898.00

Intellectual Merit: Intelligent techniques are cost efficient solutions to
making existing power systems smarter. To improve the reliability and energy
efficiency of microgrids and lower the cost of the control system, fully
distributed control solutions are preferable. As one of the most popular
distributed control solutions, multi-agent systems have been widely applied for
power system operation and control. However, existing solutions have limited
applicability and lack rigorous stability analysis. To address the needs of
microgrids and the problems with existing solutions, one of the PI?s long term
research goals is to study fully distributed multi-agent system based control
solutions. In this project, the PI will design three types of fully distributed
optimization algorithms based on a stable global information discovery
algorithm. The designed algorithms can be selected for different energy
management tasks based on model availability, complexity, and response time,
etc. Efficient synchronization techniques will be proposed based on analysis of
agents? autonomous activities. Models with different levels of details will be
developed for microgrids with multiple different types of distributed energy
resources. The developed models will be used to evaluate the dynamic
performances of candidate solutions and overcome the disadvantages of the
optimization algorithms. The proposed algorithms can solve simple problems in
real time or complex problems in several seconds or faster. Real-time simulation
and experimentation will be used to investigate real world performance.

Broader Impacts: This project will create new fields in power and energy
research by introducing new theories and technologies. The planned work will
demonstrate to power engineers that advanced computational intelligence
techniques can bring about novel solutions for complex engineering problems. The
success of this project will also inspire other societies with new applications
and challenges. The project has potential to revolutionize the practice of power
system operation by seamlessly integrating power system scheduling and control.
The distributed optimization algorithms can be applied to many other large-scale
online optimization and control problems. The project will generate two graduate
RA positions, create two new multidisciplinary courses, and broaden
participation by providing excellent hands-on learning opportunities for the
large population of minority students at New Mexico State University. Outreach
activities are planned to improve public awareness, understanding, and
confidence of the Smart Grid. The microgrid testbed, high quality publications,
and trained students produced according to this project will greatly enhance the
capability of New Mexico State University in doing related research and
attracting new funding from governments and industries.