* 1500253
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Developing low-cost nanowire sensors based on a seed-mediated solution process
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Guangzhao Mao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2019
* USD 287,768.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel,
lower energy method of creating nanowires that will enable reliable, cost-
effective and scalable manufacturing of nanowire sensors. Low-cost nanowire
sensor technology is important because it has the potential to improve multiple
types of detection systems, with impacts in disease detection, food safety,
antiterrorism capabilities, higher crop yields (due to earlier detection of
pathogens), and better protection for emergency responders and industrial plant
workers (due to better chemical detection). The project will result in a proof-
of-concept electrochemical nanosensor for gas/vapor sensing with the following
unique features: 1) it will be based on a combined top-down and bottom-up
nanomanufacturing method that directly deposits nanowires on micro-fabricated
devices, 2) it will be fabricated via a room temperature process, 3) it will
utilize a reversible synthesis process that may enable in-field regeneration and
reuse, 4) it will have new or broadened sensor capabilities through a modular
approach enabling combinatory synthesis of a wide range of novel organic
nanowires, and 5) it will be compatible with flexible electronic architectures.
These features will provide the following advantages: low-cost, scalable,
reusable, modular, and applicable to a diverse range of chemicals as compared to
other competing sensor technologies in this market
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanowires have been applied to sensing for over 10
years but few nanowire sensors have reached the market. The major barriers are
the complexity of manufacturing and difficulty in connecting nanowires in
microelectronic devices. In current competing technologies, nanowires need to be
aligned and placed at precise locations and orientations on the patterned
substrates, a complex process to scale up. This new technology synthesizes
nanowires directly on the metal substrates by using the metal micro- and
nanopattern as nucleation points to grow the nanowires. It is based on seed-
mediated nucleation research. When a nanoparticle is used as a seed, the high
curvature of the seed imposes unsustainable strain energy on the nucleated
crystal at the crystal/seed interface and results in a nanowire crystal. In
addition, a graduate student involved in this project will gain technology
translation experience through exposure to business methodologies, access to
technology transfer networks, and a deeper engagement in the university
technology transfer process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages a serial
entrepreneur with prior experience in nanotechnology ventures to guide
technology transfer and commercialization activities, and an established
technology-enabling company to augment research capability in this technology
translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.