* 1500095
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Prototyping Untrusted-Device Quantum Cryptography
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Carl Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2018
* USD 211,924.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating breakthrough
discoveries in quantum information theory into practice by constructing a
practical and secure prototype random number generator. Random numbers are
indispensable resources for modern information processing and are ubiquitous in
computers and communication devices. In particular, they play a crucial role in
many applications, including cryptography, privacy assurance, Internet protocols
and scientific computing. Unfortunately current random number generators are
vulnerable to hostile adversaries, thus compromising the security of many
systems. This lack of security derives from the fact that no test can determine
whether or not a string of bits is random. Thus one is faced with the prospect
of having to trust that the random number generator operates as advertised,
since this cannot be verified by observing its output alone. If the device is
user-built and always remains under the user's control, then this will not be an
issue. In practice, however, these constraints are not likely to be met. A
prototype hardware random number generator, operating on quantum principles,
will be built using optical components and tested. The operation of this
prototype is unique, since it includes a certification procedure that can
guarantee the randomness of its outputs even if the hardware equipment used to
generate the randomness is not trusted. This certification protects the user
against hardware imperfections and also deliberate manipulation, and it offers
higher security than any other current solution on the market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to narrow or close the gaps between
theory and experiment through prototyping such a random number generator. This
method of generating certified random numbers is based on measuring entangled
quantum states; it was first proposed in 2006 by Roger Colbeck. In 2014, Yaoyun
Shi and Carl Miller, two members of the AIR-TT project team, gave the first
practical security proof, which fundamentally lowered the requirements
associated with implementing a certified random number generator. Recent
advances in the optical components needed for quantum information processing
have greatly improved the performance of quantum-based measurement instruments.
To reach the project's goal, the team will examine the capabilities of currently
available components, through numerical studies and theoretical analysis, in
order to identify any shortfalls in view of the known security requirements. The
hardware and protocols will be adjusted accordingly, and new theoretical
analyses will be developed as needed. In addition, personnel involved in this
project, including postdoctoral, doctoral researchers and undergraduate
students, will receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation
experiences through the prototyping effort and market research activities.