* 1500509
* Applications of Harmonic Analysis to Function Theory and Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Brett Wick, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 10/31/2015
* USD 116,697.00

This research project will conduct a study of fundamental questions in function
theory and operator theory using the tools and techniques of harmonic analysis.
The project will address important questions now open to exploration because of
recent advances made by the principal investigator and his collaborators.
Resolution of these problems raised will find applications in function theoretic
operator theory and yield new tools and techniques that can be adopted by the
larger analysis community. The principal investigator will advise graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows, include them in the proposed research
projects, and provide mentoring, in order to assist them in transitioning to the
next stage of their careers. Broad dissemination of the results will take place
by participation in conferences and posting of the research to the arxiv
preprint server.

This project will combine recent results of the principal investigator with
motivation from function theory and operator theory to study questions related
to the two-weight Hilbert transform and properties of model spaces. The first
research direction to be explored couples the results of the principal
investigator with questions about boundedness and invertibility properties of
products of Toeplitz operators. In particular, the problems to be studied are
aimed at obtaining a better understanding of the composition of paraproducts and
determining necessary and sufficient conditions for their boundedness.
Connections to the two-weight inequality for the Hilbert transform suggest
related problems to investigate. Resolving the proposed problems will provide
more insight into the recent characterization of the two-weight inequality for
the Hilbert transform and related properties for Toeplitz operators on the Hardy
space. An additional research direction, based upon the principal investigator's
recent results and their connection to the description of the Carleson measure
for model spaces, will be pursued. The open question of obtaining a
characterization of the Riesz bases for model spaces leads to problems related
to reverse Carleson measures for the model spaces, and their relation to two-
weight inequalities for the Cauchy and Hilbert transforms. Additional directions
of investigation connect to bilinear forms and commutators on model spaces.