* 1500751
* Typological and historical discovery through language documentation of Walman, Srenge, Aro, and Eho, four critically endangered languages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2023
* Matthew Dryer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2023
* USD 347,466.00

About one fifth of the languages of the world (that is, over 1200 languages) are
spoken in New Guinea. This is more than all the languages of mainland Europe and
Asia combined. Yet fewer than 5% of the languages of New Guinea have been
described in any detail and for the majority, we know next to nothing. We know
from past experience that New Guinean languages exhibit rare typological
features through which we can understand better how language changes through
time and how language systems are organized. We must document these features now
as many of the languages of New Guinea are seriously endangered and are no
longer being learned by young children. Probably a majority of the languages of
New Guinea will be extinct or almost extinct by the end of this century.
Language is the most complex form of human behavior, but for every language that
become extinct, we forever lose knowledge about this essential part of what it
means to be human. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Matthew Dryer of SUNY at Buffalo along
with linguist Pamela Brown and two graduate students will conduct fieldwork in
northern New Guinea in or near the Torricelli Mountains. They will complete or
create dictionaries, grammars and texts collections for four languages, Walman,
Srenge, Aro, and Eho, all of which are of the Torricelli group. The
documentation will include descriptions of complex verbal conjunction,
typologically unusual infixation patterns, and variations in word order that are
determined by the object's thematic role. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
collected from this project will be accessible from the Endangered Languages
Archive.