* 1500753
* Software for enriching endangered language-annotated databases with crowd-sourced linguistic and cultural input
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Raphael Finkel, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2020
* USD 333,318.00

To understand how humans organize and relay information, linguists need to know
what linguistic structures are possible in human language. Yet many languages
that can tell us more about potential linguistic structures are no longer being
spoken as fluent older speakers are not being replaced by younger speakers, thus
making the loss of linguistic and cultural knowledge irreversible. The
Documenting Endangered Languages Program supports proposals, including those
that create innovative software, to facilitate the efficient, rapid, and
accurate digital capture of endangered language data so that this knowledge can
be collected, analyzed, and made available for speakers and scientists in
perpetuity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a three-year award Raphael Finkel of the
University of Kentucky and Daniel Kaufmann of the Endangered Language Alliance
will create software that allows for the rapid refinement of transcription and
translation of endangered language data. The team will test their software on
data collected on two languages -- Purhepecha, an isolate spoken in Mexico, and
Koda, a Munda language spoken in Bangladesh and India. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
central product of language documentation projects is the annotated corpus, a
collection of language samples with accompanying analytic notes on specific
features such as the sounds and word and sentence structure of the language.
Kaufman and Finkel will write software that will provide web-based access to the
corpus and make it possible for linguists and the speaker-community to search,
browse, and edit the corpus. These additional participatory annotations will
enrich and refine the corpus in ways and at a rate not previously possible.
Thus, in addition to providing valuable data on two under-described languages,
the results of this project have the potential of dramatically changing the
quality of language documentation products. Data from these projects will be
available at the Archive of the Indigenous languages of Latin America and the
Endangered Languages Archive and Repository. The resulting software will be
distributed through SourceForge.