* 1500126
* Collaborative Research: GOALI - Non-Equilibrium Processes, Stability, Design and Control of Pulsed Plasmas for Materials Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mark Kushner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the science and technology of pulsed
plasma processing of semiconductor wafers aimed towards developing a knowledge
base that will enable pulsed plasmas to be optimized for materials modification.
Plasma assisted materials processing is largely responsible for the impressive
progress that continues to be made in production of microelectronics devices of
ever increasing capability. Plasma etching is the only known, industrially
implementable method to fabricate the nanometer sized features in logic and
memory chips. During plasma etching, fluxes of ions and neutral particles are
directed towards the wafer being processed. The energy and angle of impact of
the particles onto the surface of wafers are the critical parameters for the
fabrication of microelectronic devices, as well as nanostructured and
biocompatible materials. Control of these parameters allows for finer control of
the surface composition and, in microelectronics fabrication, etch rate. Low
temperature plasmas for plasma materials processing have traditionally used
continuously excited plasmas. However, all major semiconductor chip and
equipment manufacturers are predicting that pulsed plasmas will be the enabling
technology for achieving sub-10 nanometer feature sizes. The most direct impact
of this research is addressing fundamental science issues that are of paramount
importance to the plasma processing of high performance microelectronics,
nanostructures and biocompatible materials. In addition to the technological
broader impacts, this project will be highly focused on educational outreach.
Prof. Gekelman is one of the founders of LAPTAG (Los Angeles Physics Teachers
Alliance Group) and several LAPTAG students and will be involved in these plasma
processing studies. Prof. Kushner, director of the Michigan Institute of Plasma
Science and Engineering, will leverage those resources to launch the Plasma
Picture of the Day website with the goal of providing informative images of
plasmas to educate the general public and school children about
plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of fundamental understanding of the
dynamics of pulsed plasma systems is the current impediment to widespread
adoption. For example, instabilities and waves are nearly universally observed
in pulsed plasmas, and particularly in electronegative plasmas, which sometimes
prevents operation in desirable parameters spaces. The sources of these
instabilities and the means to prevent them are not understood. Pulsed plasma
processing can be arbitrarily complex. For example, modern capacitively coupled
plasma etching tools may be driven by up to 3 separate power supplies at
different frequencies which can be pulsed independently at different repetition
rates and different duty cycles. The combinations of parameters can number into
the millions. This extremely large parameter space places a large premium on
having a fundamental understanding of pulsed plasma processing and so be able to
predict plasma performance. In this research project, a highly collaborative
experimental-modeling effort will investigate the fundamental properties of
pulsed plasmas as used in materials processing, with an emphasis on
instabilities and waves, diagnosing and modeling the dynamics of the transition
from interpulse afterglow to powered plasma, and the means to improve uniformity
through pulsing. Laser induced fluorescence will be used to characterize the
trajectory of ions as they are accelerated through the transient sheaths
produced by pulsed plasmas; and will be correlated with Langmuir probe
measurements of plasma properties. Multi-dimensional computer modeling will be
validated by these measurements and will be further used to illuminate
fundamental issues related to plasma transport in pulsed systems.