* 1500838
* Combinatorics, Representations, and Catalan Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Brendon Rhoades, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 180,001.00

This project studies problems at the interface of enumerative and algebraic
combinatorics. Combinatorial questions arise in many areas of mathematics, and
combinatorics has applications that include optimization, computer science, and
statistical physics. The enumerative problems under study in this project are
related to parking functions (which originally arose in the study of hash
functions in computer science) and the cyclic sieving phenomenon (a concept in
enumerative combinatorics that interprets certain polynomial evaluations as
counts of fixed points). The research aims to both prove results in enumerative
combinatorics and understand these results in terms of deeper algebraic
structures. This interaction between combinatorics and algebra promises to yield
new results in both fields. The enumerative side of the research is well-suited
to broader impacts in the form of graduate and undergraduate research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies problems in algebraic
combinatorics. The first of these is the cyclic sieving phenomenon as it applies
to the action of a K-theoretic analog of the promotion operator on a
K-generalization of rectangular standard Young tableaux. The idea is to prove
new instances of the (enumerative) cyclic sieving phenomenon related to this
action using representation theory. The second problem concerns a generalization
of parking functions attached to the symmetric group to a wider class of
"parking spaces" attached to a reflection group W. We study a family of
conjectures regarding these objects which would yield uniform proofs of various
facts in Coxeter-Catalan theory which are at present only understood in a case-
by-case fashion. The third project studies rational Catalan combinatorics, which
is a generalization of classical Catalan combinatorics motivated by the study of
rational Cherednik algebras. We propose to both extend various results from the
rich enumerative domain of the classical setting to the rational case and study
a genuinely new feature of the rational case that we call "rational duality."