* 1500575
* Dynamical systems on nilmanifolds, ultrafilters, and polynomial multiple correlation sequences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Vitaly Bergelson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 240,000.00

The problems and conjectures presented in this program can be viewed as far
reaching extensions of classical recurrence results in dynamics. At the same
time, these problems connect diverse areas of mathematics (such as ergodic
theory, combinatorics, number theory, topological algebra) and contribute to
each. The new problems considered in this proposal deal with interesting and
promising new connections and reflect the entrance of novel methods and
techniques in the picture. These include, in particular, the methods involving
dynamical systems on nilmanifolds and methods utilizing the topological algebra
in compactifications. The conjectures stated throughout this proposal are
supported by the results obtained by the investigators and other workers in this
vibrant area in recent years.

The polynomial Szemeredi theorem, the polynomial Hales-Jewett theorem, and
various additional results obtained by the investigators in recent years served
as an impetus for further developments in the theory of multiple recurrence.
These developments provide better understanding of the phenomenon of multiple
recurrence and bring new vistas of research to light. The directions of study
touched upon in this proposal reveal strong and mutually perpetuating
connections between combinatorics, number theory and various aspects of
recurrence and convergence in the theory of dynamical systems. The field of
Ergodic Ramsey Theory, with its richness of problems and connections and
diversity of techniques and methods, is a meeting point of several branches of
modern mathematics and is an excellent medium for attracting undergraduates to
mathematics and graduate students to an area of active research.