* 1500774
* Connecting New Systematic Biologists Across Borders: A Workshop in Model-Based Phylogenetics at Evolution 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Bryan Carstens, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 47,608.00

This award to University of Colorado, Boulder is made to support travel for
twenty US graduate students, and three invited speakers from US institutions to
a day-long workshop on model-based phylogenetics and phylogeography on the day
prior to the Evolution meetings in Guarujo, Brazil (June 26, 2015). Model-based
phylogenetic methods are growing at a staggering pace and now provide
researchers with an opportunity to address research questions that were not
possible before. This proposal is worthy of funding because it will allow U.S.
researchers to learn about these new model-based phylogenetic methods first hand
from several of the leading researchers in the field. The workshop is structured
to provide an introduction to the theory behind the models followed by hands-on
experience with the various software packages using real world data. The PIs and
speakers have a strong track record of running successful workshops on similar
topics demonstrating the feasibility of the proposed plan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will support travel to the meeting and
accommodation for twenty US graduate students, including members of under-
represented groups. All workshop tutorials will be made publically available
through a dedicated website and all presentations will be uploaded to YouTube
after the meeting. 100 foreign graduate students, predominantly from South and
Central America, will also attend the workshop enhancing opportunities for
international scientific collaboration.