* 1500919
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effect of niche conservation versus niche evolution on diversification rate in the Neotropical plant genus Citharexylum (Verbenaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Richard Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,085.00

The Neotropics are estimated to house more seed plant species than the African,
Asian, and Oceanic tropics combined. Recent studies of diverse plant groups have
noted that closely related species often occupy similar types of habitats
despite being geographically separated. This observation led to the hypothesis
that dispersal is common in many groups and that migration to new, but suitable
habitats can spur diversification. Adaptations can also stimulate radiations
within plant groups, though less is known about the contributions of these
seemingly rare but important evolutionary events to biodiversity. This research
will focus on the systematics of the Neotropical plant genus Citharexylum
(Verbenaceae), and the relative contributions of dispersal and adaptation to
species diversification in the group. Studies that provide an understanding of
how organisms have dispersed and evolved in the past provide the necessary
historical context to predict how these same groups are likely to disperse and
diversify in the future. One graduate student will be trained and undergraduates
will be introduced to a broad range of laboratory and analytical methods. The
research will also enhance international scientific research infrastructure by
establishing collaborations in several South and Central American countries. .

The object of this project is to understand how biogeographic events
(migration/colonization versus adaptation) influence diversification in
Neotropical plant lineages. This study will elucidate the biogeographic history
of the plant genus Citharexylum, a lineage of trees and shrubs that originated
in and diversified into multiple biomes of the Neotropics. A time-calibrated
phylogeny of Citharexylum with near-complete sampling will be inferred using
multiple, independent loci. Phylogenetic inference will take a two-tiered
approach using both high-throughput and traditional sequencing methods to
produce a robust phylogeny. This framework will then be used to test
evolutionary and biogeographic hypotheses about the genus. Statistical analyses
will reconstruct ancestral ranges/climatic niches and detect the placement and
magnitude of diversification rate shifts in the phylogeny. Additionally, the
phylogeny will be dated using a fossil-calibrated phylogeny of the inclusive
group Lamiales allowing assessment of migrations and adaptive events with known
geologic and climatic events in the history of the Neotropics. This work will
help build the foundation of knowledge surrounding the timing and magnitude of
diversification events as well as the directionality of niche evolution in the
New World.