* 1500601
* Gromov-Witten theory under extremal transitions and birational transformations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Yuan-Pin Lee, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 260,000.00

Gromov-Witten (GW) theory lies in the intersection of many exciting research
areas in mathematics and physics. Roughly speaking it counts the number of
curves meeting prescribed conditions in a geometric object called a variety. On
the one hand, the theory itself has remarkable structures, both established and
conjectural. Investigating these structures requires some new insights and
technical tools from other areas. This provides a lot of interesting problems
for classical subjects in mathematics. On the other hand, these new insights and
technical tools help to discover deep relations and connections between existing
mathematics and theoretical physics. This project will advance understanding in
this active area of research. The project includes training of graduate students
and postdocs, as well as international collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project lies on the intersection of algebraic geometry and mathematical
physics. Specifically, it concerns the Gromov-Witten theory and variation of
Hodge structures (VHS) on one side and birational geometry and mirror symmetry
on the other. The main themes of the project are the study of GW theory of
bundles and blowing-ups and the extended functoriality of GW and VHS under
extremal transitions (also known as space-time topology change in the physics
literature). The relations between the crepant transformation conjecture in GW
theory and the Landau-Ginzburg / Calabi-Yau correspondence will also be studied.