* 1500083
* SaTC-EDU: EAGER: Broadening Cyber Security Education Beyond Computing - Educating Everyone to Safeguard Our Online Lives
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Mustaque Ahamad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The growing sophistication of online threats requires that the larger educated
workforce understands risks posed by such threats. In recent past, the
importance of infusing cyber security concepts in computer science courses has
been recognized. This project will explore the viability of an approach that
advocates infusion of important cyber security concepts in meaningful context in
courses that are part of the general education of undergraduate students across
multiple disciplines. Based on a learning sciences informed approach, the
project will identify existing courses that provide suitable context for cyber
security topics. These courses will range from introductory computing courses to
discipline-specific courses in business and public policy colleges at the
Georgia Institute of Technology. The relevance of key cyber security concepts in
the professional context of various majors will be the primary consideration in
identifying courses where these concepts can be infused.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary project team, with considerable
expertise in the learning sciences, will work together to achieve this goal.
After a rigorous evaluation and refinements, content modules and experiences
will be shared with the larger community for dissemination. By developing an
effective approach to infuse key cyber security concepts in courses that are
part of the general education of all undergraduates, the project hopes to have
impact on the education of the workforce of the future.