* 1500097
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Improving Performance and Reducing Costs for Phased Array Weather Radar
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Stephen Frasier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 09/30/2016
* USD 199,394.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a technique
to correct polarization errors in phased-array antennas enabling their use in
dual polarization weather radar applications. The Interleaved Sparse Array (ISA)
technique is important because it augments the enhanced scanning capabilities of
phased-array radar and may lead to cheaper and smaller weather radars with
appropriate accuracy in places where traditional weather radars are cost- and
space-prohibitive. This can lead to the preservation of human life, better
management of agriculture, and better preparedness for weather-related events.
The project will result in a proof-of-concept demonstration of the ISA technique
that will enable dual-polarization phased-array weather radars to achieve
necessary polarization purity for weather and hydrological applications in a
cost-effective manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In phased-array antennas, each
element of the array not only radiates its requested polarization, but also
emits an unwanted cross-polarized signal. The ISA technique is a correction that
is applied after manufacturing and switches the polarization of some of the
antenna elements in order to cancel the cross-polarized signal of the remainder
of the array, or to adjust the overall radiated polarization. To do so, the
antenna elements need to be characterized to determine the number and position
of the elements to be switched. This project addresses how to cost effectively
characterize the antenna elements and how to evaluate the resulting performance
so that ISA may be applied to commercial products. In addition to the technical
work, personnel involved in this project, including a postdoctoral student, will
conduct literature and patent searches related to prior art, work with the
university technology office on protecting any intellectual property generated,
develop marketing collateral, and work with industrial collaborators and other
potential licensees on identifying first adopters of the technology for
prototype demonstrations.