* 1500069
* Interactions between Commutative Algebra and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Steven Sam, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 09/30/2018
* USD 154,866.00

An important theme in mathematics is to find finite descriptions for objects
that a priori contain an infinite amount of information. For example, an
infinite sequence of numbers might be compactly encoded as the values of a
simple function. One such occurrence relevant to this project is the dimensions
of a sequence of spaces. In many cases of interest, it may not be possible to
directly compute these numbers, but one can instead hope to analyze their rate
of growth. An old theme in mathematics has been to understand such problems by
finding some algebraic structure on the sequence. Recently, several groups of
researchers have found new, exotic algebraic structures that apply to previously
unexpected examples of such sequences in areas such as topology, combinatorics,
and algebraic geometry. The purpose of this project is to study and uncover the
fundamental properties of these new algebraic structures by applying and
combining tools from commutative algebra and representation
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to work on several projects at the
interface between commutative algebra and representation theory, specifically
the study of new classes of algebraic objects (e.g., twisted commutative
algebras, Delta-modules, and FI-modules) and their applications to classical
topics (syzygies of algebraic varieties, homological stability, homology of
arithmetic groups, etc.). Additionally, the PI will work on problems in Boij-
SÃ¶derberg theory, which is the study of algebraic invariants, such as Betti
tables of graded modules and cohomology tables of vector bundles, "up to scalar
multiple." This topic is connected to the general theme in indirect and subtle
ways that are still not well understood. The basic theme is to identify a class
of examples that have the structure of a module over one of these algebraic
structures and to prove that it is finitely generated. The finite generation
reveals some information akin to an existence result, but often the results do
not come with bounds or any sharper information, so should be seen as a first
step in a larger program. The PI proposes to import ideas from commutative
algebra and homological algebra, such as Hilbert functions, projective
resolutions, Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity, and Koszul duality, to further
enhance the understanding of such examples and to reveal new information.