* 1500492
* Human and Animal Relations in Southwest Alaska: Continuity and Change
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Ann Fienup-Riordan, Calista Education and Culture, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 07/31/2021
* USD 632,855.00

This award supports an innovative Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR)
collaboration between Yup'ik communities and investigators with the goal of
scientifically documenting Yup'ik knowledge and creating accessible repositories
of this knowledge for future generations. The PI/collaborative team will work
with elder experts from six regional groups in southwest Alaska, to understand
human-animal relations generally, as well as shifting attitudes toward keystone
species, including; seals, moose, salmon, and whitefish. This study is highly
significant, addressing directly the research needs identified by Alaska Native,
Yup'ik communities. The previous NSF funded projects led by the same core team
have been very successful with more than 10 major, well reviewed and well
received, volumes published, including the critically acclaimed books: "Stories
for Future Generations / Qulirat Qanemcit-llu Kinguvarcimalriit;"
"Yuungnaqpiallerput / The Way We Genuinely Live Masterworks of Yup'ik Science
and Survival;" and "Ellavut / Our Yup'ik World and Weather: Continuity and
Change on the Bering Sea Coast." In addition, this methodology has created
strong community/science collaborations and the co-production of valuable
knowledge to both scientists and community member. The research teams have been
very interdisciplinary, including anthropologists and Yup'ik scholars, as well
as other scientists e.g., geologists, archaeologists, biologist, and physicists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration, as the PI states, is the hallmark of this
project, which builds on past partnerships between the scientific community and
the Yup?ik community. The project will engage institutional partners and Yup?ik
collaborators from 23 communities in southwest Alaska. The primary information-
gathering tool will be a series of gatherings held both in local communities and
the regional center of Bethel. The research team and CEC staff pioneered this
format working with elders a decade ago and have found that meetings with small
groups of elder experts, younger community members and non-Native scientists for
two-three-day gatherings devoted to a specific topic is a very effective means
of both documenting traditional knowledge and addressing scientific questions.
Unlike interviews, during which elders answer questions posed by those who often
do not hold the knowledge they seek, gatherings encourage elders to speak among
their peers at the highest, most complex level. The CEC method of elder
gatherings in which scientists participate has been a very successful way of
supporting the co-production of knowledge important not only for deeper
understanding of key social and environmental issues of great interest in the
region, and also for informing the public, resource managers, policy makers, and
other stakeholders of the importance of these issues the region and beyond.