* 1500077
* SaTC-EDU: EAGER: Education Initiative TECH MeD: Transdisciplinary Education for Critical Hacks of Medical Devices
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Michael Bachmann, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2018
* USD 270,019.00

TECH MeD (Transdisciplinary Education for Critical Hacks of Medical Devices)
seeks to engage a broad audience about the cybersecurity implications of
remotely accessible, implantable medical devices. The project will educate
undergraduate and graduate-level students from various disciplines, healthcare
professionals, patients, and the general public about the ethical, legal,
social, and technical implications of these remotely accessible devices. Growing
the population of security-aware end-users of implantable medical technology,
the initiative will address one of the most critical links in the cybersecurity
chain. TECH MeD will equip them with the knowledge and skills necessary for the
appropriate handling of this technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECH MeD will
include four educational tools: 1) An online open-access course that features
expert interviews on important topics to create an informed public, aware of the
host of issues associated with implantable medical devices; 2) An undergraduate
and graduate course that will create a pipeline of cognizant and prepared
professionals to address the present and future challenges of this proliferating
technology; 3) A Continuing Medical Education (CME) course that will provide
medical professionals with an overview of the issues they are likely to
encounter on the front lines of medicine; and 4) An open-access website document
repository for the general public with useful information for educators,
students, and patients. The website will ensure the continued success and
widespread education of the TECH MeD initiative by offering easily
understandable information for patients, their families, and all other
laypersons seeking information on implantable medical device security.