* 1500317
* Cohort 12:  JSU Bridge to the Doctorate
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Evelyn Leggette, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 03/31/2018
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. In order to maintain the United States of America's global
leadership in STEM, it needs to develop the untapped pool of creative and
talented students historically underrepresented, who earn Ph.Ds in STEM .
Jackson State University (JSU), a Historically Black University (HBCU) and lead
institution for the Mississippi LSAMP (LSMAMP), will serve as the host site for
the 2015-2017 cohort of BD Fellows. JSU will execute a BD program that is based
upon challenging research and academic experiences. This program contributes to
addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, namely to
"integrate education and research to support development of a diverse STEM
workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." JSU's BD Program will contribute
significantly to increasing the diversity of scientists, mathematicians and
engineers in academia and the STEM workforce, thereby helping the nation to
remain globally competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson State University's
Bridges to the Doctorate Program has four objectives, which are focused on (i)
research and academic preparation, (ii) enrichment activities, (iii) national
and international partnerships, and (iv) evaluation and student tracking. JSU
has a strong track record for preparing primarily African American graduate
students in biology, chemistry, mathematics, environmental science, computer
science, and engineering doctoral degrees. To date, 97 out of the 117 BD Fellows
from previous cohorts have been admitted into STEM doctoral programs; 27 out of
the 97 have earned their Ph.D.s and 54 are progressing well towards earning
their doctorate. JSU's two-pronged approach of rigorous research training and
compassionate and committed mentoring will enable their BD program to continue
to prepare and increase the quality and quantity of students historically
underrepresented in STEM entering the Ph.D. pathway.