* 1500256
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Low cost method for harvesting algal biomass from dilute cultures
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Sridhar Viamajala, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 199,997.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on improving and
demonstrating the recovery of algal biomass from dilute growth cultures with
minimal cost and energy input. This project has the potential to lead to
economical use of alternative fuels derived from algal biomass. The lack of low-
cost technologies for harvesting algae is currently a major bottleneck in the
commercial production of fuels from microalgae. When cultivated in open raceway
ponds, microalgae concentrations are very low - typically 0.1%. Stimuli-
sensitive hydrogels are capable of selectively soaking up large quantities of
culture media (without absorbing microalgae cells), thus efficiently increasing
concentrations of the microalgal cultures, leading to a more efficient recovery
of the microalgal cells. This allows separation of solid cells from liquid media
in a cost- and energy-efficient manner and without use of additional chemicals
as compared to competing chemical flocculation methods. In addition, the
absorbed liquid in the hydrogel can subsequently be released easily through
small increases in hydrogel temperature (from ambient to 35Â°C). The recovered
(de-swelled) hydrogels, as well as the growth medium, can then be reused over
multiple cycles to create a sustainable algae harvesting process through
effective recycling of water and un-utilized water-soluble nutrients.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application: (i) continuous hydrogel
harvesting in a scalable prototype that minimizes exposure of the gel to
mechanical attrition and preserves gel longevity; (ii) use of waste flue gases
to de-swell hydrogels through heat integration, (iii) establishes benchmarks for
harvesting efficiency, highest culture concentrations achievable, quality of
harvested product, and hydrogel stability during prolonged-use. In addition,
undergraduate and graduate students involved in this project will receive
innovation and technology translation experiences through design, development
and testing of hydrogel-based algae harvesting prototypes.