* 1500529
* Mutual Mentoring to Reduce Isolation in Physics
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Barbara Whitten, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2022
* USD 742,648.00

The PLAN-D funding track is designed to expand the application of proven-
successful gender-equity initiatives for STEM faculty in a specific disciplinary
area through networked adaptation of a specific program or initiative. Careful
evaluation is expected to expand understanding of such initiatives in a
disciplinary context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create mutual
mentoring eAlliances for professional development under the auspices of the
American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) by developing ten alliances of
women physics faculty who are isolated in various ways. This intervention will
directly impact the careers of the fifty women physics faculty members who
participate in the mutual mentoring alliances supported by this project.
eAlliance participants will meet initially in-person at professional meetings
followed by regular electronic meetings. This project will reduce the isolation
of participating physicists and provide support to enhance their career
development. The project evaluation will identify the benefits of mutual
mentoring networks, particularly for isolated faculty, and add to the research
on the impact of mutual mentoring on career development.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and test a cost-effective model for
mentoring for physics educators which could be adapted for other academic
scientists and other work environments. eAlliances of mutual mentors will aid in
the professional development of participants who are isolated by virtue of
gender, race, sexual orientation, and/or type of institution. This project is
based on past ADVANCE projects and research on the effects of isolation and good
mentoring practices. The project has the potential to enhance retention and job
satisfaction of isolated physics faculty. This project will work toward
institutionalizing these mentoring networks within AAPT. Because the project
will be implemented by the AAPT, the project will help to professionalize and
highlight the importance of mentoring within the physics community.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE Partnerships for Learning and Adaptation Networks
(PLAN) program track supports projects that promote the adaptation and
implementation of previously effective ADVANCE programs in new contexts and the
testing of innovative strategies to promote the participation, success, and
advancement of women in STEM academic careers. PLAN projects also contribute to
the knowledge base on gender equity in STEM academic careers.