* 1500800
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Innovation and constraint: the evolution of power-amplified feeding in syngnathiform fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Peter Wainwright, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,290.00

Syngnathiformes (seahorses, pipefishes, trumpetfish and relatives) are a group
of fishes with unusual and novel modes of locomotion, reproduction, and feeding.
Nearly all species are characterized by an elongated snout, which they rotate
towards prey during feeding strikes. Recent research has shown that seahorses
and pipefish are using power amplification to achieve extremely fast rotations,
resulting in strikes that are among the fastest recorded for any fish (less than
2.5 milliseconds). This research will reconstruct the sequential evolutionary
assembly of this mechanically extreme feeding mechanism and will investigate the
consequences of this feeding mechanism on head shape diversity. The findings of
this work will advance knowledge about how complex structure-function
relationships evolve and influence subsequent structural evolution. The study
will produce set of phylogenetic trees that reveal the evolutionary
relationships among over 200 syngnathiform species. These will be a valuable
resource and shared with other researchers to advance knowledge of the
evolutionary history of this unique and unusual group of fishes. Other data and
products from this research, including slow-motion videos, will engage a wide
audience in the diversity of fish feeding strategies by incorporation into
existing coursework at the University of California, Davis and through YouTube.
In addition to forming an ambitious and integrative doctoral dissertation, this
research will involve undergraduates interested in pursuing STEM related fields
through hands-on training and experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will investigate the evolution of a mechanically extreme and complex feeding
mechanism in syngnathiform fishes, beginning with the inference of a phylogeny
using modern hybrid-enrichment (ultraconserved elements, UCEs) and next-
generation sequencing technologies (Objective #1). Previous research has shown
that seahorses and pipefish use power amplification to rotate their head towards
prey faster than would be possible by direct muscle activation, and it has been
proposed that this mechanism relies on a unique pivot joint in the skull. A
combination of morphological and functional approaches including high-speed
video, biomechanical modeling, and micro-CT scanning will be used to
characterize and compare the feeding functional morphology of lineages related
to seahorses and pipefish (Objective #2). The phylogeny from Objective #1 will
be used to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the structural and functional
changes necessary for power-amplified feeding in syngnathiform fishes and to
test hypotheses about how the possession of this specialized mechanism has
influenced the evolution of head shape in syngnathiforms (Objective #3). Models
of continuous character evolution will to be fit to craniofacial shape data and
compared in the software program OUwie to test the hypothesis that the
possession of power amplification exerts strong stabilizing selection on
craniofacial morphology. While the literature focuses on innovations that
increase diversity, this work incorporates a model-testing approach to determine
whether this novel feeding mechanism may constrain morphological diversification
at macroevolutionary timescales.