* 1500922
* Noncommutative Multivariable Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Gelu Popescu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 175,996.00

Many problems in the physical sciences and engineering can be modeled by
noncommutative functions. Such functions are used to encode information about
physical systems, so studying various aspects of them could reveal important
information about how to design systems that perform desired tasks or how to
maximize their performance. The motivation for this project is the relatively
recent worldwide interest in the noncommutative aspects of multivariable
operator theory and function theory, and their interplay with the classical
theory of functions, algebras, and harmonic analysis. The present project aims
at extending fundamental ideas from analysis, algebra, and geometry to the
noncommutative context and finding applications in science and engineering. The
study of noncommutative functions and the algebras that they generate, which is
the goal of the project, has potential applications to free probability,
interpolation , optimization and control, and systems theory. The principal
investigator expects the results of the project to make new connections between
several areas of mathematics and to have applications in mathematical physics.
Another important objective of the project is to attract graduate students to
the PI's research program and help build a Ph.D. program in mathematics at the
University of Texas-San Antonio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is a
continuation of the ongoing program of the principal investigator to develop a
free analogue of the Sz.-Nagy-Foias theory of contractions for noncommutative
domains and varieties in several noncommuting variables and to develop the
theory of free holomorphic functions on these domains. The project is devoted to
enhancing the understanding of the structure of the noncommutative polydomains
and varieties that admit universal models and have rich analytic function
theory, and to make advances towards their classification up to free
biholomorphic equivalence. This is accompanied by the study of free holomorphic
functions on these polydomains with the emphasis on geometric aspects and the
connection with the hyperbolic geometry. The most prominent feature of this
project is the interaction between the structure of the noncommutative
polydomains and varieties, the operator algebras generated by the corresponding
universal model operators, and the noncommutative analytic function theory on
these polydomains. Moreover, this study is anchored in classical complex
function theory in several variables and in complex algebraic geometry. The
project focuses on the following problems: classification of noncommutative
polydomains and varieties up to free biholomorphic equivalence and the
classification of the associated universal algebras up to completely isometric
isomorphisms; universal models, invariant subspaces, and commutant lifting;
unitary invariants on noncommutative polydomains (e.g., the curvature, the Euler
characteristic, and the entropy); hyperbolic geometry on noncommutative
polyballs; free holomorphic functions on polydomains; free holomorphic self-maps
of noncommutative balls and composition operators.