* 1500052
* SaTC-EDU: EAGER: Transforming Usable Security and Privacy Education
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Heather Richter Lipford, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2018
* USD 194,439.00

Usability is widely recognized as important to the design of security and
privacy systems. Despite this, very few of the lessons learned through usable
security and privacy research are taught to students as part of a security or
computing curriculum. There are few educational materials, no consensus as to
the knowledge units and learning objectives, and little research on how to best
integrate usable security concepts into security curricula. The current project
will follow a systematic instructional design process to analyze, design,
develop, and evaluate a body of knowledge for education in usable security and
privacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will lead a community of experts in
determining and organizing instructional goals and knowledge units, along with
the associated concepts, skills, and objectives. This body of knowledge will
serve as a foundation for further curricular development throughout the usable
security research and education communities. A subset of the body of knowledge
will be evaluated through a set of online learning modules. Investigators will
design and develop instructional strategies and novel learning materials for
these modules, in order to evaluate them on students in various courses at
multiple institutions. Evaluation of student use and learning with the modules
will help examine how to actively engage students in usable security content in
a variety of settings. The body of knowledge and online modules will be publicly
available. Research results will enable further development of learning
materials, courses, and research into novel instructional methods for usable
security and privacy.