* 1500400
* The Linearized Monge-Ampere Equation and Applications in Nonlinear, Geometric Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Nam Le, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This research project focuses on fine properties of solutions to the linearized
Monge-Ampere equation and their applications to nonlinear, geometric partial
differential equations (PDEs) of great importance in geometric, mechanical, and
economic contexts. The Monge-Ampere type equations arise naturally in optimal
transportation problems in economics and in traffic network planning in cities,
in the design of reflector antennae in geometric optics, and in the semi-
geostrophic equations of meteorology. The project covers a broad class of PDEs
where key structural quantities could be possibly extremely small (degenerate)
or extremely large (singular). The main goal of the project aims at discovering
new underlying principles and correct perspectives on these equations in order
to develop innovative tools and methodologies to tackle them. Understanding
deeper properties of affine maximal surface equations studied in this project
will help design faster algorithms in architectural free-form structures, in
computer graphics, and in visualization where convex objects are involved. In
addition to applications, the successful analysis of PDEs investigated in this
project will reveal deep and interesting connections between different areas of
mathematics such as analysis, PDEs, the calculus of variations, geometry, and
fluid mechanics, thereby augmenting the fruitful interaction among
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, in the field of analysis and partial
differential equations (PDEs), focuses on regularity properties of solutions to
the linearized Monge-Ampere (LMA) equation and their applications to nonlinear,
geometric PDEs. The linearized Monge-Ampere equation arises in several
fundamental problems of current interest in computer graphics, affine geometry,
complex geometry, fluid mechanics, and economics. The purpose of this project is
to obtain fine and higher order boundary regularity properties of the LMA
equation and apply them to tackle several outstanding problems in analysis,
geometry, and PDEs. More specifically, the objectives of the project are to:
investigate sharp boundary regularity for the LMA equation; apply these
regularity results to understand qualitative properties of several interesting
but highly challenging nonlinear, fourth-order geometric equations such as the
second boundary value problems for the affine maximal surface and Abreu's
equations, and finally resolve the outstanding open problem on global smoothness
of eigenfunctions to the Monge-Ampere operator. The techniques used in attacking
the problems under study in this project include perturbation arguments,
localization techniques, covering arguments, partial Legendre transform,
geometry of the Monge-Ampere equation, and also harmonic analysis on homogeneous
spaces.