* 1500106
* Derivation of mean-field equations and dynamics of coherent structures in nonlinear dispersive PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Walter Strauss, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 179,530.00

This project deals with certain types of equations modeling wave propagation in
various physical contexts. Among these are (1) the structure of a collection of
ultra-cold atoms (2) light waves moving through a medium whose index of
refraction depends upon the strength of the wave allowing for the self-focusing
of the wave (3) water waves in a shallow channel, and (4) waves that move
through the electrons and ions in a plasma. Among the important mathematical
issues are the rigorous derivation of such models from fundamental physical
laws, and the precise study of special types of coherent wave solutions
(variously referred to as solitary waves, kinks, vortices, and monopoles, and
blow-up profiles). In the last decade, new techniques from several branches of
mathematics, specifically harmonic analysis, spectral theory, and Hamiltonian
mechanics, have led to striking developments and the resolution of many problems
once deemed intractable. The PI has outlined several conjectures that he and his
students and collaborators will address by adapting and extending these new
methods. At the same time, the resolution of these conjectures is expected to
extend the applicability of these methods and interface other branches of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, several conjectures on the derivation
of the nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLS) as a limit of the fundamental
quantum mechanical model for a many-body system of bosons are outlined. The PI
will continue to investigate problems pertaining to dimensional reduction by the
imposition of strong anisotropic confining, and allowing attractive interactions
leading to the focusing NLS, which supports bright solitary wave solutions, as
observed in recent experiments. Second, problems pertaining to the geometrical
structure of singularity formation for NLS are proposed. In particular, the PI
will consider the stability of new contracting sphere blow-up solutions, the
possibility for blow-up on an ellipse, and a precise description of blow-up in
the Zakharov system, a model for collapse of Langmuir waves in a plasma. Third,
the PI proposes to consider the dynamics of dark solitons, vortices, and
monopoles, which are solutions for which the wave function has nontrivial
topological structure on the spatial boundary, in equations such as the sine
Gordon equation, subjected to semiclassical perturbations. Fourth, the dynamics
of non-perturbative interacting multi-solitons in completely integrable models,
specifically the modified Korteweg-de Vries (mKdV) and NLS equations, subjected
to semiclassical perturbation, will also be pursued.