* 1500091
* Workshop: Responsible Disposal of Flame Retarded Foam and Plastic: Developing the Basic Science for Improved Separation and Destruction; VA Tech Center,Arlington,VA, June 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Catherine Koshland, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2017
* USD 86,544.00

The California flammability standard TB117-2013 was recently updated (effective
Jan. 1, 2014) to increase fire safety without the need for flame retardant
chemicals. Consequently, new furniture and other consumer products in North
America will increasingly be produced without flame retardants. However,
hundreds of millions of pieces of furniture and other products in current use
contain flame retardant chemicals, many of which have been banned or removed
from production due to toxicity concerns. Also, most electronic devices contain
fire retardant chemicals in their plastic casings. There is a need to determine
how to responsibly dispose of billions of pounds of foam and plastic treated
with chemical flame retardants. These materials should be properly disposed of
rather than recycled into other products or landfilled, which can result in
continued human and environmental exposure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
objective of the workshop is to bring together research teams of scientists and
engineers with shared interests and complementary expertise to provide
understanding of the research knowledge gaps needed for improved and innovative
processes to separate flame retardants from polyurethane foam and plastic and
then to destroy the harmful flame retardants. A report (written as a review
article for a peer-reviewed journal) to be published in a timely manner would
document the current research discussed and future directions.