* 1500654
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Identifying the pollen tube chemoattractant regulating gamete recognition in the wild tomato clade (Solanum sect. Lycopersicon)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Cathleen Jewell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 11/30/2016
* USD 20,129.00

This study aims to understand gamete recognition (chemical cues used by male and
female gametes to recognize and attract each other) as a mechanism of sexual
reproduction, and how it acts to prevent reproductive events between different
species. This work uses the domesticated tomato and its twelve diverse wild
species relatives, which vary in many reproductive and functional traits. The
project will first identify the chemical signal derived from the female gamete
that attracts the male gamete within species. Second, it will characterize
variation in this signal across species and connect this variation to previously
observed reduced gamete attraction between species. In addition to understanding
molecular mechanisms of normal and attenuated reproductive function, these data
could aid in overcoming breeding barriers between domesticated tomato and its
genetically diverse wild relatives. This project will include research by
undergraduates from underrepresented groups and potential insights of
agricultural importance for crop breeding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify the
female gamete-derived chemoattractant and its specific tissue of origin, this
project will use high depth nucleotide sequencing technologies (RNA-seq) for
tissue specific expression analysis. It will assess molecular divergence of this
signaling protein via variation in sequence and/or expression across 13 closely
related species. These combined approaches will explicitly link patterns of
molecular expression and DNA variation to functional divergence in reproductive
behaviors. Although many studies have demonstrated that species show reduced
sexual compatibility, the underlying molecular mechanisms are generally unknown.
Together, this research will provide an unprecedented opportunity to examine the
patterns and consequences of evolutionary changes in a reproductive molecule,
including for the development of new species.