* 1500007
* EAGER: Novel photoacoustic sensor using piezoresistive GaN microcantilever
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2014,08/31/2016
* Goutam Koley, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 151,149.00

The objective of the EAGER research is to explore the feasibility of developing
a novel photoacoustic chemical and biological sensor utilizing vacuum enclosed
piezoresistive GaN microcantilever as a highly sensitive ultrasonic sensing
element. The sensor will be utilized to perform detection in both air and liquid
media and can potentially offer: (i) detection of surface adsorbed or deposited
analytes at femtogram level with high specificity, and (ii) unique label-free
detection of bio-analytes in a liquid medium. Ultra high sensitivity of the
sensor will be attained using a resonant GaN microcantilever enclosed in vacuum,
with integrated AlGaN/GaN heterostructure field effect transistor as a highly
sensitive deflection transducer. To attain the basic objective of this project,
the following tasks will be performed:(i) Design of the photoacoustic sensor
through theoretical modeling and finite element simulations; (ii) Fabrication of
the piezoresistive microcantilever and integration of microfluidic channels;
(iii) Packaging and electromechanical characterization of the sensor; and (iv)
Performance evaluation of the sensor for analyte detection in air and liquid
media Piezoresistive GaN microcantilevers will be fabricated using standard
photolithographic process and packaged in high vacuum to achieve high resonance
quality factor. For detection in air, surface deposited or adsorbed analyte near
the cantilever base will be exposed to IR radiation to perform highly sensitive
and selective detection, based on photoacoustic waves generated in solid. For
detection in liquid, a PDMS based analyte reservoir connected to microfluidic
channels will be patterned near the cantilever base, which will allow analyte
flow and combined spectroscopic and multimodal detection of blood cells. The
fabrication of the microcantilever sensors will be performed at the Georgia Tech
Nanofabrication Facility, while the sensor packaging will be done in the PI's
lab at USC. Intellectual Merit: The proposed EAGER research will focus on
validating novel sensing concepts that can lead to the development of high-
performance and versatile sensors with much superior characteristics compared to
the state-of-the-art sensing technologies for analytes in air and liquid media.
Firstly, the proposed piezoresistive microcantilever sensors is expected to
exhibit orders of magnitude higher sensitivity compared to the state-of-the-art
Si cantilevers due to the unique piezoelectric properties of III-V Nitride
semiconductors. Secondly, the innovative concept of vacuum enclosure of the
resonant microcantilever sensor coupled with photoacosutic sensing, will further
enhance the sensitivity by orders of magnitude due to quality factor
enhancement, while completely eliminating cantilever degradation, which is a
major challenge for cantilever sensors utilizing functionalization layers for
detection. Thirdly, integration of microfluidic channels and functionalization
layers to concentrate the analytes near the cantilever base will minimize signal
loss, and tremendously increases signal-to-noise ratio, thereby eliminating the
need for acoustic focusing and confinement using a macroscopic cell, which is a
significant drawback for current state-of-the-art photoacoustic sensors.
Overall, the EAGER research can have a transformative impact on the science and
technology of piezoresistive cantilever sensors and photoacoustic sensing
methodologies, spurring aggressive development of next generation of
miniaturized and high performance photoacoustic sensors.

Broader Impacts: This highly interdisciplinary project is anticipated to result
in the development of novel photoacoustic sensors with potential applications in
the diverse fields of defense, homeland security, environmental monitoring, drug
discovery, implantable sensors, and disease diagnosis and prognosis. As a part
of the educational and outreach activities, the PI would involve at least one
undergraduate and one high school student to work on this project every year
throughout its duration. Participation of the project activities would provide
broad interdisciplinary training of the graduate student involved. The PI would
integrate research results in a graduate course, and disseminate them through
conference participation and various websites.