* 1500310
* Women Achieving Tenure-Track Success: Strategies to Enable Community-based Retention
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Eve Riskin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 08/31/2020
* USD 899,734.00

The University of Washington, North Carolina State University, and California
Polytechnic State Institute, San Luis Obispo submitted an ADVANCE PLAN D project
whose overall goal is to increase the retention and advancement of women in
academic careers to create greater diversity in engineering leadership. This
project will build and facilitate a community-centric mentoring, networking, and
career development program and will target early career women in electrical
engineering and underrepresented minority women in engineering and computer
science. The early career women (postdoctoral and early-career faculty stage)
will be supported through cross-career stage networking, community building,
career development symposia, and peer Mentoring Circles.

The project adapts two previously successful efforts at the University of
Washington: 1) Women Evolving the Biological Sciences (WEBS): professional
development symposia for early-career women in ecology and evolution and 2)
Broadening the Representation of Academic Investigators in NeuroScience
(BRAINS): symposia followed by Mentoring Circles for early career
underrepresented minority neuroscientists. This project will examine how best to
adapt these successful programs to two new disciplines and develop a model
framework to allow others to develop such programs for a wide variety of fields
and populations. To maximize program impact, the team will use ethnographic
research methods to study the process and unique features of program development
such as the collaboration between engineers and social scientists to develop new
knowledge on the principles and processes critical to planning, implementing,
and adapting successful intervention programs. The evaluation of the project
will identify best practices to support women's success in academic careers and
to diversify the engineering professoriate. The guiding principles and values
that enable these programs to have impact on participants will be identified and
codified in a framework that will be shared through the University of
Washington's ADVANCE online "LEAD-it-Yourself!" toolkit.

The NSF ADVANCE Partnerships for Learning and Adaptation Networks (PLAN) program
track supports projects that promote the adaptation and implementation of
previously effective ADVANCE programs in new contexts and the testing of
innovative strategies to promote the participation, success, and advancement of
women in STEM academic careers. PLAN projects also contribute to the knowledge
base on gender equity in STEM academic careers. The PLAN-D funding track is
designed to expand the application of proven-successful gender-equity
initiatives for STEM faculty in a specific disciplinary area through networked
adaptation of a specific program or initiative. Careful evaluation is expected
to expand understanding of such initiatives in a disciplinary context.