* 1500314
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Highly Sensitive Eye-safe Flash LiDARs based on Nanoinjection Detectors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Nathaniel Harrison, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2017
* USD 226,831.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on improving the
3-dimensional (3D) imaging of structures. 3D imaging has applications in
environmental mapping, ecological characterization, robots and automation,
medical imaging, areal mapping, and defense. This project will use electron
injection detectors developed at Northwestern to develop a 3D imaging technique
that can be accomplished without moving parts, using laser illuminated detection
and ranging (LIDAR) large detector arrays ("flash LIDAR"). Most current LIDAR
systems use a small number of avalanche detectors and mechanical scanning
methods to produce an image. Electron injection detectors, as proposed here,
offer a promising alternative to avalanche detectors because they require less
voltage and use less power, and can be made into large two-dimensional arrays.
If successful, the proposed work could lead to "staring" LIDAR systems, which do
not need mechanical scanning and produce a high-resolution 3D image in one shot.
The system would be smaller, lighter and lower cost than existing 3D imaging
systems with mechanical scanning. These improvements could enable 3D imagers to
become as ubiquitous as digital cameras are today. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the following technology gap as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application: increasing the speed of electron
injection detectors to enhance the ranging resolution. While the current devices
are fast, they do not demonstrate gigahertz (GHz) speed. One of the limitations
in achieving this speed is the parasitic capacitances, which will be addressed
as part of the research effort. Also, high-bandwidth trans-impedance amplifiers
will be used, an improvement over current existing voltage amplifiers. In
addition to the PI, co-PI, and the personnel from sub-contracting company, there
will be one graduate student who will receive significant technical training.
The student will also learn directly from the commercialization work planned for
the project, and from entrepreneurship courses offered by the McCormick School
of Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Michigan Aerospace,
which has significant expertise in LIDAR system, to help identify the best
tradeoff between different design parameter in this technology translation
effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.