* 1500123
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Novel Vector Acoustic Communication Technology for High Speed Underwater Modems
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,04/30/2022
* Ali Abdi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2022
* USD 295,460.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating novel vector
acoustic underwater communication research findings to fill the need for high
speed communication in oceans and other underwater environments. Three quarters
of the earth surface is covered with water that overlays many resources upon
which our lives depend. High speed wireless underwater data communication among
underwater sensors, deepwater instruments and autonomous underwater vehicles is
of high importance in many applications of national interest, such as
environmental ocean monitoring to predict natural disasters such as hurricanes,
and offshore oil and gas drilling. However, underwater channels are highly
bandlimited and the data rates of existing modems are much smaller than what is
needed for effective communication and management. The project will result in a
prototype underwater modem that benefits from novel vector acoustic underwater
communication concepts and methods. This underwater vector modem has the unique
feature of utilizing acoustic particle velocity channels for data communication,
in addition to the conventional acoustic pressure channel. This feature provides
the following advantages: increased data rate, improved performance, and small
size modems, when compared to the leading competing underwater modems in this
market space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a number of technology
gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. In
the new vector acoustic and particle velocity communication paradigm, the
underwater modem designer is facing new communication channels and transducers
that are fundamentally different from those used in the past. Therefore, proper
designs for different parts of the modem, including transducers and analog and
digital transceivers will be developed. Analog electronics are supposed to
interface with multi-channel transducers, whereas digital signal processing
units are required to generate and demodulate multiple data streams. The
personnel involved in this project, graduate and undergraduate students, will
receive innovation, entrepreneurship and technology translation experiences
through working at the interface of multiple disciplines such as electro-
acoustic transducers, underwater acoustics, communication and signal processing
hardware/software, as well as participating in an intensive boot-camp on
technology entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Teledyne-
Benthos and Kongsberg, two leading companies whose underwater modems and
autonomous underwater vehicles are sold worldwide, to assist in at-sea testing
of the prototype modem developed in this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality. Development of the vector acoustic
high speed modem prototype will eventually allow the growth of many underwater
systems and businesses whose operations have been constrained by low wireless
data rates or very expensive undersea cables.