* 1500630
* Continuation of Full-Scale Three Dimensional Numerical Experiments of High-Intensity Particle and Laser Beam Matter Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Warren Mori, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 440,000.00

Particle accelerators are ubiquitous in society as they are used in particle
physics, materials science, structural biology, medicine, and transmutation of
nuclear waste. In some cases these accelerators are more than a mile long and
cost billions of dollars. If a new cheaper and more compact accelerator
technology could be developed, it would transform our ability to use particle
accelerators and enable their application to an even wider range of problems of
scientific and societal benefit. This research will examine fundamental
scientific questions aimed at developing compact particle accelerators based on
plasma waves (these are waves moving in fully ionized gases) moving near the
speed of light. It will also require generating state-of-the-art software that
can be used on the nation's largest computers. The students and post-doctoral
researchers trained under this grant will be part of the twenty first century
work force in computational science and engineering as well as experts in plasma
physics and accelerator physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an award to
perform full-scale three-dimensional numerical experiments of high-intensity
particle and laser beam-matter interactions to significantly advance the
understanding of basic high-energy density science (HEDS) on ultra intense laser
and particle beam plasma interactions. This understanding will aid in the quest
to make plasma based accelerator stages for use in high energy physics
colliders, next generation light sources, medicine, and homeland security. This
work will continue to blend basic research with three-dimensional simulations,
including full-scale particle-in-cell modeling of ongoing and planned
experiments. High-fidelity full-scale modeling provides the means to extrapolate
parameters into regimes that will not be accessible to experiments for years to
come. During the past decade, a hierarchy of state-of-the-art PIC codes and data
analysis tools for HEDS studies has been developed that not only include the
necessary physics but also scale to more than 1,600,000 cores and can run on
current many core hardware including GPUs and Intel Phi's. With this set of
tools, the UCLA Simulation of Plasma Group is uniquely positioned to continue to
make significant progress towards determining the feasibility of building a
compact X-Ray Free Electron Laser (XFEL) in the next decade, and a future linear
collider based on wakefield sections driven by lasers or particle beams.