* 1500194
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Pulsed Shaped Magnetic Fields to Focus Therapy to Deep Tissue Targets
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Benjamin Shapiro, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation (TT) project aims to enable a safe and
effective magnetic focusing of magnetic particle therapies to address inoperable
deep tissue tumors. The proposed technique of pulsed magnetic focusing will
deliver nanotherapeutics to deep targets in order to direct chemotherapy to
where it needs to go in the body. If successful, this technique would enable a
technology that could improve treatment for a wide range of diseases. The
project will result in a prototype device that will dynamically focus nanorods
to deep targets in preclinical studies. In this research, biocompatible nanorods
are first aligned in one direction by a fast magnetic pulse, and then before
they can turn around a second shaped fast magnetic pulse applies forces on the
rods that serve to focus them to a central target. Repeat magnetic pulsing
brings all the rods to a central target between the magnets. These features
provide the key advantage that therapy can now be focused to a deep target
between magnets, for example to treat inoperable deep tissue tumors. Focusing of
therapy to deep tissue targets has been a key goal in magnetic drug targeting,
and prior efforts in this field have not yet been able to achieve this goal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as
it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. Dynamic
magnetic focusing of nanorods to a target between magnets was shown in benchtop
experiments. In this NSF AIR TT research, the technology will be tested in
tissue samples, scaled up to an in-vivo system, and its safety and utility shall
be optimized and verified. In addition, personnel involved in this project will
receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences
through developing and helping commercialize this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Weinberg Medical Physics
who will act as an industry liaison and supply the effort with equipment,
expertise, and with connections to strategic partners and future investors in
this technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.