* 1500381
* Methods and Applications for Bilinear Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Virginia Naibo, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 174,860.00

The subject matter of this project belongs to the realm of bilinear Fourier
analysis. After the pioneering work of Joseph Fourier in the first decades of
the nineteenth century, one is now familiar with the process of decomposing a
signal or function into its elementary frequency components (analysis) as well
as with the reverse process of superposing individual frequency components to
form a single signal (synthesis). Fourier analysis thus acts in a way similar to
a prism, which allows one to see the individual color components of a beam of
light. Along these lines, when two functions or signals coexist, their frequency
components interact and this phenomenon plays a key role in the study of certain
partial differential equations that arise, for instance, in optics, quantum
mechanics, and fluid dynamics. In the field of bilinear Fourier analysis, tools
are developed to model the behavior and interaction of two signals by
decomposing each one into their constituent frequencies, separating each
decomposition into low and high frequencies, and studying the interplay between
the low-low, high-low, and high-high frequencies from each decomposition. This
project will also contribute to the integration of research and education at the
postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate levels, to advancing discovery, to
forming human resources, and to developing academic curricula.

Motivated by the study of commutators, bilinear Leibniz-type rules,
paraproducts, and related topics in analysis and partial differential equations,
the research activities of this project aim at developing methods in bilinear
Fourier analysis to advance the theory of bilinear pseudo-differential operators
and their applications. In particular, problems to be addressed include the
description of the mapping properties, in the scales of Lebesgue, Besov, and
Triebel-Lizorkin spaces, of bilinear pseudodifferential operators with symbols
in certain critical classes.