* 1500903
* Thin-Film Compound Semiconductor Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Yanfa Yan, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 02/29/2016
* USD 6,600.00

Principal Investigator: Yan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
1500903&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
symposium award will provide support for the Symposium on Thin-Film Compound
Semiconductor Photovoltaics, to be held at the 2015 Materials Research Society
Spring Annual Meeting. The specific goals of the symposium are to present and
disseminate significant recent advances in the understanding of new materials
for solar cells, and to help develop a diverse and active community of early
career scientists to further technical progress in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium
award will provide support for the Symposium on Thin-Film Compound Semiconductor
Photovoltaics (Symposium B), to be held at the 2015 Materials Research Society
Spring Annual Meeting, April 6-10, 2015, San Francisco, CA. Compound thin-film
photovoltaics have demonstrated high light-to electricity conversion
efficiencies, and are leading candidates to provide low-cost sustainable solar
energy conversion, due to potential advantages in lowering costs for
manufacturing and materials. Recent progress has improved the record
efficiencies of laboratory CdTe and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin film solar cells
considerably, reaching 21%. The topic has great importance for the materials
research community to further its contribution to develop alternative energy
sources. The symposium brings together a wide range of experts in research on
thin-film photovoltaics, including 12 internationally recognized invited
speakers, along with students and other early career scientists. There will be
sessions on many different aspects of the technology, and the materials needed
for production. Synergies among different materials, processing approaches, and
characterization methods will be highlighted. The technical presentations on
these diverse topics are designed to foster open discussion needed to advance
scientific progress. The symposium will also organize a Young Scientist Tutorial
to train and educate graduate and undergraduate students on the latest advances
in thin-film photovoltaics.