* 1500707
* Harmonic Analysis Challenges in Nonlinear Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Monica Visan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 296,788.00

This research project explores the mathematical properties of a class of
equations known as nonlinear dispersive equations. Equations of this type arise
in models of several physical phenomena, including propagation of light in
optical fibers, Bose-Einstein condensates, small-amplitude water waves, and
waves in plasmas. Despite their common occurrence, understanding of the behavior
of solutions to such equations is limited by their mathematical complexity. This
project aims to extend current theoretical understanding of this important class
of equations. Training of junior researchers and students in this area of
research is also an integrated part of the project.

The problems to be investigated are nonlinear dispersive partial differential
equations with broken symmetries and/or non-constant coefficients. While some of
these equations are very physical, such as the cubic-quintic nonlinear
Schrodinger equation with non-zero boundary conditions, others have been
carefully selected by the investigator to highlight certain deficiencies in our
mathematical understanding of the underlying linear propagator. A major thrust
of this project is therefore to resolve questions in harmonic analysis related
to the linear propagator in various geometries. These range from proving
Strichartz estimates powerful enough to resolve the small data energy-critical
problem on high-dimensional tori to shepherding recent progress on the
restriction conjecture into the realm of non-constant coefficients, which is a
key step toward resolving mass-critical problems outside the translation-
invariant setting.