* 1500997
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Highly unsaturated fatty acid transfer from aquatic to terrestrial food webs
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Alexander Flecker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,151.00

Streams depend upon nutrients from terrestrial landscapes to fuel the production
of the plants and animals living in them. Reciprocally, stream organisms such as
emerging aquatic insects provide energy and nutrients to terrestrial predators,
including streamside birds. Emergent stream insects are likely an especially
important food source for streamside predators. Most past studies on nutrient
movement between streams and terrestrial landscapes have been conducted in
relatively undisturbed forests. However, the contribution of stream-derived
nutrients to streamside predators may actually be less important in forested
streams than in highly productive streams in agricultural landscapes where algae
and stream insects are abundant. This research will examine effects of: 1) food
availability and quality on the growth rates of a representative streamside
bird, the Eastern Phoebe (Sayornis phoebe), and 2) agricultural versus forested
land use on the availability and quality of freshwater and terrestrial food
resources for Eastern Phoebe chicks. The researchers will collaborate with local
environmental managers and landowners by sharing summaries of results, and at
publicly accessible study sites, informational signs will be used to explain the
research. The researchers will work with a local children's science museum to
develop presentations based on the research themes, and will continue to mentor
underrepresented minority undergraduates.

Effects of food quality and quantity will be measured by raising phoebe chicks
during their most rapid period of growth (days 4-9) in lab settings. Chicks will
be fed diets that vary in quantity (high or low calorie) and quality (high or
low highly unsaturated fatty acids) in a two by two design. Phoebe chick weight,
head length, and tarsus length will be measured daily. To examine the effects of
land use on food quality and quality in a natural setting, chick growth
measurements will be coupled to fatty acid composition analyses to quantify food
quality across sites. Stable isotope analyses of phoebe tissues and their
terrestrial and aquatic dietary items will be used to reconstruct where phoebes
obtain food resources. The researchers expect agricultural sites to provide
phoebes with both higher food quantity and quality resulting in faster phoebe
growth rates. Compound-specific stable isotope analyses of phoebe tissues and
their terrestrial and aquatic dietary items will be performed to determine how
land use affects where phoebes obtain highly unsaturated fatty acids. The
researchers expect phoebes at agricultural sites to obtain highly unsaturated
fatty acids synthesized by aquatic primary producers and phoebes at forested
sites to obtain highly unsaturated fatty acids elongated from their molecular
precursors synthesized by terrestrial primary producers.