* 1500917
* Dissertation Research: Linking coexistence at local and regional scales by assessing a dormancy-dispersal tradeoff
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,928.00

Understanding how and if species can coexist stably in a fragmented habitat
where patches are connected by dispersal is key to understanding the maintenance
of biodiversity. The coexistence of similar species?ones that feed at the same
level in a food chain, have similar life histories, and share predators?requires
some form of tradeoff such that each is either limited by different resources or
enemies, or each is a superior competitor to the other at some points in either
space, time, or both. This project will elucidate the differences in life-
history strategies of two grazing zooplankton, Moina macrocopa and Daphnia
pulex/pulicaria, in a freshwater rock-pools on an island off the coast of Maine,
USA. The dormancy and dispersal of each species will be examined to determine if
these differences promote coexistence either alone or in combination with
spatial and temporal variation. This study will experimentally test whether one
species is superior at remaining dormant while one species is superior at
dispersing, and will model whether or not this allows these two species to
coexist. This project will train one Ph.D. student and multiple undergraduate
students through field-assistantships and mentored independent projects. The
research will be communicated to the public, K-12 students, and undergraduates
from many institutions at a nearby biological field station. The research itself
promotes the progress of science and has implications for national welfare
through application to the management of biodiversity of fragmented habitats;
the project also supports education and diversity.

Understanding how and if species can coexist stably in a fragmented habitat is
key to understanding the maintenance of biodiversity. The coexistence of similar
species?ones that feed at the same trophic level, have similar life histories,
and share predators?requires some form of tradeoff such that each is either
limited by different resources or enemies, or each is a superior competitor to
the other at some points in either space, time, or both. The differences in
life-history strategies of two grazing zooplankton, Moina macrocopa and Daphnia
pulex/pulicaria, will be elucidated for a freshwater rock-pool metacommunity on
an island off the coast of Maine, USA. Life history strategies relating to
dormancy and dispersal of each species will be examined and used to determine if
these differences promote coexistence either alone or in combination with
spatial and temporal variation. This study will experimentally test (1) whether
one species is superior at remaining dormant while one species is superior at
dispersing, and (2) whether or not this allows these two species to coexist in
this metacommunity by measuring the necessary relationships to parameterize a
mathematical dormancy-dispersal model to test the conditions for coexistence.
The spatial and temporal dispersal rates of diapausing eggs and their
establishment success will be measured by stocking focal pools surrounded by
other pools in which the species are initially absent. These data will be
combined with data on competition outcomes in both artificial mesocosms and
manipulated rock pools. In addition to furthering our understanding of the
maintenance of biodiversity, which can be applied to the management of naturally
and anthropogenically fragmented habitats, this project will train one Ph.D.
student and multiple undergraduate students through field-assistantships and
mentored independent projects. Furthermore, the information about this project
will be disseminated to visitors to Shoals Marine Laboratory, which includes the
public, K-12 students, and undergraduates from many institutions.