* 1500320
* 2015-2017 LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate: Tennessee LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program at Vanderbilt University
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Alisa Mosley, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 03/31/2019
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to successfully complete high quality
degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (LSAMP-BD) activity provides two-
year support at the post baccalaureate level for students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to matriculate in STEM graduate programs
with the ultimate goal of earning a doctoral degree in a STEM discipline.
Participants are selected from LSAMP institutions nationwide. The Tennessee
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TLSAMP), under the leadership
of Tennessee State University, has chosen Vanderbilt University as the first
LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (LSAMP-BD) site managed by this alliance.
Vanderbilt University will host the 2015-2017 BD program in which a cohort of
twelve LSAMP BD students will engage in STEM research, academics and
professional development leading to acceptance and completion of the doctoral
program. The Tennessee LSAMP graduate BD program at Vanderbilt University has
the potential to promote systemic change in graduate education practices and
policy, in ways that will increase the success of individual students on the
doctoral pathway and the effectiveness of STEM graduate programs with a goal of
diversifying America's STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD program at
Vanderbilt University employs a proven "toolkit" with components for innovative
recruitment, engagement, retention, student tracking and dissemination that will
include a mentoring e-dashboard to advance the practice of mentoring formatively
and real-time for tracking student progress and development. The toolkit also
accommodates interview protocols and non-cognitive skills rubrics that has the
potential to transform traditional graduate education practices. The program
includes collaborations and linkages with other STEM networks and resources as
well as other graduate programs, such as NSF's Graduate Research Fellowship
Program (GRFP), Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP),
Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) and
institutional resources to ensure students successful completion of the STEM
doctoral degree. The program will be externally evaluated and students will be
tracked throughout the program and into STEM careers following completion of
STEM doctoral degree programs.