* 1500173
* EAGER: Rapid, Efficient Implementation of Irregular Applications on SIMD Many-Core Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Roger Chamberlain, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 276,866.00

General-purpose computation with efficient Single Instruction, Multiple Data
(SIMD) oriented many-core devices, such as graphical processing units (GPUs),
can deliver high performance in a variety of application domains. Data-parallel
applications that perform well on SIMD many-cores typically exhibit regularity
in patterns of computation and data movement, acting identically on each of an
ensemble of many equal-sized inputs. However, many important applications
exhibit irregular behavior making them difficult to implement efficiently on
these platforms. Thus, efficient SIMD implementation of applications with
irregular behavior is an important ongoing research problem.

This project's focus is the investigation and validation of novel interface
designs, algorithmic techniques, and implementation strategies to address the
problem of efficient SIMD implementation uniformly for applications from a
variety of domains. The work includes generating alternate module designs to
support efficient developer-driven searches over large design spaces to tune
performance. Another key area of the research will validate these technologies
on bio-sequence analysis applications resulting in innovative, efficient new GPU
designs for computational tasks.

More broadly and with a particular focus on new high-performance application
designs for data-intensive computations critical to bioinformatics, the project
will enable faster development of more efficient, more maintainable GPU
software, even for applications with SIMD-unfriendly irregular behaviors.