* 1500998
* Deformation/rigidity theory in von Neumann algebras and ergodic theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Jesse Peterson, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 225,314.00

Von Neumann algebras were introduced in the 1930s and 1940s in part as a tool
for developing a mathematical foundation for quantum physics. Von Neumann
algebras have since become a field of independent interest with further
applications to areas of mathematics such as ergodic theory, Voiculescu's free
probability theory, Jones's theory of subfactors and planar algebras, knot
theory, and many others. The development of von Neumann algebras has also
historically been closely connected to the study of measurable dynamics, and
these connections have recently begun to reemerge in the presence of a newly
developed rigidity phenomenon. The investigation of this rigidity phenomenon has
since led to new connections between von Neumann algebras and other areas of
mathematics. Furthering the development of rigidity theory will in turn lead to
new insights and connections among these various fields, and it will provide
opportunities to exploit this phenomenon in other areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the newly emerging
deformation/rigidity theory in von Neumann algebras, as well as continue to
explore the deep connection between this theory and ergodic theory.
Deformation/rigidity theory, initiated by Popa in the early 2000s, has been
extremely successful over the last decade in answering a number of longstanding
problems in von Neumann algebras and ergodic theory. The juxtaposition between
deformability properties such as Haagerup's property, free products, or
unbounded cocycles, with rigidity properties such as so-called property T or the
spectral gap allows one to discover hidden structure in a von Neumann algebra
where both types of phenomena occur. This has led to new insight in the
structural properties of these von Neumann algebras, and in turn has found
applications to other areas such as measured group theory, or the theory of
invariants. Developing alongside deformation/rigidity theory is the
corresponding techniques applied to ergodic theory of group actions. This has
already led to a number of striking results, and yet here the surface has only
been scratched. This project will also investigate more fully these
interactions.