* 1500249
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Low Cost High Resolution 3D Scanning Technologies for 3D Printing
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Angus Kingon, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 215,249.00

This PFI:AIR Technology Translation project will leverage technologies developed
under prior NSF projects to create advanced low-cost 3D scanners targeted at the
flourishing consumer 3D printer market. Many low-cost desktop 3D printers are
commercially available, but only a handful of low-cost desktop 3D scanners have
been introduced in this market. Unfortunately, all these 3D scanners produce low
quality 3D models as a result of intrinsic limitations of their technologies.
Although the quality of existing low-cost 3D commercial (or home made) scanners
is sufficient for hobbyists to replicate small objects using the current
generation of personal 3D printers, the resolution of the low-cost desktop 3D
scanners is not adequate for applications in art, entertainment, industrial
inspection, reverse engineering, medicine, forensics, and in many other more
advanced applications. Industrial 3D scanners, capable of producing high
resolution 3D models, are available in the market, however they are at a price
point one or two orders of magnitude higher, which makes them unsuitable for the
high volume consumer 3D printer market, or even for some of the more advanced
applications listed above. The 3D scanners to be developed in this project will
be competitive in cost with existing low-cost desktop products, but able to
produce 3D models of much higher quality, resulting in significant improvements
over the state-of-the-art, with resulting competitive
advantages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate proprietary
technologies within a well designed user-friendly system, which will remove the
most tedious steps through smart automation and advanced algorithm design:
projector-camera calibration technology will enable the creation of a simple
user-friendly semi-automatic calibration process, critical for high quality
reconstruction; unsynchronized structured lighting technology will enable the
project to leverage low cost hardware components manufactured in high volumes
for the mobile market, and also to simplify the circuitry quite significantly;
multi-frequency phase shifting technology will enable 3D scanning of objects
made of optically challenging materials, such as polished metal and other
anisotropic and translucent materials; smooth signed distance and non-convex
hull surface reconstruction technologies will result in high fidelity multi-
resolution polygon meshes. The project will also develop other unique image and
geometry processing technologies to register multiple scans, to cleanup the
reconstructed models, and to prepare the models for 3D
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership with the Brown Program in
Innovation Management and Entrepreneurship (PRIME), the project will analyze the
market opportunities in a number of additional application domains, and will
develop a broader marketing and commercialization strategy. A team of PRIME
students will work to acquire an enhanced understanding of the identified market
space, the market need, the competitive technologies; the potential impact of
the proposed competitive innovation; necessary intellectual property protection,
and licensing opportunities and freedom to operate issues. The students
participating in this effort will acquire an enhanced understanding of
innovation, technology commercialization and entrepreneurship through these
experiences.