* 1500949
* Combinatorics and geometry of mutations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Nathan Reading, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 170,000.00

The goal of this project is to better understand an operation on matrices called
"mutation." A matrix is a collection of numbers arranged in a square grid.
Matrix mutation takes a matrix and changes it according to certain rules to make
a new matrix. The rules themselves seem strange and counterintuitive, but matrix
mutation is happening behind the scenes in many very important mathematical
areas, including Teichmüller theory, Poisson geometry, quiver representations,
Lie theory, algebraic geometry, algebraic combinatorics, and even partial
differential equations (in the equations describing shallow water waves). Matrix
mutation appears in certain kinds of algebra (manipulating multivariable
functions in a setting called a "cluster algebra"), combinatorics (modeling
cluster algebras by discrete objects) and geometry (measuring distances in two-
dimensional spaces). A key component of this project is to study matrix
mutation, with a focus on the "mutation fan." A fan is a way of cutting space
into pieces (subject to certain rules). For example, if we draw three different
lines through (0,0) in the xy-plane, they cut space into six pieces, and those
pieces define a fan. If we take two of the pieces that are right next to each
other and glue them together to make one piece, the resulting five pieces are a
simple example of a mutation fan.

One part of the project concerns universal geometric coefficients and mutation
fans. Specifically, the goal is to construct the mutation fan for matrices
arising from Cartan matrices of affine type and from surfaces, and to construct
universal coefficients in those cases. Furthermore, the research will pin down
the relationships between mutation fans and other fans, like tropicalized
cluster algebras, fans of semi-invariants, and scattering diagrams. A second
part of the project concerns the dominance relation on exchange matrices. A
matrix B dominates a matrix B' if they have the same (weak) sign pattern and
each entry of B is weakly larger than the corresponding entry of B'. The goal of
this part of the project is to understand a phenomenon observed in many
examples, namely (1) that dominance relations among matrices often lead to
refinement relations among mutation fans and (2) that there is often an
algebraic relationship between the two cluster algebras. The third part of the
project concerns cluster algebras and Coxeter-Catalan combinatorics in affine
type. Here the goal is to construct the affine-type analogs of almost-positive
root models for cluster algebras, and to relate them to affine doubled Cambrian
fans.