* 1500046
* SaTC-EDU: EAGER Enhancing Cybersecurity Education Through a Representational Fluency Model
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Samuel Wagstaff, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,376.00

Cybersecurity experts must possess several abilities: deep technical skills, the
capability to recognize and respond to complex and emergent behavior, mastery of
using abstractions and principles, the ability to assess risk and handle
uncertainty, problem-solving and reasoning skills, and facility in adversarial
thinking. Based on cognitive theory, this project will investigate the efficacy
of model eliciting activities for developing students' ability to recognize and
respond to complex and emergent behavior, and how to handle uncertainty and
ambiguity. This project extends the theory of representational fluency, which
has been proven to be a powerful tool to effectively teach complex concepts in
the field of Science and Mathematics to the cybersecurity domain. The findings
from this project will shed light on how representational fluency can shape the
cognitive schema and cultivate the cybersecurity mindset.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: 1) develop model eliciting
educational activities that teach network security related concepts using and
translating among multiple representations, 2) investigate students'
representational fluency and schema of these concepts, and 3) investigate the
relationship of students' development of schema and changes in their cognitive
processing and control. While the context for this educational research will be
network security and the students will be at the undergraduate level, the theory
and framework built through this research should be relevant to other knowledge
areas in cybersecurity and applicable to different levels of students and
professionals in different settings including university classroom or adult
continuous education.