* 1500954
* Lefschetz Fibrations, Mapping Tori, and Dynamics on Moduli Spaces of Objects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Paul Seidel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2018
* USD 312,380.00

Dynamical systems (mathematical models of systems changing in time) describe
many processes that affect us, and have given rise to some of the hardest
questions in science, such as the multi-body problem in celestial mechanics. The
first part of this project aims to explore an entirely new kind of dynamics, in
which the states of the system (such as positions of particles) move around in
time, without a global motion of the entire system. This seems paradoxical, and
indeed one expects it to happen mostly in situations that are far from
applications. Nevertheless, it has been shown that the phenomenon is
mathematically possible, and because dynamical systems thinking provides such a
powerful intuition, it makes sense to want to stretch its limits as far as
possible. Any evidence of additional complexity in classical mechanical systems,
even if it directly affects only a few cases, ultimately changes how we think of
the complexity of such systems in general. The second part of this project deals
with a phenomenon in mathematics which arises from its current close exchange of
ideas with string theory: namely, the appearance of complicated explicit
functions (typically, of one variable). From the viewpoint of topology, which is
more qualitative, one hopes to minimize the amount of information that needs to
be encoded inside such functions. For instance, if the functions themselves
solve a differential equation, they can be recovered from a finite amount of
information. String theory has been very effective in providing such a
characterization, but this project aims (in a special case) for a more direct
and simpler description. It should be viewed as an exercise in "noncommutative
geometry", which is the mathematicians' way to prepare ourselves for thinking
beyond conventional notions of space (which is one of the big challenges in
contemporary mathematics and physics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic manifolds
have a rich internal structure. This can be approached from a variational
viewpoint (capacities, Hofer norms, spectral invariants), or from string theory
and mirror symmetry. Nevertheless, the basic known invariants are a collection
of numbers, or homology classes (Gromov-Witten invariants). There is information
beyond that (Lagrangian submanifolds, Fukaya categories), but it is not directly
amenable to being used as a classification tool. The project intends to attack
this situation by looking at dynamical systems acting on the Fukaya category.
The idea is start with geometric considerations such as flux, and export them to
other situations. The approach is designed to be applied to a specific class of
symplectic manifolds, related to mapping tori. The other major topic is a way of
computing Fukaya categories, using Lefschetz pencils. While there is a body of
previous work in this direction, it is restricted to the exact (or monotone)
situation, and does not address the challenge of understanding the infinite
series that arise in the Calabi-Yau case. The PI's aim is to describe those
series in a more direct way than is provided by the standard framework of mirror
symmetry (Gauss-Manin connections, mirror maps); this description would then
also be more general, since it is ultimately independent of mirror symmetry
considerations.