* 1500720
* Documentation and Child Learners: A Workshop to Examine the Broader Impacts of Endangered Language Documentation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Ruth Rouvier, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 04/30/2017
* USD 60,000.00

Current research indicates that 46% of the world's 7,000 languages are in danger
of losing their last speakers by the end of this century. Communities are
responding to this situation by accelerating their efforts to learn their
languages. In situations of severe language endangerment, communities and
educators are turning to archived language documentation to promote language
learning. This workshop project will investigate the process of language
acquisition in these unique learning situations, looking specifically at the
role of documentary materials -- grammars, dictionary, and linguistically
analyzed natural discourse -- in learning. A special focus will be on the long-
term academic success and other benefits to learners.

In Fall 2015, Ruth Rouvier of the Education Development Center will facilitate
this workshop in Washington D.C. Rouvier will bring together a 10-member
interdisciplinary team of specialists in language acquisition, early childhood
development, educational linguistics, documentary linguistics, statistics, and
public health. Participants will address topics relating to the role of language
documentation in formal language-based activities and the impact of these
activities on learners ages 0-5. The impacts to be addressed include linguistic
benefits (language competence and use) and extra-linguistic benefits relating to
academic success and social well-being. Workshop participants will examine both
the resources and practices known or hypothesized to result in these positive
outcomes, and the methods for evaluating these benefits. They will assess the
state of collective (i.e., academic, professional and community) knowledge
regarding these issues and make recommendations for addressing shortfalls, in
order to encourage research on how language documentation research affects
society.

Results of the workshop will be broadly disseminated for discussion and comment
through listservs such as the Resource Network for Linguistic Diversity, the
Foundation for Endangered Languages), and the Linguistlist.