* 1500284
* California LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program at the University of California-Irvine (2015-2017)
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Howard Gillman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 03/31/2018
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." For the
U.S. to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of
all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas
that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The University of California-Irvine
(UCI), lead institution of the California LSAMP (CAMP), will serve as the host
site for the 2015-2017 cohort of BD Fellows. The BD Program at UCI will employ
creative strategies and best practices for recruitment and retention of diverse
graduate student researchers through completion of the Ph.D. The efforts to
invest in doctoral students underrepresented in STEM should result in the
production of well-trained scientists and engineers who would support NSF's
Mission to promote the progress of science. Ultimately, the CAMP BD Program will
positively impact diversity and inclusion in the national scientific and
engineering workforce, thereby ensuring our nation's future prosperity and
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD Program at UCI will enhance the
diversity of STEM graduate education on the Irvine campus by recruiting,
enrolling, training, and graduating a cohort of 12 talented doctoral students.
Best practices employed for recruitment and retention are built upon lessons
learned from previous LSAMP BD host sites. The program will provide a robust set
of graduate student opportunities that promote mentorship and leadership in STEM
communities. These include workshops on such topics as writing technical reports
and papers, learning the culture of the laboratory, building peer and
professional relationships, planning for advancement to candidacy, successful
grant writing, and presenting your work. Collaborations between UCI-LSAMP, the
Graduate Division, and STEM departments will ensure the success of the BD
Program. To date, the California LSAMP BD has supported 105 underrepresented
students in STEM disciplines across all campuses of the University of
California.