* 1500138
* Bridge to the Doctorate: Wisconsin Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Gail Coover, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2018
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." Since
national security and economic vitality of the United States require a highly
trained domestic STEM workforce, institutions engaged in the most advanced
levels of research and innovation must do their part to train tomorrow's leaders
in STEM. The Wisconsin LSAMP BD (WiscAMP-BD) Program builds on the growing
diversity of undergraduate students who are completing their Baccalaureate
degrees in STEM. The strategies employed by the WiscAMP-BD Program will
contribute significantly to increasing the diversity of leaders in academia and
the STEM workforce, thereby helping the nation to remain globally competitive.

The WiscAMP-BD program is based on established theories of identity development
and integration, adult learning and career development, and institutional change
and has the following objectives: 1) To recruit and enroll a cohort of twelve
students into any of the 54 STEM doctoral programs at UW-Madison; 2) To pair
each of the students who are strong candidates for graduate study and are
underrepresented in STEM with faculty mentors who are engaged in cutting-edge
research and committed to mentoring students from underrepresented populations;
3) To establish a community of practice for WiscAMP-BD students to support the
development of eight core competencies and their persistence to the doctoral
degree.