* 1500925
* Existence of Solutions to Hyperbolic Differential Equations in Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Hans Lindblad, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,997.00

The PI's research concerns basic mathematical questions about systems of
nonlinear hyperbolic differential equations in mathematical physics. These
include many important equations in classical field theory and continuum
mechanics; e.g. Einstein's equations of general relativity and Euler's equations
of fluids. The basic questions concern existence, uniqueness and stability of
solutions, as well as the question if solutions blow up (e.g. black holes in
general relativity) and if not what the long time behavior of solutions are?
More specifically, the PI is mainly working in two areas. One project is to
study if Einstein's and related equations have solutions for all times or if the
solutions blow up. A long term goal is to study the stability of large solutions
like black holes and the big bang in general relativity. The motivation is to
understand the large scale structure of our universe. The Physicists are
building large gravitational wave detectors to observe the universe and the
theory has to be developed together with observations. Another project is to
study a class of problems that occur in fluid dynamics and general relativity,
in particular, proving existence and stability for the free boundary problem of
the motion of the surface of a fluid in vacuum (such as the surface of the
ocean). A long term goal is to study the long time behavior of astrophysical
bodies such as gaseous stars as well as other interface problems of fluids and
solids. It is conceivable that understanding the properties of and controlling
the interface between two fluids could have important applications. In
particular there is a version of the problem in magneto-hydrodynamics and
controlling the plasma is needed for constructing fusion reactors.

To solve these problems the PI and collaborators are developing new techniques
that could be useful for studying many other problems as well. In particular,
they are using geometric methods combined with frequency decomposition methods
to study hyperbolic differential equations. The PI's and collaborator's greatly
simplified existence proof for Einstein's equations and its generalizations and
refinements will have a large impact. Moreover the detailed asymptotic behavior
they prove in harmonic coordinates will be useful also for the physics
community. The methods the PI has developed for the free boundary problem of
fluids work also for the compressible case and also with vorticity since it uses
interior equations and not just equations on the boundary. The methods PI and
collaborators are developing to deal with nonlinear equations with variable
coefficients will hopefully also be useful to show stability of perturbations of
large solutions.