* 1500261
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Development of Tools and Methods for Extended Maturity Analysis of Concrete
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Chao Koi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a microscale
sensor of water stress and temperature for real-time monitoring of the chemical
state within concrete during curing, and for refined predictions of the
concrete's mechanical properties. The HydroT sensor of water status and
temperature, and the Extended Maturity Analysis that it will enable, are
important because they will allow for improved control of the properties of
concrete during curing. Improper curing of concrete structures can cause stress
that may lead to cracking and ultimate failure. Real-time sensing and monitoring
of concrete curing will lead to improved functionality, increased lifetime, and
a reduction in the global use of this energy-intensive material.

The project will result in prototypes of the HydroT sensor, initial development
of Extended Maturity Methods using these sensors in concrete curing, and an
improved understanding of the priority markets for the commercialization of this
technology. The HydroT sensor has the following unique features: 1)
unprecedented sensitivity for the measurement of water stress in the range that
is relevant in concrete. This capability will allow for water status to be
incorporated, for the first time, into methods of tracking and controlling
concrete properties during construction. 2) Integration of water and temperature
sensing using microfabrication techniques. This approach will allow for simple,
low-cost scaled-up and production by leveraging the existing capabilities of
microfabrication foundries. 3) Small format and simple integration with
electronics and communication. These characteristics will make the barrier for
adoption by industry low. Taken together, these features mean that the HydroT
technology will provide the concrete industry an important new functionality
(sensing of water status) in a device that can replace the temperature probes
used in conventional Maturity Analysis with similar costs and technical
complexity.

To translate the HydroT Probe and Extended Maturity Analysis toward commercial
application, the team will pursue advances in the understanding and technical
approaches on both hardware and application fronts. These developments will
involve fundamental advances in the ability to manipulate the properties of
critical materials such as the porous membrane and deeper understanding of the
coupling of moisture and temperature in defining maturation in important classes
of concrete. Additionally, the team will pursue a deeper understanding of the
market, competitors, and potential partners for manufacturing and distribution.
Throughout, the team will aim to reinforce its intellectual property position
and to build a core group of entrepreneurs and technical staff to carry the
project into a successful start-up company. As part of the project, the
personnel involved - undergraduates, graduates, and post-docs - will gain
experience in innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation through
participation in the patent application process with Cornell's technology
transfer office and activities such as Cornell's Pre-Seed Workshop and
technology accelerator program, eLabs.