* 1500916
* Topics in Fluid dynamics with free boundaries, and Kinetic theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Robert Strain, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 270,001.00

This research proposes to develop new methods to advance the current level of
scientific knowledge on a diverse collection of recognized questions in a few
different areas of the mathematical analysis of non-linear partial differential
equations. The first part of this project involves questions regarding the
dynamics of fluids, and solutions to these questions are expected to increase
our understanding of water waves, tsunamis, hurricanes, and other fluid
phenomena. The second part of this project studies the dynamics of plasmas from
a mathematical point of view, and we anticipate that these studies will increase
our understanding of the physical phenomena such as the solar wind, galactic
nebulae, and the Van Allen radiations belts. The third part of this project
focuses on the study the relativistic Kinetic theory and it is expected that the
research will increase our physical understanding in a wide variety of places in
astrophysics, for instance in high atmosphere aerodynamics where the air is a
very rarefied gas and fluid equations are probably not sufficient. This project
will involve training in research of postdoctoral researchers, graduate students
and undergraduate students from the University of Pennsylvania and beyond, with
participation of under-represented groups. The PI is working to develop
innovative Active Learning Calculus courses in order to further the goal of
developing a diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce and to improve STEM
education at the collegiate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed research is to fully understand both global in time existence of
solutions and singularity formation of solutions when this occurs for several
different fundamental physical models in non-linear partial differential
equations. One part of this research is to study fluid dynamics problems with
free boundaries such as the Muskat problem and the Surface Quasi-Geostrophic
equations. Another part of this work looks at problems related to the
relativistic Vlasov-Maxwell system which is a fundamental model of plasma
physics. And a third part of this proposal will study problems on the the
relativistic Boltzmann equation which is the central model in relativistic
Kinetic theory. The PI proposes to develop several new methods in the Analysis
of partial differential equations in the course of developing deeper
understanding of these different equations. It is expected that the techniques
developed to be useful for future mathematical and physical developments.