* 1500484
* 2015-2017 Louis Stokes Louisiana Bridge to the Doctorate -  LSU BD-7: 2015 Cohort LA-BRIDGE
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2018
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to successfully complete high quality
degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (LSAMP BD) activity provides two-
year support at the post-baccalaureate level for students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to matriculate in STEM graduate programs
with the ultimate goal of earning a doctoral degree in a STEM discipline.
Participants are selected from LSAMP institutions nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority
Participation (LS-LAMP), under the leadership of the Louisiana Board of Regents
and Southern University, has chosen Louisiana State University (LSU) as the site
for the seventh cohort of LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate &lt;br/&gt;participants
during 2015-2017. This cohort of twelve LSAMP BD students will engage in STEM
research, academics and professional development leading to acceptance and
completion of the doctoral program. The LS-LAMP graduate BD program at LSU has
the potential to promote systemic change in graduate education practices and
policy in ways that will increase the success of individual students on the
doctoral pathway and the effectiveness of STEM graduate programs with a goal of
diversifying America's STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD program at
LSU employs a proven program of systemic mentoring with components for
innovative recruitment, engagement, retention, evaluation, student tracking and
dissemination. The program includes collaborations and linkages with other STEM
networks and resources, such as the Louisiana Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (Louisiana EPSCoR), other state
fellowship&lt;br/&gt;programs as well as institutional resources to ensure
students successful completion of the STEM doctoral degree. The program will
be&lt;br/&gt;externally evaluated and students will be tracked throughout the
program and into&lt;br/&gt;STEM careers following completion of STEM doctoral
degree programs.