* 1500246
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Commercializing an Intelligent Tutor for eLearning in Mathematics
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Ivon Arroyo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2017
* USD 199,944.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation (TT) project addresses the high failure
rate of K12 students to learn mathematics. This project focuses on technology
translation of an intelligent online tutor, named MathSpring, which is important
because it provides adaptive and personalized responses to students and teaches
by matching the learning needs of individual students with effective teaching
approaches. It applies theoretical understanding of cognitive, metacognitive and
affective student characteristics to each tutor response. The MathSpring Tutor
is also important because no online tutor today responds by analyzing both
student knowledge and behavior. This PFI:AIR-TT project will result in a scale-
up of the MathSpring Tutor and provide advantages in the marketplace by
capitalizing on the general appeal of animation and humanoid characters that
talk to students about the importance of perseverance and effort. The project
will also provide low-cost, quality solutions for a wide range of students,
adaptive tutoring based on student models, just-in-time verbal and animated
interactions designed to move students away from boredom or disengagement, and
the capability to select from among potentially 700 problems in the system.

These features of the MathSpring tutor provide improved performance, efficiency
and efficacy when compared to classroom teaching or to the leading competing
technology, primarily drill and practice problems, videos of lectures or games
in this market space. The potential economic impact of translating this
technology to the market place will positively contribute to the growth rate of
eLearning within the next 5 years and to the U.S. competitiveness in the
eLearning domain. Since the annual U.S. education expenditure for K-12 is
approximately $625 billion, a large potential exists for making both a
commercial and social impact in this space. Potential outcomes include:
personalized tutors that guide students into their own zone or state of ?flow?;
identification of target educational markets; and reaching any student with
access to a computer and an Internet connection.

This PFI project addresses the following technology gaps as the software is
translated from research discovery toward commercial application: identification
of tutor responses that are effective for students in distress (e.g., bored,
unmotivated); building sufficient content so the tutor can be used through an
entire semester in Grades 5-9; and providing tools that enable teachers to
select math problem based on the Common Core curriculum. The project work also
includes hardening the tutor, porting it to two platforms (e.g., Android, IOS)
and identifying consortia of schools (e.g., linked by geography, or pedagogy)
for long-term partnerships.

Personnel involved in this project, e.g., graduate students and programmers,
will receive innovation and technology translation experiences through efforts
to identify paths through the idiosyncratic school procurement process and the
communication of the efficacy studies arising from credible evaluation of
MathSpring. The project engages CarneyLabs to guide commercial aspects of the
translation and Virginia Advanced Studies Strategies (VASS), a non-profit
company that works with the Virginia Department of Education (DoED), to provide
a test environment in this technology translation effort from research discovery
toward commercial reality.