* 1500135
* Unraveling the Unique Properties of Transient Discharges in Bubbles and Liquid Water
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Peter Bruggeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 342,000.00

This project is focused on the understanding of the production of reactive
species when plasmas interact with liquids. Plasmas in and in contact with
liquids are one of the most exciting and important intellectual frontiers in
plasma science, with broad potential applications ranging from environmental
remediation and green chemistry to biomedical applications. The complex
interaction of plasmas with liquids offers a rich source of short-lived
chemically reactive species, many of which are critical for chemical and
biological applications. Plasmas are often considered to be an advanced
oxidation technology for liquid waste treatment and also have great promise in
the destruction of pharmaceuticals in drinking water. The presence of these
pharmaceuticals in the water supply is an increasing public concern and for
several cases no alternative technologies exist to remove them from drinking
water. In addition, plasmas in liquids can be used for environmentally friendly
chemical synthesis of hydrogen peroxide, hydrogen and even nanoparticles.
Producing hydrogen and hydrogen peroxide from water with better energy
efficiency than electrolysis or other chemical processes would be a major step
forward. The nanoparticles in the context of advanced material science could
also strongly affect energy research that increasingly uses complex
nanostructured materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since energy efficiency is often
a bottleneck for applications of plasmas in liquids, a better understanding of
the reactive species production in these plasmas is the necessary step to lead
to a breakthrough in technologies based on plasmas in liquids. To date, progress
in the field of plasmas in liquids has been hindered by the lack of quantitative
correlations between plasma properties and the plasma induced liquid phase
chemistry. The key idea of this project is to generate a non-equilibrium plasma
filament in liquid water by a nanosecond pulsed high voltage supply in a needle-
needle electrode geometry. This offers an excellent control of the plasma
dynamics and allows detailed investigation of a stabilized plasma filament. The
short-lived reactive species production mechanisms will be investigated both
temporally and spatially resolved by a combination of advanced laser
diagnostics. In addition, plasma induced liquid reactivity will be measured and
a direct link between plasma chemistry and liquid phase chemistry will be
established. This is expected to lead to the necessary knowledge for optimizing
and establishing many promising applications as stated above. This project
enables education of students and a post-doctoral researcher in the cross-
disciplinary field of plasma engineering. The outcomes of this work will be used
to extend an existing graduate course on Plasma Technology to cover non-
equilibrium liquid phase plasmas including laboratory demonstrations. Within the
framework of the project, collaboration with the Science Museum of Minnesota
will be initiated to establish an exhibit about plasmas.