* 1500743
* Arithmetic on Shimura Varieties and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Tonghai Yang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2019
* USD 359,997.00

Mathematics has always been essential to the development of science and
technology. Now mathematics is becoming increasingly important, too, to
business, finance, biology, and social sciences. Basic research in mathematics,
which is thought of as "pure" mathematics, is increasingly finding deep
applications in unexpected areas. The research area of this project has this
flavor. On the one hand, the principal investigator is investigating Shimura
varieties, whose definition itself involves both geometry and representation
theory. These objects lie at the center of modern number theory. In their
simplest cases, the modular curves, they have been studied for more than one
hundred years and were essential to the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem, one of
the most famous and oldest conjectures in mathematics. On the other hand, the
investigator's research results in recent years have become useful in algebraic
curve cryptosystems. These are essential to the safety of electronic commerce
and communication. The investigator will continue to work on these types of
applications.

In one of the projects joint with Bruinier, Howard, Kudla, and Rapoport, the
investigator aims to prove that a generating function of arithmetic Chow cycles
in the Shimura varieties of unitary type is modular. As an application, he will
prove more non-Abelian cases of the Colmez Conjecture. In another project, the
investigator will try to understand the L-function side of the Colmez conjecture
and obtain clues on how to attack the general case. In yet another project, the
investigator will study, with collaborators, CM values of some interesting
Borcherds projects. These have two purposes: one is to prove some classical
conjectures, and the other is an application to cryptosystems.