* 1500511
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at UMBC (2015-2017)
* EHR,HRD
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2019
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. For the U.S. to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it
taps into the talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. BD
programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher education contribute
to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, namely to
"integrate education and research to support development of a diverse STEM
workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." The University of Maryland Baltimore
County (UMBC), lead institution of PROMISE: MD's Alliance for Graduate Education
and the Professoriate (AGEP) and the University System of Maryland (USM) LSAMP,
will be the host site for the 2015-2017 USM BD Program. The activities of UMBC's
program provide BD Fellows with a positive doctoral experience that includes
meaningful initiatives such as professional leadership, community networking,
and improved discipline-specific group and individual mentoring that have
demonstrated positive impact on retention and successful graduation. Therefore,
the efforts at UMBC will continue to contribute to increasing the diversity and
representation in academia and the STEM workforce, thereby increasing the
nation's competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed training for the
2015-2017 cohort of BD Fellows is extensive. The academic departments at UMBC
have enthusiastically embraced the BD Program and are true partners in the
success of the BD Fellows who will be heavily mentored to ensure they receive
strong academic and professional preparation. UMBC's BD Fellows are provided
excellent training in core competencies in their disciplines. The BD Fellows
will also have the opportunity, early in their academic careers, to conduct
cutting-edge research with top research scientists on campus and at national
laboratories located in close proximity to UMBC. The proposed activities such as
the required university-wide and state-wide research presentations, and training
for participation in national and international research efforts, provide the BD
Fellows with creative ways to enhance their preparation for STEM careers.
Furthermore, the planned training in leadership, teaching, and mentoring will
position the fellows well for future faculty positions, or other areas of the
STEM workforce. The team has worked cohesively to facilitate the success of BD
Fellows since 2005 and Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(AGEP) students since 2003. Since the first BD cohort matriculated at UMBC in
2005, 108 BD Fellows have enrolled in STEM graduate programs at UMBC and at the
University of Maryland, College Park. USM BD Fellows have earned 9 STEM Ph.Ds.
and 47 master's degrees; 63 Fellows are currently persisting in an MS or Ph.D.
program (17 students in master's programs and 46 students in doctoral programs).