* 1500170
* Enabling High-Speed Communication over Turbulent Free-Space Optical Links by Employing Spectral-Spatial Schemes
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Bane Vasic, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 359,917.00

This project plans to bring ideas and techniques from high-speed photonics and
advanced telecommunications to bear on the field of optical communication
systems operating through free space. Free-space optical communication systems
emerged as the most promising alternative and supplement to high-speed radio
frequency data links by offering several key advantages, such as higher
security, operation over unlicensed frequency spectrum, and higher information
capacity. Such systems can be remarkably well-suited for rapidly establishing
high-speed communication in disaster recovery areas or over difficult terrains,
linking Earth stations and low-orbit satellites, providing ultra-secure inter
vessel connections, or supporting high-speed data links in urban areas. Although
the information capacity of free-space optical communications is inherently
higher since information is carried by frequencies from optical domain, there is
need to investigate more comprehensive solutions for additional information
capacity increase in order to advance high-speed free-space optical
communication capabilities towards their full potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is well known that higher information capacity can be enabled by exploiting
fundamental optical parameters (time, frequency, polarization, and space)
contained in a highly directed light beam. While the time, frequency, and
polarization properties have been analyzed and understood in detail, theoretical
and practical use of the spatial dimension is not fully explored. The goal of
this project is to investigate free-space optical communication schemes by
utilizing both frequency and space properties through their parallel employment
within a single propagating light beam. Although this approach is highly
promising, propagation through the turbulent atmosphere can drastically degrade
the signal quality and thus reduce the information capacity. Therefore, an
innovative approach is needed to advance solutions that can increase the
information capacity and compensate for these turbulence effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal technical objective of the proposed project
is advancement of technologically innovative multidimensional schemes that
increase the information capacity of free-space optical communication systems.
For that purpose, creation and propagation of spatial orbital angular momentum-
based modes to carry an optimized number of spectral components will be
explored. In parallel, modulation, coding, detection, and compensation schemes
and algorithms that would maximize the information capacity of free-space
optical communication channel will be investigated. This approach is
transformative in nature since it brings multidimensional character to design of
free-space optical communication channels. The key challenge in this task will
be suppression and minimization of the mutual interaction between spatial modes
due to the impact of air turbulence, which would otherwise cause unacceptable
crosstalk and limit the channel capacity. For this purpose, a rigorous
theoretical framework for the multidimensional free-space optical communication
channel will be developed and experimentally verified. It will be used to lay
down the crosstalk mitigation research tasks in both optical and electrical
domains to counter the effects of long-term temporal correlation. A novel
architecture that combines adaptive compensation of wave-front phase distortions
with advanced detection and coding schemes and algorithms will be developed to
suppress the impact of impairments caused by clear-air turbulence phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will help to transform high-speed free-space
optical communication technologies in the United States by advancing the
understanding and practicality of entirely novel communication schemes with a
significant economic potential. In addition, the tight and creative
interdisciplinary integration of knowledge and expertise in information theory
and photonic technology will highly benefit undergraduate and graduate students
at the University of Arizona, as well as those in the industrial research and
development community.