* 1500448
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing for Ecological Speciation with Phylogeographic Data
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Frank Burbrink, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 16,226.00

The various processes involved in the formation of species are not well
understood. One of the leading hypotheses, ecological speciation, proposes that
populations of the same species living in different regions will diverge over
time in response to differing environments. Eventually these changes will
accumulate, resulting in the formation of different species. This research will
test the hypothesis of ecological speciation by studying multiple species of
snakes in the Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts where it has been shown that
closely populations in the two regions have divergent DNA sequences. Using a
combination of genomic DNA sequence data, anatomy, morphology, and climate data,
researchers will test whether predictions from ecological speciation account for
differences observed between these recently diverged populations. This research
will train one graduate student and provide undergraduate students with early
training in molecular evolutionary studies and diverse laboratory techniques.
Data collected from the research will be used to design a new course for
graduate students, who can then apply similar methods to address their own
research questions in systematics and evolutionary
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ecological speciation hypothesis states that
reproductive isolation is a byproduct of natural selection on divergent
ecologies between species. Alternatively there are several non-ecological
mechanisms by which speciation can occur, including genetic drift, the fixation
of incompatible mutations, or sexual selection. Under the hypothesis of
ecological speciation it is expected that reproductive isolation will be
correlated with ecological differentiation. The proposed study will test for the
signature of ecological speciation in a group of snakes that share a common
phylogeographic break between the Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts. Researchers
will collect high-throughput genomic DNA sequence data and measure reproductive
isolation between pairs of sister taxa. Ecological niche models and
morphometrics will be used to measure ecological divergence between populations.
Bayesian model averaging will then be used to assess the affects of ecological
divergence and time on reproductive isolation. This research will address
whether ecological divergence is driving speciation at recent time scales, and
test its importance in generating species level diversity. Further, the study
will help to illuminate the mechanisms responsible for generating high regional
species diversity in this biodiversity hotspot.