* 1500976
* Model Theory and Difference Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Alice Medvedev, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2020
* USD 103,389.00

Logic is the study of formal reasoning rules that rely on the grammatical
structure of the statements rather than their content. Revived in the beginning
of the twentieth century to deal with some foundational issues, mathematical
logic turned out to also be useful for obtaining new results in mathematics. The
recent applications of the model theory of difference and differential algebra
to algebraic number theory are some of the most exciting examples of this.
Difference equations, like differential equations, model real-world processes
that change over time. Differential equations describe quantities that vary
continuously with time, such as the positions of planets in space, while
difference equations describe quantities that are only measured at discrete time
intervals, such as the annual GDP of a country. Difference algebra is the
abstract setting for studying difference equations; it also has applications to
the kind of algebraic number theory that underpins modern cryptography and
internet security. Medvedev proposes to study the fine structure of solution
sets of difference equations: to find algorithms for computing their dimensions
and for identifying the very special cases where it is possible to define some
kind of addition and/or multiplication on these sets.

A difference field is a field with a distinguished automorphism. The theory of
difference closed fields is supersimple, meaning that Lascar rank is a good
notion of dimension for complete types. Furthermore, the complete types of
Lascar rank 1 satisfy the Zilber Trichotomy: each is nonorthogonal to a
definable field, or nonorthogonal to a definable one-based group, or is
disintegrated. While the fieldlike case of the trichotomy is relatively easy to
identify in explicit examples, the dividing line between the grouplike and the
disintegrated cases is much less clear. Similarly, even in the relatively nice
case of groups, it is not always easy to determine the Lascar rank of a
particular type. Beginning with her PhD thesis, Medvedev has worked on these
sorts of problems, and on applications to algebraic dynamics. She is confident
that she can generalize the main theorem of her PhD thesis from curves to
higher-dimensional algebraic varieties. She has already accomplished the first
part of this in far greater generality; the last part of the original proof
should generalize easily; and the middle piece is supplied by an observation in
a paper by Chatzidakis and Hrushovski. She expects to also obtain concrete
results on the Lascar rank of certain groups G defined by systems of polynomial
difference equations. This question can be translated to the language of linear
algebra over the quasiendomorphism ring of the underlying algebraic group. For
example, when G is a subgroup of the multiplicative group of a field in
characteristic zero, this question reduces to linear algebra over the field of
rational numbers. In addition, Medvedev proposes to continue expanding her
foundational notes about difference schemes defined by Hrushovski in his work on
the model theory of Frobenius automorphisms, filling in many missing detail,
adding enlightening examples, and reorganizing the presentation to make it
(more) understandable. Medvedev expects to continue involving students in this
work, encouraging logicians and algebraic geometers to learn each other's
languages when they are still young.