* 1500375
* CyberWatch West: Securing the Cyber West
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Dan Manson, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,463,827.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. To address these needs, CyberWatch West (CWW;
http://cyberwatchwest.org), an Advanced Technological Education (ATE) regional
center, will continue its activities that are strengthening and expanding
cybersecurity education in the Western region of the United States. This area is
home to many high-tech companies, utilities, government agencies, and nonprofit
organizations, which need a healthy supply of employees with cybersecurity
knowledge and skills at all levels. CWW's cybersecurity education programs,
hands-on cyber competitions and training workshops, approaches to faculty and
student development, and industry engagement initiatives are proven models that
should be shared broadly across the West and the nation. In cooperation with
industry and government partners, CWW will educate students to fill thousands of
job openings in cybersecurity and will thereby address national needs for the
security of critical infrastructure, defense, healthcare, and
commerce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CWW was previously funded through NSF Awards
DUE-1104278 and DUE-1361636. The center's mission is to strengthen the
cybersecurity workforce in the Western United States by providing solutions to
address the limited resources at community colleges through innovative
curriculum development; building an online community for faculty professional
growth and mentoring; creating a developmental pathway of competitions that
facilitate growth of students' cybersecurity skills; and supporting other
efforts at the state, regional, and national levels to develop and disseminate
cybersecurity programs. The center will disseminate its model cybersecurity
education programs throughout a 14-state region; expand curriculum development,
faculty professional development, and student development opportunities; and
strengthen and sustain industry partnerships to ensure up-to-date curricula as
well as student internships and employment. In particular, CWW will support
institutions seeking the National Center of Academic Excellence in Information
Assurance 2-Year Education (CAE2Y) designation. The center will develop model
curricula that meet CAE2Y Knowledge Unit (KU) criteria and National Initiative
for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) criteria addressing workforce readiness.
Expanding CWW's past work on "2 + 2 + 2" educational pathways, the center will
develop a cybersecurity Transfer Model Curriculum (TMC) to facilitate automatic
transfer for California community college students to universities in the
California State University system. CWW will further serve college faculty in
the region by addressing new topics and content in cybersecurity via webinars,
workshops, the CWW website, and an innovative faculty mentoring program.