* 1500389
* Ergodic Theory of Nonamenable Group Actions
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2015,09/30/2019
* Lewis Bowen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2019
* USD 373,411.00

Classical dynamics studies how systems change in time. Ergodic theory focuses on
the statistical behavior of dynamical systems. Applications of ergodic theory
are widespread: from traffic modelling to aerospace engineering and population
dynamics. It is natural and of practical importance to generalize the role of
time in a dynamical system to more complicated groups of symmetries. This
generalized notion of dynamics leads to applications in statistical mechanics,
number theory, and geometry. However, new tools are needed, especially in the
particular case when the group of symmetries is non nonamenable, which means
that boundary phenomena are too significant to be safely ignored (unlike
intervals in the integers or real numbers). Nonamenable groups naturally arise
in many parts of mathematics, such as geometry and number theory. This project
is concerned with developing the tools needed to analyze the ergodic theory of
nonamenable group actions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are five specific goals.
The first is to continue developing sofic entropy theory. This is a vast
generalization of Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy to actions of sofic groups, a class
of groups that contains all amenable groups and residually finite groups. One
major aim of this research is to determine to what extent Ornstein theory can be
extended beyond actions of amenable groups. The second goal is to establish
pointwise ergodic theorems for geometrically defined groups (e.g. Lie groups,
CAT(0) cubulated groups, relatively hyperbolic groups) using techniques recently
discovered by the PI and Amos Nevo. The third goal is to import tools from
geometric group theory into the study of measured equivalence relations. The
fourth goal is to continue to analyzing the structure of the space of weak
equivalence classes of actions of a given group. This space serves as a
classifying object for the ways in which the Rokhlin Lemma fails for nonamenable
groups. Because the Rokhlin Lemma is of crucial importance in Ornstein theory,
this topic is intimately connected with the first goal. The fifth goal is to
continue clarifying what the space of stationary actions of a given group "looks
like.'' One major focus is on new constructions of stationary actions (via
invariant random subgroups or measured equivalence relations). Another is on
generic behavior of stationary actions. Yet another is to apply the new
techniques to the study of harmonic functions and random walks; topics deeply
connected with stationary actions.