* 1500519
* North Carolina LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program at NCA&amp;T (2015-2017)
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Sanjiv Sarin, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2018
* USD 986,982.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. For the U.S. to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it
taps into the talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University (NCA&amp;T), a Historically
Black University and lead institution for the North Carolina LSAMP (NCLSAMP),
will serve as the host institution for the 2015-2017 cohort of BD Fellows. The
NCLSAMP BD Program is designed to assist students' academic and social
integration into the graduate school culture through a structured advisement and
mentoring model. The strategies employed will contribute to the goal of
increasing the quantity of well-trained, highly-skilled STEM professionals from
underrepresented groups. Ultimately, these efforts would enhance diversity and
representation in academia and the STEM workforce, thereby increasing the
nation's competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives of the BD
Program at NCA&amp;T are to recruit nationally a cohort of 12 former LSAMP
students into STEM graduate programs at NCA&amp;T and demystify the graduate
degree process through intensive academic enrichment, professional development,
involvement in faculty-led research, and mentoring. The activities, which are
designed to assist the successful transition and retention of the BD Fellows,
include: (i) regularly scheduled meetings with BD staff; (ii) financial support
to attend and participate in professional meetings and seminars; (iii) active
engagement in research during the academic year and summer; (iv) presentations
at national conferences; (v) visitations to graduate research laboratories at
other research-intensive institutions; and (vi) intensive preparation for
application to selected STEM doctoral degree programs.