* 1500222
* PFI:AIR - TT:  BaTiO3 Photonic Crystal Electro-optic Devices for 50 GHz Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Zhifu Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 204,802.00

This PFI Accelerating Innovation Technology Project focuses on the development
of a prototype Photonic crystal (PhC) electro-optic modulator for ultra-high
bandwidth optical systems. This is important because in the future,
communication and cyber systems will require optical subsystems with ultra-high
transmission rates due to the connectivity requirements of data centers,
residential systems, mobile smartphones, and smart network communications. The
optical modulator is a key piece of optical systems and at present is the
component that limits the data transmission rates. This project focuses on
developing a working, packaged prototype optical modulator based on barium
titanate (BaTiO3) ferroelectric oxide thin films with a bandwidth of 50 GHz,
which is 25% higher than the current state of the art technology based on
Lithium niobate (LiNbO3). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium niobate (LiNbO3) has
been established as the electro-optic material of choice for optical modulators
due to its relatively high electro-optic (EO) coefficient. However, it has a
high dielectric constant at microwave frequencies, which limits the bandwidth of
conventional modulators to 40 gigahertz (GHz) or less. Approaches based on
silicon, indium phosphide and polymeric materials have been widely investigated
to solve this major challenge and although progress has been made, a number of
significant challenges in speed and power required remain. This project takes an
alternative approach by using BaTiO3 ferroelectric oxide thin films with
experimentally demonstrated electro-optic (EO) coefficients more than an order
of magnitude higher than that of LiNbO3. In this project, packaged EO modulators
with photonic crystal waveguide structure will be developed. Devices will be
fabricated using vapor phase epitaxial deposition, and both conventional
photolithography and focused ion beam milling. The BaTiO3 thin film platform has
numerous competitive advantages over other platforms for optical modulator
applications such as (1) Large EO coefficient, ten times higher compared to
those of LiNbO3 devices dominating optical modulator markets; (2) Low driving
voltage thus low power consumption; (3) Ultrahigh bandwidth higher than 50 GHz
demonstrated with potential reaching sub-THz regime; (4) potential for
integration with Si electronics leading to ultrahigh compact electro-optical
components at low cost. By using a BaTiO3 thin film platform with non-linear
photonic crystals, significant improvements in bandwidth, operating voltage, and
size are expected compared to conventional devices. A working packaged,
prototype 50 GHz bandwidth modulator, 1mm long, will be demonstrated. The
project will involve training of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in
photonic crystal design as well as offering experiences with technology transfer
through the development and demonstration of the prototype.