* 1500759
* Langlands Reciprocity and Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Freydoon Shahidi, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

This research project concerns reciprocity laws, which are correspondences
between different sets of objects preserving certain quantities, each defined by
separate means. Reciprocity laws are found in abundance in many disciplines,
ranging from mathematics and physics to engineering, network theory, and social
sciences. The two sets of objects may a priori have no way of seeing each other
and that makes such laws truly fascinating. One of the deepest examples of
reciprocity are those appearing in number theory, a rather general form of which
is due to Artin and Langlands, for which the famous "Quadratic Reciprocity Law"
is just a first example.

Such reciprocity laws suggest an indexing of certain presentations of "Galois
groups" by complex matrices, objects of arithmetic nature, with infinite
dimensional presentations of general linear groups over local fields, objects of
analytic nature, preserving certain complex functions (root numbers and
L-functions) attached to them by totally separate means. An important part of
this project is to show that this reciprocity is robust by developing an
approach to establishing this equality for all such factors. More precisely,
this project suggests an approach to establishing the equality of certain Artin
factors (Artin root numbers and L-functions) with those obtained from analytic
methods, e.g., those coming from Langlands-Shahidi method. These will carry
information from one side to the other including equality of conductors, root
numbers and possibly R-groups. There will be consequences in representation
theory and automorphic forms such as many cases of tempered L-packet and its
converse, generic A-packet conjectures, as well as normalization of intertwining
operators by means of Artin factors as demanded by Arthur and Langlands and the
conjecture of Lapid and Mao as well as others. As another project, one hopes to
obtain results on p-adic L-functions by means of Fourier coefficients of
Eisenstein series where their complex versions show up. Certain intertwining
relations for covering groups will also be established, as well as study of
Weyl's law by means of twisted trace formula as part of a student doctorate
thesis. The project suggests training of graduate students through teaching
courses, mentoring, and advising.