* 1500538
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Study of the Plasma Physics of Antihydrogen Generation and Trapping
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jonathan Wurtele, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The long-term goals of this research address the very basis of our understanding
of the world around us. Potentially, it has deep implications on the nature of
particle interactions, on the question of matter-antimatter symmetry, and on
cosmology. At the same time, this research is uniquely visible because the study
of antimatter is accessible and fascinating to the public. Antihydrogen
experiments are sufficiently simple that they can be comprehended in their
entirety by graduate students. Consequently, they offer students a broad
education. Experimental students learn beam and plasma physics, experimental
planning and design, instrumentation, electronics, cryogenics, magnetics and
software development. Along with theory development, theory students can make
critical contributions to the design, operation, and analysis of the
experiments. The relative accessibility of the material makes it easy to
integrate undergraduate students into both the experimental and theoretical
program. The research includes significant participation by members of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is primarily focused
on the immediate plasma and atomic physics issues surrounding improving the
trapping of antihydrogen, and on the design of a third generation trap optimized
for gravitational research. The physics issues will be studied with experiments
at Berkeley and at CERN, with classical trajectory Monte Carlo, molecular
dynamics, Vlasov codes and 3D Particle-In-Cell codes, and with analytic theory.
Some of the questions that will be addressed include: achieving improved (lower)
lepton and antiproton temperatures; studying how leptons interact with the
background radiation field; studying how leptons interact with resonant
cavities; improved plasma diagnostics; and improved mixing of positrons and
antiprotons, so that more of the resultant antihydrogen can be held in a very
shallow neutral trap. While the motivation for seeking answers to these
questions comes from antihydrogen research, many of these questions raise novel
and deep issues in plasma and atomic physics. This research is co-sponsored by
the NSF's Physics Division and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.