* 1500750
* Dynamical Developments:  A Conference in Complex Dynamics and Teichmuller Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Sarah Koch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 49,950.00

This award supports the participation of U.S.-based researchers in the
international conference "Dynamical Developments: A Conference in Complex
Dynamics and Teichmüller theory," taking place August 17-21, 2015, at Jacobs
University in Bremen, Germany. Dynamical systems are all around us: the motion
of the planets, the weather, the stock market, and the ecosystems in which we
live. These systems depend on a variety of parameters, and as these parameters
change, the corresponding system is affected. Often, "complexifying" a dynamical
system and its corresponding parameter space, that is, regarding the salient
quantities as complex numbers rather than (the more highly restricted) real
numbers, leads to new insights and tools for investigating the underlying
mathematics. Complex dynamics is a very active field that has experienced
tremendous progress over the past few decades. This conference will bring
together a diverse group of participants, ranging from various experts in these
fields to younger researchers who are beginning their studies, for an intense
and focused meeting to discuss exciting new developments, ideas, and directions
for the subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex dynamics has thrived over the past
25 years. This period of development has led to deep results on certain one-
parameter model families (quadratic polynomials, for example). The time is ripe
for the subject to advance to a more general theory, which will inevitably
involve related fields such as Teichmüller theory, moduli spaces, dynamics in
several complex variables, self-similar groups, arithmetic dynamics, symbolic
dynamics, hyperbolic and algebraic geometry, and statistical physics. The
conference will feature presentations by leading experts in complex dynamics and
Teichmüller theory and will provide ample time for discussions. In addition to
the formal scientific program, this conference will have two aspects less common
to current mathematics conferences: there will be a young researchers seminar in
which more junior participants can share their work with the community of
mathematicians attending the conference, and there will be a computer program
tutorial, showcasing some of the latest software used in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site : http://www-
personal.umich.edu/~kochsc/H70.html