* 1500368
* Illinois LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at the University of Illinois at Chicago (2015-2017)
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2018
* LeRoy Jones II, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2018
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. For the U.S. to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it
taps into the talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. BD
programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher education contribute
to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, namely to
"integrate education and research to support development of a diverse STEM
workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." The Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (ILSAMP) is led by Chicago State University, which is
a Predominantly Black University and will host the 2015-2017 cohort of BD
Fellows, with the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) as the main
implementation campus. UIC will offer a comprehensive program that includes
rigorous academic preparation and research training experiences as well as
mentorship and professional development activities. Since the strategies
implemented at UIC will result in the production of well-trained, highly-skilled
STEM Professionals from underrepresented groups, the project will contribute
significantly to increasing the diversity and representation in academia and the
STEM workforce, thereby ensuring the nation's global competitiveness.

Since starting in 2006, the ILSAMP BD at UIC has produced 22 STEM PhDs out of
its 42 fellows from three cohorts. The Illinois LSAMP BD Program at UIC will
continue to produce more STEM PhDs following the four primary objectives of the
program: 1. To recruit twelve highly motivated students from LSAMP campuses
across the nation; 2. To prepare matriculating BD Fellows to study and train
towards the PhD; 3. To facilitate activities that will encourage BD Fellows to
persist in PhD studies; and 4. To implement a series of activities designed to
enhance the education and training of ILSAMP BD Fellows and help them transition
to postdoctoral fellowships, placement in the academy, or other positions
requiring doctoral level STEM education.