* 1500220
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  CREATING AN AUDIO-VISUAL CORPUS OF SCOTTISH GAIDHLIG TO PRESERVE AND INVESTIGATE LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Michael Hammond, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2018
* USD 166,982.00

Scottish Gaelic, a Celtic language closely related to Irish and Welsh and more
distantly to English, was once spoken across Scotland by most of the country's
population. Today, however, Gaelic remains a community language only in the most
remote regions of western Scotland. Gaelic speakers comprise about 1% of the
Scottish population; the 2011 census found only 57,375 native speakers, compared
to 250,000 a century earlier. This sharp decline makes the language's continued
survival uncertain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scottish Gaelic is of immense interest
because it possesses many rare linguistic features, including initial consonant
mutation where a word-initial consonant can be changed depending on what the
function of that word is in a clause. Scottish Gaelic also exhibits pre-
aspirated consonants, and verb-initial sentence structure. In addition, Scottish
Gaelic offers remarkable examples of how knowledge systems particular to its
local geography and climate (land management, fishing techniques) are imbedded
in the language. Should Gaelic become extinct, the global community -- not just
Scotland -- will lose an irreplaceable cultural and scientific resource.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this two-year project for $189,457, Professors Ian
Clayton from the University of Nevada, Reno along with Andrew Carnie and Mike
Hammond from the University of Arizona will create a corpus of linguistic
interviews with 30 native Gaelic speakers, with the help of native speaker
Muriel Fisher (recipient of the Linguistic Society of America's 2015 Excellence
in Community Linguistics Award). Speakers will represent a range of ages,
geographic origins, and professional backgrounds. The collection will contain
more than twenty hours of high-quality audio-visual material, transcribed and
translated, with both cultural and scientific value. The collection will offer
an invaluable tool to help linguists expand their scientific study of the
language's rare features. In addition, the interviews will focus on traditional
occupations, folklore, and oral history, the kinds of knowledge and terminology
most at risk as Gaelic declines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When complete, the corpus
will be publically available through the Max Planck Institute's Language
Archive, and the University of Arizona's Open Repository.