* 1500236
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Developing an Engineering Prototype for Ultra-Low-Cost Blood Coagulation Diagnostics Using Paper-based Microfluidics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Giovanni Pauletti, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 281,532.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating capillary-
based paper microfluidics to fill the need for ultra-low-cost blood coagulation
diagnostics. The diagnostic device is important for patients who receive blood
thinner medication because of cardiovascular disease. These patients require
constant blood coagulation analysis in order to monitor the efficacy of the
anticoagulation medication. If the anticoagulant drug level is too low, the risk
of blood clot formation is high. Conversely, if the drug level is too high
severe bleeding (hemorrhage) can occur. Conventional hospital- or lab-based
coagulation measurement is expensive and time consuming. The project will result
in the development of engineering prototypes of simple paper-based diagnostic
screening devices with several unique features: rapid indication of blood
coagulation status; ease of use, with no other apparatus needed, thus allowing
patient-operated home use; ultra-low-cost allowing one time use and preventing
contamination; fast response time. These features provide significant cost
savings compared to the leading competing blood coagulation portable measurement
systems, thus greatly expanding the availability of point-of-care testing to
currently underserved segment of the population.

This project addresses technology gaps in using blood samples with paper-based
lateral flow assays (LFA) as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. This includes specific design of test kits (LFA
materials and cassettes) for use of small blood sample volume, enhanced
sensitivity to coagulation conditions, low-cost manufacturability. A major
consideration is the development of industrial-quality manufacturing processes,
with particular consideration to reproducible fluid flow in the LFA
nitrocellulose (NC) membranes. The geometrical definition of the NC membrane by
mechanical cutting will be compared to a laser milling approach. In addition,
personnel involved in this project (research assistant and research associate)
will receive entrepreneurship and technology translation experiences through the
Center for Entrepreneurship & Commercialization at the University of Cincinnati.

The project engages with industrial partners in this technology translation
effort from research discovery toward commercial reality. Meridian Bioscience
Inc. will provide guidance with overall prototype engineering, evaluation of
product costs, regulatory requirements. Specific assistance with the design and
optimization of the LFA unit will be provided by Diagnostic Consulting Network
Inc.