* 1500271
* PFI:AIR - TT:  High-Rate High-Powered Pulsed Magnetron Sputtering (HPPMS) Prototype Development
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2017
* David Ruzic, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 222,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a new
magnetic field configuration used in physical vapor deposition to large-scale
rectangular cathodes used for many applications. The TriPAC magnetic arrangement
is important because it allows a new type of high-power pulsed magnetron
sputtering (HPPMS) to achieve the same deposition rates as conventional
sputtering sources. The project will result in a higher quality coatings (less
stress, higher density, better adhesion) broadly impacting many different
industries and research areas- from consumer items (razor blades) to energy
production (photovoltaics) to semiconductors (displays) to decorative coatings
(bathroom faucets). The advantage of the innovation is the way the new magnetic
field is generated, using only permanent magnets, and the whole assembly can fit
into the standard design of magnetrons where conventional magnet assemblies are
positioned. These features will allow easy adoption in the market place and will
allow HPPMS to be used in a cost-effective manner compared to the standard
magnet packs currently in use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. This new magnetic field topology works better than
current magnetic fields because it allows plasma to expand further from cathode
and provides a less steep potential drop. With this new electric field
orientation, ionized sputtered material is more directed towards substrate to be
coated and utilized for film deposition in larger quantities than with the
conventional magnetic field configuration. The average incident atom energy is
also increased, further improving film densification and making the HPPMS
technique more attractive for thin-film coatings. In addition, personnel
involved in this project, undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students,
will receive technology translation experiences through seeing this invention
turn into a commercial product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages
Starfire Industries Inc., a small business specializing in bridging the "valley
of death" to take the design which works in the research lab and turn it into a
manufacturable product, and the Kurt J. Lesker Company - a large leading firm in
this area. This partnership will enable the technology translation effort from a
research discovery toward a commercial reality.