* 1500286
* Operationalization of Visualization via Deconstruction
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Maria Oliver-Hoyo, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 258,769.00

Because chemistry explores phenomena that can be observed with the senses, but
are explained based on the molecular-level behavior of invisible molecules,
atoms, and ions, effective use of visual representations of molecular-level
phenomena is essential for communicating about chemistry. Research also shows
that there is a positive relationship between the ability to see chemical
concepts among different representations and successful chemistry problem
solving. Chemistry instructors may sometimes assume that, as their instruction
addresses conceptual understanding, students' visualization skills will
naturally develop. Consequently, instructors may not explicitly teach
visualization skills and processes in their courses. This Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education project will develop and test a set of ten modules
to explicitly teach visualization skills and the use of visual representations
to students in college chemistry courses. The modules will support students in
understanding progressively more complex content and visual representations
across the chemistry curriculum.

Each of the ten modules will be developed, pilot tested, revised, and ultimately
implemented in an upper-division chemistry course. In developing the modules,
three main mechanisms will be employed to support students development of
visualization skills: drawing attention to prominent features and patterns to
reduce attention to extraneous information and cognitive load, decomposing a
complex problem into more manageable parts, and problematizing to encourage
students to make their ideas and thinking processes explicit. During the pilot-
testing phase, the main data sources will include the copies of students' work
on the activities and recorded sessions from focus groups. Analyses of these
data will employ a drawing to learn framework to assess visualization objectives
and an argumentation framework to assess problematization. In addition, the
selection of representations included in the module activities will be evaluated
for areas of visual attention using eye-tracking methodologies in conjunction
with a retrospective think-aloud method. Once the modules have been pilot tested
and revised, they will be implemented as a set during a one-semester
intervention, scaffolding both chemistry content and visual complexity in
representations. A rubric will be developed to track students' progress in the
use of deconstruction as a problem solving strategy and sophistication in
verbalization of visual mental constructs. Quantitative data from pre- and post-
test scores on two standardized visualization tools will complement
documentation of visualization gains, and the impact of the intervention on
student achievement will be determined. Ultimately, the project will provide
faculty with robust instructional materials that they can use in their
classrooms to promote visualization and effective problem solving in chemistry.