* 1500670
* Dynamics with a combinatorial flavor
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Bryna Kra, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 180,000.00

A collection of objects whose changes are governed by a deterministic, time-
independent update rule is called a dynamical system. Many dynamical systems are
too complicated to be understood locally, but nonetheless we can predict global
properties of the long term behavior of these systems. The overall goal of this
project is to use the properties of certain dynamical systems to answer
questions motivated by problems in combinatorics and computer science, and to
obtain a deeper understanding of the connections among such diverse fields. The
research component of the project will be supplemented by mentoring, advising,
conference organization and giving lectures on mathematics for a general
audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigator plans building on
past results in multiple recurrence and convergence, further understanding the
connections to nilpotent groups and the dynamical systems that can be defined on
their homogeneous spaces (nilsystems). Such systems play a key role in
understanding the limiting behavior of multiple ergodic averages and the PI
proposes research to extend our knowledge of their role. The PI proposes
building on past results concerning symbolic and topological dynamics to further
understand relations between complexity, periodicity, and automorphism groups of
shift systems. While most of the problems proposed are within dynamics, the
research has strong relations to problems in combinatorics, number theory, and
computer science. The PI will continue to explore these deep links, developing
applications to these other areas and making use of recent advances in these
other areas to address problems within dynamics.