* 1500850
* Conformal invariance and the renormalization group in some critical systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Thomas Kennedy, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2020
* USD 361,417.00

Many models in physics are inherently discrete at the very smallest scale
(typically the size of an atom) and there is inherent randomness at this
discrete level. At the macroscopic level the randomness is typically not seen.
But under certain conditions this randomness manifests itself at the macroscopic
scale. This is known as a critical phenomena. For example, the spins in a
magnetic material have randomness in their orientation. At a certain temperature
these spins can align with each other to produce macroscopic magnetic domains
that play a crucial role in technological applications such as hard drives. The
randomness seen at the macroscopic scale often does not depend on the details of
the microscopic randomness. In physics this is called universality and has
developed into a key idea in the understanding of critical phenomena. The
renormalization group is set of methods from physics that has become the basis
for the modern understanding of both critical phenomena and of quantum field
theory - the theory of elementary particles. Despite the tremendous success of
the renormalization group in physics, we do not have a deep mathematical
understanding of this set of ideas. This research will further the mathematical
development and understanding of this set of ideas and methods and use them to
understand the mathematics of critical phenomena in models such as self-avoiding
random walks and Ising models of magnetic spins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of
the research will be devoted to random walk models and Ising-type models. The
smart kinetic walk (also known as a limiting case of the Laplacian-b random
walk) is a dynamic model for self-avoiding walks. On the hexagonal lattice it is
closely related to percolation. Percolation methods have been used to prove its
scaling limit is the Schramm-Loewner evolution with parameter value 6. The
research will study this scaling limit on other lattices and for generalizations
of the transition probabilities. The goal is to understand the universality of
this scaling limit. For the ordinary random walk the scaling limit of the exit
distribution for a domain is harmonic measure. Another goal of the research is
to understand the first order correction for this convergence for both the
ordinary random walk and the smart kinetic walk. The research will also study
real space renormalization groups for Ising type models, in particular exact
renormalization group transformations in one and two dimensions. These
transformation have the potential advantage that the map would act on a finite
dimensional space. The goal is to prove that the map can be rigorously defined
and then take advantage of the finite dimensional nature to prove existence of a
fixed point and all the exciting consequences that follow from this existence.
Finally the research will study Schramm-Loewner evolution as a renormalization
group fixed point. This stochastic process is known to be the scaling limit of
many critical models. The goal here is to define a renormalization group map
that has this process as a fixed point and then use this map to understand
models that are near criticality.