* 1500204
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Ultra-fast electro-optical switching of nematic liquid crystals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Suguna Rachakonda, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 12/31/2016
* USD 202,198.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating two recently
discovered effects to fill the need for fast switching of liquid crystal (LC)
electro-optic devices. Fast switching of light propagation is of prime
importance in applications such as optical communications and computing as it
allows one to process larger amounts of information within a shorter period of
time. The two discovered effects are the Nanosecond Electrically Modified Order
Parameter (NEMOP), in which the electric field is used to alter the refractive
indices of the LC rather than to reorient the optic axis as in standard approach
used so far, and the polymer-induced modification of the order parameter that
allows one to enhance the amplitude of the switched optical birefringence. The
NEMOP-based technology has the following unique features: the switching time of
optical properties is on the order of nanoseconds and tens of nanoseconds;
moreover, the switching-on and switching-off responses are equally fast. These
features provide the advantages when compared to the leading competing LC
switches based on reorientation of the optic axis, as the nanosecond switching
is million times faster than the current industry standard of a few
milliseconds.

The NEMOP-based technology brings a new paradigm in the development of LC
devices by utilizing microscopic effects of molecular alignment instead of
macroscopic reorientation. This project addresses the following technology gaps:
relatively high operating voltages (hundreds of volts) and moderate (10-3-10-2)
modulation of the effective refractive index, as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. The researchers will overcome the gaps
by a synergy of approaches: (a) polymer modification of the LC materials to
increase the amplitude of switching; (b) exploration of LC structure-property
relationships in order to enhance the optical response and lower the driving
field; (c) design of electro-optic cells that increases the pathway of light
propagation. The main commercial target is communication industry where cheap
and light-weight LC optical and infrared modulators with nanosecond response
times would be of great value. In addition, personnel involved in this project
includes several graduate students, who will receive innovation and
entrepreneurship experiences through the cutting-edge research, targeted
development of the technology to the commercialization level, and through
participation in the NSF I-Corps program.