* 1500535
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Reassessing the role of the Great American Biotic Interchange in the evolution of the raccoon family
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Larry Rockwood, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2017
* USD 16,549.00

The Great American Biotic Interchange (GABI) was a major biogeographic event
that connected the terrestrial animal communities of North and South America via
the closure of the Panamanian Isthmus. Geological evidence and the fossil record
have suggested that the closure of the isthmus occurred 3 million years ago
(mya), but more recent studies suggest a much older age for the formation of a
landbridge between North and South America, around 15 mya. Among mammals of
North American origin, the raccoon family (Procyonidae), which also includes
coatis, kinkajous, olingos, and ringtails, has one of the longest histories in
South America. The fossil record shows that an extinct member of this group was
the first North American mammal to immigrate to South America, approximately 7-9
mya. While the prevailing hypothesis states that immigration of modern members
of this group took place 3 mya, recent estimates based on DNA sequence data
revealed that this family has had a much longer tenure in South America. This
study will more thoroughly test competing hypotheses regarding the process and
timing of evolution of this group, with the potential to revise our
understanding of mammal evolution in the Neotropics, while contributing to
advancement in the fields of genomics, systematics, taxonomy, and biogeography,
as well as promoting the professional development of an early-career female STEM
researcher.

This project will use an integrative approach to test competing hypotheses based
on genomic analyses of museum specimens, morphometrics, and biogeographic
modeling. Ancient DNA techniques in combination with high-throughput sequencing
methods will be used to sequence mitochondrial genomes as well as to sample the
nuclear genome using a novel intron-capture microarray. Morphometric data will
be analyzed separately and in conjunction with comparative genomic data to test
hypotheses regarding procyonid evolution and revise the taxonomy of this group.
A new biogeographic model for the evolution of the raccoon family that
accommodates the most recent DNA and geological evidence will be tested against
the traditional fossil-based hypothesis, and will integrate phylogenetic data to
reassess the tempo and geographic pattern of diversification associated with the
GABI. Results will be shared through scientific publications co-authored by the
PI, Co-PI, and collaborators. Genomic and morphological data, protocols, scripts
and parameters used in the analyses will be made publicly available through the
electronic repositories of NCBI?s Genbank and Dryad.