* 1500573
* Northwest Engineering and Vehicle Technology Exchange
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Bruce Emerson, Central Oregon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2018
* USD 199,873.00

The worldwide market for hybrid electric vehicle (HEV) and electric vehicle (EV)
is growing steadily, with the United States taking the lead with over 500,000
HEV/EVs sold in 2013. This growth compounds when considered globally, with the
forecast for the worldwide number of HEV/EVs on the in road in 2015 at 80.4
million. The west coast (Oregon, Washington and California) is the leader in
HEV/EV ownership and development with nearly one-third (32.9%) of all HEV/EVs
sales nationwide in these three states alone. This project at Central Oregon
Community College (COCC) will prepare technicians to work in advanced HEV and EV
diagnostics, maintenance, and repair. The establishment of a regional
consortium, the Advanced Vehicle Training Group Northwest, will foster
technology education opportunities for instructors and advanced automotive
technicians across the northwest region. This collaboration will set and
implement the standard for HEV/EV education. It will bring HEV/EV educational
opportunities to rural students in Central Oregon, an area with a significant
Latino and Native American population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support student learning in science and engineering technician education by
developing new curriculum aligned with Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)
standards for HEV/EV certified training programs. This will add to the
pedagogical knowledge in HEV/EV diagnostics, maintenance, and repair. In
preparation for this effort, the college has conducted extensive research on
automotive technology education gaps, has engaged in discussion with local and
regional employers, has surveyed students and employers, and has investigated
how other colleges statewide and nationally are addressing the HEV/EV education
gap. This project will build on previously successful models for constructing
alternative curricular pathways (often described as a latticed curriculum) to
provide a rich tapestry of education and training opportunities for students at
various stages of the employment cycle. It will also develop novel tools needed
for alternative certification of skills through "open badges." This national
initiative is still early in development and every implementation of the badging
process in a community college will add to the collective knowledge and
understanding of best practices in the use of open badges to build a new
curricular framework for educators in academic and industrial communities. A
comprehensive evaluation plan will measures student success by completion rates
for certifications, degrees, and badges earned. Outreach activities to
underserved populations will focus on strategies known to be effective in
reaching such students.