* 1500755
* Analyzing Siriano and Desano to Determine Universal Principles of Language Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Wilson Silva, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 180,883.00

A finely balanced linguistic ecology is needed to sustain the practice of
linguistic exogamy which ensures that marriage occurs between speakers of
different languages. These linguistic ecologies and the languages used to
sustain them can begin to breakdown as speakers transition to larger world
languages. Siriano and Desano, two languages of Northeastern Amazonia, have
traditionally been maintained through linguistic exogamic practices which are
now breaking down with the increasing influence of Brazilian Portuguese and
Spanish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wilson Silva of the Rochester Institute of
Technology will undertake a three-year study of Siriano [sir] and Desano [des]
before further influence of language contact makes this difficult. These
languages exhibit a number of typologically noteworthy features of broad
scholarly interest such nasal harmony (where nasality extends over several
segments), tone (the use of pitch for meaningful contrasts), noun classifiers
(classifying nouns grammatically in terms of universal semantic parameters), and
evidentiality (indicating what kinds of evidence are available for a given
statement). Research products will include a linguistically annotated database,
a reference grammar for Desano, audio and video documentation and preliminary
description of Siriano. Silva's research will be useful in reconstructing the
genetic relationship among languages of the Vaupés Linguistic Area to which
Desano and Siriano belong. Understanding the structures of these closely related
languages of the Eastern Tukanoan branch of the Tukanoan family will shed light
on the nature of language change through contact with other
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has strong support from the
communities and their leaders, and involves close collaboration between
researchers and community members in Colombia and Brazil where these languages
are spoken. The corpus of audiovisual and audio recordings collected as a result
of this research will be archived at the Archive of the Indigenous Language of
Latin America at the University of Texas at Austin and at the Museum of the
Indian at National Foundation of the Indian (Museu do Índio at the Fundação
Nacional do Índio), Brazil.