* 1500730
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Acquisition of Complex Chickasaw Linguistic Constructions in an Endangered Language Context
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Juliet Morgan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 17,216.00

Learners of major world languages can acquire fluency in an additional language
through formal instruction or informally through immersion in a speech
community. Formal and informal learning reflect different levels and types of
analytic and adaptive processes. Juliet Morgan under the direction of Racquel
Yamada of the University of Oklahoma will investigate the learning processes
involved in acquiring fluency in Chickasaw [cic], a Muskogean language spoken in
Oklahoma by approximately 65 fluent first language speakers, all over the age of
fifty. The project will explore learning processes in this unique case where
formal instruction and informal exposure are highly constrained due to the low
functional use of the language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Juliet Morgan will collect
data from adult learners of Chickasaw involved in the Master-Apprentice language
learning program. Developed specifically for teaching endangered languages, the
Master-Apprentice teaching method pairs a fluent elder with a learner or group
of learners who meet multiple times a week for the purpose of communicating
exclusively in the endangered language. Using ethnographic and language
documentation methodologies, Morgan will collect cross-sectional and
longitudinal data from Chickasaw apprentices. Analyzing the input and output of
these interactions, she will analyze the order of acquisition, developmental
stages, and learner varieties. Morgan will focus on how the learners' use of
morphosyntax (how they create words and sentences) and discourse (how they
organize sentence into larger linguistic units) approximates the elder's
variety. Additionally, the research will investigate how the elder fluent
speakers perceive the speech of the L2 learner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition studies of indigenous languages are rare since
fluent speakers and language teaching materials are often unavailable for
language teaching and learning to occur. Opportunities to conduct studies of
this sort are quickly declining, as the number of fluent native speakers
dwindles faster than the number of emerging fluent learners. Juliet Morgan's
research provides unparalleled access to information on learning with these
unique set of variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have
implications for the Chickasaw Nation language revitalization efforts by
providing the means to assess what is most effective in the Master-Apprentice
method.