* 1500965
* Renormalization in piecewise isometric dynamical systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* William Hooper, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2019
* USD 171,884.00

A collection of objects whose changes are governed by a time-independent update
rule is called a dynamical system. Examples are pervasive in the sciences,
including the motion of celestial bodies, weather patterns, the behavior of
fluids moving through a pipe, and chemical processes. A basic question in the
subject is to determine the behavior of such a system. So called hyperbolic
dynamical systems are a prime example of success in the field. These systems
admit a special kind of expansion and contraction, which make available certain
mathematical methods of analyzing the behavior of these systems. This project
centers on understanding systems at the opposite extreme, piecewise isometric
systems, which admit no contraction or expansion and thus force different
approaches to be used to understand these systems. These systems are typically
understood through renormalization. Renormalization is a method of looking more
and more closely at, or zooming in on, repeated behavior. Renormalization is a
major part of this project and the PI will develop new renormalization methods
and improve existing methods to understand these systems. A better understanding
of these systems will have broad consequences for our understanding of dynamical
systems as a subject. In addition to the research aims of the project, the PI
will work with students, providing mentoring and training in mathematical
research.

The PI will make contributions toward the use of renormalization to understand
dynamical phenomena in piecewise isometric dynamical systems and related
systems. Systems of interest include horocyclic flows on hyperbolic surfaces,
geodesic flows on flat manifolds, and piecewise isometric systems. Many of these
systems arise naturally through connections with low-dimensional topology and
geometry. A piecewise isometry is formed by cutting a metric space into pieces
and applying an isometry to each piece so as to reassemble the whole space.
Examples include interval exchange transformations (IETs), where the space is an
interval, which is cut into finitely many subintervals. The theory of IETs is
quite well developed and stands as a testament to the power of renormalization
methods, but in contrast, many related systems are only poorly understood. A
primary goal is to extend the applicability of renormalization methods to wider
classes of systems including polygon exchange transformations, and infinite
interval exchange transformations. New dynamical phenomena will be discovered
and rigorously studied using the renormalization methods developed by the PI.
Results produced by research in this proposal will widely disseminated through
publication in research journals and through conference presentations.