* 1500977
* Topics in Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Solomon Friedberg, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/28/2019
* USD 201,600.00

Fourier analysis implies that functions that are periodic -- for example,
quantities depending on time that repeat their previous value a fixed amount of
time later -- can be realized as sums of trigonometric functions. Functions with
more complicated, non-commutative, periodicities are at the heart of modern
number theory. A fundamental vision of Langlands predicts connections between
such functions and symmetries related to arithmetic, that is, coming from roots
of polynomial equations. This proposal is concerned with periodic functions in a
new guise, when the functions are defined not on a group but on a finite cover
of a group. This blends arithmetic and analysis in a new way. Moreover, the
techniques to be studied may have connections to constructions in mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objects of study in this project are
automorphic forms on covering groups. The principal investigator will focus
first on Eisenstein series, which are obtained by an averaging process. Many of
the standard tools from automorphic forms do not carry over (e.g. Whittaker
functionals are typically not unique), but a surprising picture blending
representation theory (canonical bases, Mirkovi\'c-Vilonen cycles) and number
theory is emerging. The principal investigator will investigate these and and
their number-theoretic applications. He also will study the residues of
metaplectic Eisenstein series, "higher theta series." There is much to be done
to understand the unipotent orbits attached to these objects, to develop
relations between such series on different groups, and to use them both globally
and in local constructions. A third project concerns unique functionals and
Iwahori Hecke algebras. It offers the potential for new constructions of unique
functionals.