* 1500685
* Topics in Symbolic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Ronald Pavlov, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 161,416.00

In the current project, the PI will explore several questions and open problems
in the area of symbolic dynamics. Dynamics is the study of closed systems whose
elements evolve over time according to deterministic rules; some examples
include planetary motion, or a particle's movement inside a box. Symbolic
dynamics is the study of dynamics where the elements in question are infinite
sequences of symbols, and the evolution over time comes from horizontally
shifting the sequence. Symbolic dynamics was introduced as a tool for studying
more complicated dynamical systems, but has become a fundamental area in its own
right, with applications and connections ranging from computer science (e.g.
data storage in binary) to statistical physics (e.g. the Ising model for
magnetism). A current area of high activity is multidimensional symbolic
dynamics, in which one considers not sequences, but multidimensional arrays of
symbols, which can be shifted in any direction. Though the core definitions and
ideas remain the same, there are remarkable changes that occur for multiple
dimensions; many questions that were easy to answer in one dimension become
quite difficult, and classes of systems whose behavior was relatively simple in
one dimension can exhibit strange and complex behaviors.

The research supported by this grant will treat a variety of problems in
symbolic dynamics, ranging from the more classical one-dimensional case to the
less well-understood multidimensional case. A common thread throughout is the
use of ideas, techniques, and viewpoints from other areas, including probability
theory, statistical physics, and percolation theory, to attack fundamental
problems. The two projects on one-dimensional symbolic dynamics propose new
directions of research about the classical notions of follower sets and the
specification property respectively. The first multidimensional project proposes
a new method for the efficient approximation of entropies of multidimensional
shifts of finite type (SFT) which, unlike existing techniques, can be used on
systems with multiple measures of maximal entropy. The final project will extend
recent work by the PI and Kevin McGoff on random multidimensional SFTs, in which
a probabilistic framework was defined where a "typically" chosen
multidimensional SFT does not exhibit the worst pathological behaviors of the
class; we now plan to use this framework to prove multidimensional probabilistic
versions of some classical one-dimensional results. All work will be
disseminated through publications in peer-reviewed journals, conference
presentations, and the author's continued collaboration with young researchers,
including his two Ph.D. students.