* 1500292
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Robust Multimaterial Chalcogenide Infrared Optical Fibers
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Ayman Abouraddy, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating advances in
the fabrication of multimaterial fibers to the production of mechanically stable
optical fibers capable of transmitting light at mid-infrared (MIR) wavelengths
for which limited commercially available optical-fiber options exist. The MIR
range of the electromagnetic spectrum has recently become accessible (due to the
development of semiconductor quantum cascade lasers) and this has opened up
exciting applications in chemical sensing, environmental monitoring, and medical
imaging. However, fully benefiting from these sensing, monitoring and imaging
opportunities requires the development of optical fibers that cover the entire
MIR spectrum, are affordable, robust, and easy to handle. This project addresses
this critical need by leveraging recent NSF-funded fundamental discoveries in
multimaterial fiber fabrication, where distinct materials are combined
monolithically in a single fiber strand. The fiber's optical properties are
dictated by an otherwise brittle MIR glass, while the superior mechanical
properties stem from a robust built-in polymer jacket. The project will result
in three distinct optical fiber prototypes packaged with standard end-
connectors. When compared to the leading competing MIR fibers in this market
space, the monolithic multimaterial optical fibers developed here will offer a
broader optical spectral transmission window, lower cost, and superior
mechanical robustness for ease of handling and
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application, addresses the technology gap in robust
optical fibers that have a transparency window covering the entire MIR spectrum
and in which the dimension of the core and the index contrast between the core
and cladding may be readily controlled. Recent breakthroughs are exploited in
one-step multimaterial preform extrusion in which a fiber preform - a
macroscopic scaled up model of the fiber - is extruded from a billet combining
MIR chalcogenide glasses and a thermoplastic polymer. The preform is provided
with a thick, built-in thermoplastic polymer jacket that is thermally compatible
with the glass and thus they may be co-drawn into a fiber. Since the glass is
sealed within the polymer, the preform is readily drawn continuously in an
ambient environment into extended fiber lengths. The project will result in
three fiber prototypes: a multimode fiber with a transmission window extending
to a wavelength of 12 microns, a single-mode fiber for transmitting up to a
wavelength of 6 microns, and high-refractive-index-contrast fiber tapers for
nonlinear applications - particularly MIR supercontinuum generation. All three
prototypes are endowed with superior mechanical properties and will be packaged
with standard optical fiber connectors to be readily used in real-world
settings. This project combines the efforts of a research scientist for
fabrication and testing along with an MBA student for market analysis. The
project co-PIs in turn combine technical and commercialization expertise and
will leverage both the unique fiber fabrication facilities at the University of
Central Florida along with business incubation and venture accelerator programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this technology translation effort will
benefit from partnering with the IRFlex Corporation, The Mid-IR Fiber Devices
Company, to assist with the transition from research discovery to commercial
reality.