* 1500513
* Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD) Cohort XI (2015 - 2017) Program
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Karen Butler-Purry, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 04/30/2018
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. For the U.S. to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it
taps into the talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. Texas
A&amp;M University, lead institution of the Texas A&amp;M University System
(TAMUS) LSAMP, will host their 11th cohort of BD Fellows. The goal of the
program is to foster academic success in a cohort of twelve first-time
underrepresented STEM graduate students by developing their readiness and
encouraging eagerness to complete STEM doctoral degrees and by preparing them to
take their place as leaders in interdisciplinary research and in academia. By
increasing the number of well-prepared and highly qualified Ph.Ds that
ultimately enter the STEM workforce, TAMUS LSAMP BTD program has the potential
to contribute significantly to the increase of this nation's economy and
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the TAMUS LSAMP BD Program
will be achieved through collaborations among the College of Science (COS), the
Dwight Look College of Engineering (COE), the College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences (COALS), and the College of Geosciences (COG) at TAMU. The five major
components of the program are (1) professional development, (2) academic support
and social integration, (3) mentoring, (4) leadership development, and (5)
student support and community building. The twelve BD Fellows with differing
STEM disciplines and a common purpose will be nurtured for two years as a
cohorted community and will share coordinated resources and intellectually
enriching group activities with each other, and also with the larger population
of STEM graduate students at TAMU, for the benefit of all. The objectives of the
program include (1) retention of fellows into doctoral programs with funding
after completion of the two-year NSF BD program, (2) preparation of fellows to
meet the challenges of completing STEM doctoral programs and for possible
academic careers in higher education, and (3) leadership skill development
necessary to succeed as young STEM professionals upon completion of doctoral
programs of study. Out of the 60 BD fellows supported in the first five cohorts
at TAMU, 26 have completed their Ph.Ds. in STEM and 12 are progressing well
towards the doctoral degree.