* 1500714
* Documenting Linguistic Structure and Language Change in Yawarana
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Spike Gildea, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 325,248.00

It is known that language change is inevitable and systematic and that
genetically related languages often exhibit parallel changes. The Cariban
languages, which constitute one of the largest linguistic families of South
America, are a good testing ground for this expectation since closely related
Cariban languages often show dissimilar changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spike
Gildea of the University of Oregon along with linguist Natalia Cáceres and
lexicographer Marie-Claude Mattei Muller will document a critically endangered
Cariban language Yawarana [yar]. Extant data for Yawarana show surprising
phonological differences (e.g., syllable reduction, stress) with closely related
languages, Mapoyo and 'Pémono. In addition, there are dramatic differences in
morphosyntax (e.g., case alignment, verbal conjugations) between Yawarana,
Mapoyo, and 'Pémono and their Cariban neighbors Panare, 'Tamanaku, and Ye'kwana.
Particularly striking are differences between main clause verb forms resulting
from nominalizations (like English 'eating' or 'eater' based on 'eat') or a
participial (like English 'eaten' based on 'eat'). All languages change, and
some entirely replace verb conjugations with nominalizations and participles,
but it is unusual for a language or language group to have made so complete a
change when the nearest related languages have not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
investigate these and additional grammatical features of Yawarana, this team
will work with the last speakers of the language to produce a state-of-the-art
documentary corpus, including audio and video recordings of Yawarana speech with
annotations and analysis of speech samples. The final products will include a
reference grammar and a Yawarana-Spanish bilingual dictionary. The resulting
data will elucidate the nature of language change in Cariban and will have
implications for theories of language change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gildea and
his team will collaborate with the Venezuelan Ministry of Education in their
efforts to produce educational materials about the Yawarana language for use in
speech community schools. The documentary corpus created for this project will
be archived at the Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America
(University of Texas).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by co-funds
from the National Science Foundation's International Science and Engineering
Office.