* 1500933
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Hybrid zone formation and comparative genomic divergences in South American lizards (Iguania: Liolaemidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Adam Leache, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,304.00

Hybrid zones are geographical areas where hybrid offspring have mixed genetic
composition and physical appearances compared to their parent
populations/species. By studying genomic divergence in hybrid zones, researchers
can better understand which differences are responsible for the formation of new
species, and also the genomic regions that separate species. Such knowledge is
relevant to many fields beyond systematics, including ecology, conservation
biology, and even agriculture. This research project focuses on species within
the South American lizard genus, Liolaemus, and uses genomic tools to
investigate the age of hybrid zones, how they form, and how natural and sexual
selection maintain genetic boundaries. Although many hybrid zones have been
studied in northern temperate systems, southern temperate systems have received
comparatively little attention. This research will train one graduate student in
diverse systematic methods and undergraduates in field, laboratory and
analytical methods. The project will also enhance international scientific
infrastructure through collaborations with Argentinian researchers. Results from
this research will be broadly disseminated through displays and presentations at
the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture in Seattle, WA.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate hybridization and comparative
species divergences across three species pairs in the Liolaemus fitzingerii
group. In part, the hypothesis will be tested that these hybrid zones have
formed due to secondary contact following post-glacial range expansions
approximately 12,000 years ago. Genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
data will be generated using the restriction site-associated DNA sequencing
(RADseq) method to estimate the genetic and geographic transitions between
species in three separate hybrid zones. SNP data will also be used to estimate
evolutionary relationships and delimit species. Aligning the SNP data to an
annotated genome will enable the identification of regions of the genome that
are involved in maintaining species boundaries in this group. Together, these
data will shed new light on the genomic changes that occur within hybrid zones,
and provide novel insights into the mechanisms driving the formation of new
species.