* 1500367
* Solidification Cracking in Welds of Aluminum Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Sindo Kou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,243.00

Non-Technical Abstract Aluminum alloys are increasingly used for vehicle weight
reduction, and arc welding is the most versatile process for welding them.
However, aluminum alloys are susceptible to cracking during solidification,
which is called solidification cracking in welding and hot tearing in casting.
In the present project a simple new index is presented to predict the relative
crack susceptibility of aluminum alloys and how it is affected by the filler
metals used for welding. The index can be calculated easily using commercially
available software packages and databases for aluminum alloys. The index can be
a useful guide to selecting existing welding filler metals or searching for new
ones to avoid solidification cracking in aluminum welds. The index can also be
applied to aluminum casting, where hot tearing is a serious problem. The project
seeks to provide an opportunity for a Hispanic graduate student to learn
welding, aluminum alloys, and failure analysis of welded components.

Technical Abstract An alloy exists in the weak semisolid state during
solidification, with solid grains separated by thin liquid films during the
terminal stage of solidification. The semisolid can crack along grain boundaries
under the tension induced during welding or casting. How the fraction solid fs
of the semisolid increases as temperature T drops during solidification can
affect the crack susceptibility significantly, and it differs significantly from
alloy to alloy. Unlike previous studies, the present project considers the grain
boundary, where cracking occurs. It considers: 1. the tension to separate
neighboring grains to cause cracking, 2. the growth of neighboring grains toward
each other to bond together to resist cracking, and 3. the liquid feeding to
fill the boundary between neighboring grains to resist cracking. Based on the
criterion required for cracking to occur at the grain boundary, a simple new
index is deduced to predict the relative crack susceptibility of aluminum alloys
and the effectiveness of welding filler metals in reducing the crack
susceptibility. The index can be determined from the steepness of the curve of T
vs. the square root of fs, which can be calculated easily using commercial
software packages and databases. A simple new test is developed to assess the
relative crack susceptibility of commercial aluminum alloys in welding and to
verify the new criterion and index. To cause cracking during the test, the
semisolid region of the weld alone is pulled at a slow rate similar to that
occurring naturally during welding, instead of bending the workpiece suddenly
during welding, which is done in the most widely used test and which induces
unrealistically fast and high tension in the semisolid region.