* 1500208
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Prototyping a Smart Battery Gauge Technology for Stationary Energy Storage of Renewable Energy Resources
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Jason Lamb, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 321,851.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on developing a novel Smart
Battery Gauge technology to fill the increasing need for accurate battery state
of charge (SOC) and remaining useful life (RUL) estimations for stationary
energy storage systems of renewable energy resources. There is a growing demand
for stationary energy storage driven by the increasing interest in the large-
scale integration of renewable energy into the power grid. However, major
barriers preventing widespread stationary energy storage deployment are safety
and reliability concerns. By providing more accurate state of charge and
remaining useful life estimates, the Smart Battery Gauge technology will improve
safety and reliability and enable the widespread use of stationary battery
systems within the emerging renewable energy market. This will drive wider
deployment of renewable energy systems, which will help meet the renewable
portfolio standards targets imposed by many states.

This project will result in a software prototype of the Smart Battery Gauge
technology to demonstrate its real-time adaptive battery SOC and RUL estimations
with market-leading accuracy and reliability, and its flexible customization for
multiple different battery chemistries. As compared to the existing battery
monitoring methods in the market, the estimation data generated by this
technology will provide systems management and operations with the advantages of
improved energy storage system efficiency, reliability, cost-effectiveness,
longer lifespan, and reduced capital and operation/maintenance costs.

This project addresses the following shortcomings of existing battery monitoring
solutions: 1) State-of-the-art battery SOC estimation methods lack accuracy
because of non-updating parameters, 2) State-of-the-art battery RUL estimation
methods either do not exist or lack accuracy because of unreliable energy
consumption and battery degradation predictions, and 3) State-of-the-art battery
SOC and RUL estimation methods is tailored to specific battery chemistry. This
project addresses these limitations through research efforts in the following
areas: 1) Extraction of the relevant data and models that are needed for
accurate RUL estimation; 2) Design of the adaptive predictive RUL estimation
algorithm that can adjust the battery parameters with real-time measurement
feedback; 3) The development of flexible battery SOC and RUL estimates using a
configurable battery model; and 4) Benchmark the Smart Battery Gauge prototype
with existing approaches and competing technologies. This project plans to
establish collaborations with domestic and international renewable energy
companies, as well as provide outreach to other institutions performing
renewables and battery related research. In addition, the graduate students
involved in this project will receive technology translation and
entrepreneurship experiences through the prototype development and
commercialization activities.