* 1500050
* Combinatorial representation theory applied to Schubert calculus and Markov chains
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Anne Schilling, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2018
* USD 160,000.00

The award supports PI's research in the area of algebraic combinatorics. This is
the study of discrete objects and maps between them together with algebraic
properties that govern the structures of these objects. The combinatorial
problems which arise are related to representation theory (study of symmetries),
physics (energy levels of particles and their structure coefficients), and
geometry (intersections of curves in space). Among the main tools used in this
research are crystal graphs, which describe these structures in the "zero
temperature limit" and yet encapture all of the important properties. Since
combinatorics is concrete, it is very amenable to computational investigations.
The robust implementation of algorithms derived from the project will lead to
the development of new code for the open-source computer algebra system Sage.
The dissemination of this new software through Sage will not only advance the
proposed research program, but has already led to cross-fertilization between
various areas in mathematics and computer science (for example through a
semester program at ICERM), and this is expected to continue. This project
involves the training of graduate students.

The combinatorial study of affine Schubert calculus has led to new tableaux
related to weak and strong Bruhat order in analogy to semistandard Young
tableaux. Crystal base theory has a long tradition of answering representation
theoretic questions in combinatorial terms, such as multiplicities of tensor
products or positive character expansions. Applying crystal bases to the theory
of weak tableaux, the PI and her collaborators were able to answer certain
longstanding questions about structure constants of flag Gromov--Witten
invariants and quantum Schubert structure coefficients. The PI seeks to complete
this theory and apply it to strong tableaux. This would prove, for example, that
k-Schur functions, which are affine versions of the usual Schur functions and
form a set of representatives for the Schubert classes of the cohomology of the
affine Grassmannian, expand positively in terms of Schur functions. The complete
theory will facilitate the study of combinatorial expressions for
generalizations of Littlewood--Richardson coefficients, fusion coefficients, and
their q-analogues as well as one-dimensional sums, using algebras motivated by
geometry and physics and relations to Macdonald theory, Demazure crystals, and
Kirillov--Reshetikhin crystals. In addition, the PI and her collaborators have
recently successfully developed a theory of Markov chains governed by R-trivial
monoids. This has led to an abundance of new conjectures about eigenvalues,
multiplicities, and mixing times as well as new Markov chains (for example, on
linear extensions of posets) that will also be studied further.