* 1500572
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Conceptualizing sustained environmental information management in the landscape of current and emerging eco-informatics infrastructure
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Daniel Reed, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2016
* USD 17,158.00

The data generated by environmental research are highly valuable, not only
because of the cost of research but also because they are irreplaceable and
needed for understanding change. A major challenge for all research entities is
the management of this digital asset and associated information for maintaining
its value. This challenge is complex in nature, covering not only the collection
and storage of data, but also the creation of relevant (and sufficient)
information about the data (metadata), such that they can be re-used broadly.
Several environmental data repositories and data management approaches have been
developed over the past few years. It is now time to seek input from researchers
in the role of data authors and data re-users and data managers, to expansively
explore the current operating environment, potential collaboration
opportunities, efficiencies of scale, and future community needs for this
challenge to be addressed effectively. An initial workshop will allow these
stakeholders to share their expertise, experience and future requirements with
their colleagues. The output from this initial exercise will then feed into a
second session, which will result in strategic recommendations detailing the
activities needed to create a collaborative and efficient data management
infrastructure capable of supporting future environmental science research
endeavors.

Most current environmental data repositories fulfill specific needs or
objectives, i.e., archiving and disseminating data from a project, network of
research sites, institution, a specific funding source, or to accompany paper
publications. Envisioning a sustained Scientific Data Infrastructure (SDI), and
with the goal of providing high quality data to researchers, policy makers and
the general public, this project concentrates on data repositories and current
curation practices as an integral part of this vision. Within this scope and in
the context of environmental research data management, original goals and
objectives of single repositories will be re-evaluated, efficiencies of scale
identified, a cost-benefit analyses for some centralized services attempted, and
new, sustainable collaborations conceptualized. Specifically, data curators from
a range of environmental research fields, data aggregators, tool developers,
computer scientists and environmental scientists (both data providers and users)
will be brought together for an informed dialog which draws on this broad
collective experience. A preliminary information-gathering phase will describe
the characteristics of each repository to inform the discussion at two
subsequent community workshops. The first workshop will identify new
collaboration and curation strategies that also cater to the currently
underserved single investigators and move environmental data from "available" to
"usable", in order to accelerate scientific inquiry. The second workshop will
examine these strategies further, and develop one or more alternative,
community-vetted roadmaps for research information management with the goal of
more efficiently and sustainably utilizing NSF investments. In summary, these
workshops will produce a strategic implementation plan outlining one or more
options for a sustained environmental data management infrastructure capable of
accelerating scientific inquiry, serve all contributing investigators (data
producers) and provide the basis for education and outreach activities in a cost
effective approach. Data management needs are fairly well understood.
Organizational, personnel and management structures are not. Hence, the plan
will focus on these challenges while also considering workforce development. A
website for this project will be established at http://sedicollaborative.org.