* 1500579
* 2015-2017 FGLSAMP Bridge to Doctorate at Florida International University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2018
* USD 987,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to successfully complete high quality
degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (LSAMP-BD) activity provides two-
year support at the post baccalaureate level for students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to matriculate in STEM graduate programs
with the ultimate goal of earning a doctoral degree in a STEM discipline.
Participants are selected from LSAMP institutions nationwide. The Florida-
Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Florida-Georgia
LSAMP), under the leadership of Florida A &amp; M University, a Historically
Black College/University (HBCU), has chosen Florida International University
(FIU), a Hispanic-serving institution (HSI) as the host for the 2015-2017 BD
program in which a cohort of twelve LSAMP BD students will engage in STEM
research, academics and professional development leading to completion of the
STEM terminal degree. The programs promote systemic change in graduate education
practices and policy in ways that increase the success of individual students on
the doctoral pathway and the effectiveness of STEM graduate programs continuing
the goal of diversifying America's STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twelve
cohorts of students have matriculated in the Florida-Georgia LSAMP BD programs
at the following sites: Florida State University, University of South Florida,
University of Florida and Florida International University since 2003. For the
2015-2017 cohorts, the host of the Florida-Georgia LSAMP BD program will be
Florida International University. The program includes collaborations and
linkages with other STEM networks and resources as well as other graduate
programs, such as NSF's Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP) and other
regional LSAMP-supported graduate education programs. The BD program at FIU
provides a comprehensive set of support services that monitors student progress,
builds a strong BD community, and increases BD students' academic and
professional skills. Institutional resources are committed to ensure
participants' successful completion of the STEM doctoral degree. This BD program
will be externally evaluated and students will be tracked throughout its
duration and into STEM careers following completion of STEM doctoral degree
programs.