* 1500798
* Dissertation Research: Origin of the modern avian locomotor system across a neglected evolutionary interval: insight from new methods and new fossils
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Bhart-Anjan Bhullar, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 21,203.00

Despite the biological novelty of avian flight, little is known about what the
most recent common ancestor of birds looked like, nor about how that ancestor
flew. Using spectacular new fossil material, sophisticated imaging techniques,
and rigorous statistical methods, this research will reconstruct the most likely
anatomical and functional attributes of the most recent common ancestor of
living birds, bringing us closer to understanding how modern birds and their
flying ability came to be. Through museum exhibits, media exposure, and
innovative online activities, this project has strong potential to educate both
children and adults about evolutionary biology and
paleontology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will begin with allometric analysis
of a comprehensive sampling of fossil taxa. Preliminary results from this
analysis (based on &gt;13,000 data points from extant birds) indicate a
fundamental allometric division between extant flying and flightless birds. This
division, based on the relationship between shoulder joint dimensions and body
mass, enables, for the first time, the delineation of well-defined ?flying? and
?flightless? zones for morphology. This novel biomechanical ?test? of powered
flying potential can easily be applied to Mesozoic fossils, and preliminary
results indicate that the acquisition of a biomechanically favorable
shoulder:body mass ratio, enabling powered flight, evolved considerably later in
avian evolutionary history than is conventionally assumed. These results set the
stage for a novel geometric analysis of Mesozoic stem bird postcrania, which
will illustrate when the geometrically modern avian flight apparatus arose, and
will shed light on the evolutionary dynamics of this deeply integrated
morphological system. Next, the study will focus on the avian crown clade, and
will generate the first ever three-dimensional in situ muscle and feather
reconstructions of adult extant birds, which will facilitate the robust
inference of flight muscle morphology for the most recent ancestor of extant
birds. This will form the basis of range-of-motion simulations for the flight
apparatus of two pivotal fossil stem birds, validated by data from diverse
extant taxa. Together, the project outlined here will rigorously document and
mechanically interpret one of the most important functional transitions in
vertebrate evolutionary history?the acquisition of modern, powered flying
ability in birds.