* 1500238
* Collaborative Research: Heating the Solar Chromosphere Through Plasma Turbulence
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* John Fontenla, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 79,950.00

The goal of this project is to provide a detailed verifiable explanation of the
origin of the heating of the solar atmosphere. Most of the light reaching Earth
originates at the 'surface' of the sun, a region called the photosphere.
However, the regions of the solar atmosphere immediately above this surface, the
solar chromosphere and corona, create most of the dangerous Ultraviolet (UV) and
X-ray radiation. These regions also generate the solar wind, a stream of charged
particles that pass the Earth at speeds in excess of 400km/s. Both the rapidly
changing radiation and the solar wind create hazards for spacecraft, astronauts,
and have a number of important terrestrial impacts. A long-standing mystery has
prevented scientists from understanding and accurately modeling the chromosphere
and corona. A short distance above the 'surface' of the sun, the solar
atmosphere's temperature jumps up by a factor of two to three. The goal of this
project is to provide an explanation of the origin of this heating. The project
will also provide opportunities to recruit and train student researchers in
plasma and solar physics, simulations, and modeling at the Boston University.
Many of the Boston University PI's undergraduate research advisees, about half
of whom are women, have continued on to graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine whether solar plasma flows
emerging from the photosphere can transfer sufficient energy into turbulent
plasma of the solar atmosphere, which, in turn, will heat the chromosphere
sufficiently to explain whether the observed UV spectra originate there. It will
also evaluate whether this mechanism can account for chromospheric spectral
observations. This requires four linked research tasks: (1) solving for plasma
drifts and fields when a convecting neutral gas pushes it across magnetic field
lines; (2) analyzing the theory of streaming instabilities applicable to the
collisional plasma found there; (3) performing a series of kinetic simulations
to explore the nonlinear and thermal properties of the resulting turbulence; and
(4) incorporating the resulting electron heating into a radiative transport code
in order to evaluate its impact on chromospheric radiance. This research
combines several research areas encompassed by the NSF/DOE Partnership in Basic
Science and Engineering.