* 1500674
* Documenting Warm Springs Ichishkiin, an endangered language of Oregon
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Nariyo Kono, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2022
* USD 329,263.00

The essential elements that constitute the minimal scientific documentation of a
language include a reference grammar, a dictionary, and transcribed narratives
with translations and linguistic analysis. Contemporary digital tools in
language documentation allow the integration of the building blocks, so that a
linguistic database might use the dictionary to translate the narratives, use
the narratives to add words to the dictionary. Electronic databases structure a
set of data, in this case language material, and they facilitate searches for
information by allowing various keywords or categories to be used. These kinds
of digital documentation tools produce very rich databases, with sound files,
photographs, grammar information, and entire stories, all which are possible
data that can be entered and tagged. This project will employ digital language
documentation tools to process and analyze materials in an endangered Native
American language, Warm Springs Ichishkiin (also known as Sahaptin). The Native
American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy
the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American
languages. By using digital tools to assist in the analysis of Native American
languages, this project will increase access to linguistic and cultural
materials, traditional cultural knowledge, and produce and disseminate a grammar
and a dictionary. Broader impacts include training workshops for tribal
citizens, and a best practices collaboration among the community elders, the
tribal language program and academics. This will broaden participation by
increasing the number of Native American citizen scientists as Confederated
Tribes of Warm Springs community members are trained in the scientific methods
of linguistic documentation and apply them to their own
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will document and analyze discourse,
morphosyntax and semantics in the Warm Springs Ichishkiin language which is
spoken on the Warm Springs Reservation in the volcanic valleys of the Cascade
Mountains in Oregon, USA. With no more than 50 elder speakers remaining, the
translation and interpretation tasks are urgent. The collaborative team will
include the Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs Language Program and community,
joined by linguists from Portland State University and the Northwest Indian
Language Institute of the University of Oregon. Valerie Switzler of the
Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs, Nariyo Kono of Portland State University
and Joana Jansen of the University of Oregon will work with digitized copies of
reel-to-reel and cassette tapes as well as newly collected audio and video
materials. The researchers will create transcriptions and translations that will
contribute to a deeper level of understanding of lexical and grammatical
features of Ichishkiin. A database, updated dictionary and updated grammar will
result. Scientific interest in the language includes verbal morphology, referent
tracking systems and metrical patterns, as these appear to differ in related
varieties. Investigations will lead to a greater understanding of the
relationships within the larger Sahaptian family, including Nez Perce and other
of Ichishkiin varieties. This project will also provide a pathway to mobilizing
the data and findings in the community's language programs, and in the continued
maintenance of the Warm Springs Ichishkiin language within the tribe.