* 1500481
* Career Advancement for Women Through Research-Focused Networks
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Ruth Charney, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 749,984.00

This project by the Association of Women in Mathematics (AWM) focuses on
fostering research collaborations and establishing research networks for women
mathematicians in the early to mid-stages of their careers. Research
collaborations have become an increasingly essential part of a successful career
in mathematics. In theoretical sciences, unlike laboratory sciences, there is no
structure in which collaborations and mentor relationships naturally arise. It
is thus critical that women, beginning early in their career, attend research
conferences in their area of specialization, interact productively with other
participants, and have access to research-based networks. To facilitate such
networks, AWM plans to organize a series of conferences and workshops aimed at
fostering research collaborations and building sustainable networks. These
networks will be established at Research Collaboration Conferences for Women
(RCCWs), which are week-long conferences, held at mathematics institutes, where
junior and senior women come together to work on pre-defined research problems.
AWM will expand the number and scope of the RCCWs and organize a series of
follow-up events to help sustain and grow the resulting networks. Expected
outcomes of this project include more invitations to speak at conferences, more
collaborative research, a higher level of productivity for the women involved,
and decreased attrition. The networks created by this project will not be static
and will welcome new researchers as they enter the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies conducted through this project will focus on
understanding the effectiveness of research collaboration networks in helping to
advance women's research careers to the highest levels of the profession. By
promoting research collaborations and forming networks of women with related
research interests, the proposed workshops will help both senior and junior
women increase their visibility in and contributions to the research community.
This project will also add to our understanding of the impact of networks and
mentor relationships based on shared research interests in addition to shared
demographic characteristics. The research and interactive seminars designed for
this project have the potential to become models for future events of this kind
and for other theoretical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
Partnerships for Learning and Adaptation Networks (PLAN) program track supports
projects that promote the adaptation and implementation of previously effective
ADVANCE programs in new contexts and the testing of innovative strategies to
promote the participation, success, and advancement of women in STEM academic
careers. PLAN projects also contribute to the knowledge base on gender equity in
STEM academic careers.