* 1500273
* PFI:AIR - TT:  High yield production of furans from biomass hydrolysates using a hybrid enzyme- and chemo-catalytic technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Sasidhar Varanasi, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2021
* USD 320,230.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on a transformative
technology for converting biomass to platform chemicals (furans) that would
replace petroleum-derived feedstocks for fuel and chemical production. These
furans serve as building blocks for a variety of other chemicals and
intermediates that are necessary in industry. A process that allows them to be
economically produced from renewable resources (e.g. biomass) instead of
petroleum-based technologies would result in reduced dependence on fossil fuels,
reduced emission of greenhouse gases, and minimal environmental impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a proof-of-concept development,
demonstration, and evaluation of an integrated hybrid enzyme-and chemo-catalytic
technology for high-yield production of furans from biomass sugars. When
compared to competing processes that rely on inefficient water-based reaction
media, the technology has several distinct advantages. It provides a cohesive
pathway to efficiently transfer biomass sugars into a non-aqueous reaction
medium; produces the furan product in high yield; and isolates the furan for
downstream processing, all with low energy input and recycling of process
streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology
gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application: (1)
the design, construction, and testing of a scalable process configuration that
allows transition from bench to larger scale; (2) the collection of metrics for
the prolonged operation of the integrated process; (3) the assessment of the
process economics and environmental impacts; and (4) the evaluation of the
integrated process with diverse biomass feedstocks and their upstream
pretreatment/saccharification methods. In addition, personnel involved in this
project, namely undergraduate and graduate students, will receive
entrepreneurship and innovation experiences through new interdisciplinary
initiatives developed at The University of Toledo based on the Lean LaunchPad
approach.