* 1500382
* Geometry of Sets and Measures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Matthew Badger, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

Geometric measure theory is a field of mathematics that developed starting in
the 1920s and 1930s, growing out of a practical need to describe nonsmooth
phenomena such as the formation of corners in soap bubble clusters. The term
"measure" refers to an abstract generalization of length, area, or volume, which
assigns a size value to every mathematical set. Traditional outlets for
geometric measure theory, such as the calculus of variations and geometric
analysis, have expanded in recent decades to include partial differential
equations and harmonic analysis. The widespread utility and current use of
geometric measure theory in different areas of analysis justifies its continued
development. The proposed investigation on the geometry of sets and measures
seeks to develop new techniques that will expand the toolbox that geometric
measure theory provides for researchers in adjacent areas in analysis and
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two groups of questions
about the geometry of sets and measures in Euclidean space. The first group of
questions concerns rectifiable measures, one of the core objects of study in
geometric measure theory. Specifically, these questions are aimed at increased
understanding of rectifiable measures in the absence of a standing regularity
assumption that has been assumed in the past. The main approach entails adapting
quantitative techniques developed in the 1990s by Jones and David-Semmes to
study the qualitative rectifiability of measures. The second group of questions
are designed to examine the geometry of Reifenberg-type sets, which are sets
that can be approximated at all locations and scales by one or more kinds of
model sets. Instances where Reifenberg-type sets occur include geometric
minimization problems and free boundary problems for elliptic partial
differential equations. A general goal of this inquiry is to determine in what
situations and to what extent good properties of solutions to problems in ideal
models (smooth settings) persist under controlled perturbation (weak
regularity).