* 1500710
* The 29th Automorphic Forms Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Mahesh Agarwal, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 01/31/2017
* USD 19,220.00

The 29th Annual Automorphic Forms Workshop (AFW) will be held March 2-5, 2015 at
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Over the past three decades,
the AFW has built a reputation as an internationally-recognized, well-respected
conference attended by leading experts and junior researchers alike. The
workshop is known for its inclusive, supportive atmosphere. Historically, about
half of the presentations are given by mathematicians at early stages of their
careers. Additionally, the workshop has a long history of involving women and
members of other underrepresented groups in the automorphic forms community and
facilitating the establishment of research connections. The workshop has led to
many collaborations and research papers. Moreover, the workshop traditionally
includes panel discussions on topics designed to further the mathematical
careers of junior participants. This award supports participation in the
workshop of twenty early-career U.S.-based mathematicians, including students.
Additional information can be found at the workshop's website:
automorphicformsworkshop.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automorphic forms, in all of
their various guises, are of central importance in modern number theory and
illuminate deep connections between number theory and other mathematical
disciplines including coding theory, mathematical physics, representation theory
and topology. Some of the most remarkable mathematical breakthroughs of the 20th
century, for instance Wiles' proof of Fermat's Last Theorem, made extensive use
of automorphic forms. Moreover, several celebrated conjectures, such as those of
Langlands and Bloch-Kato, are automorphic in nature. Many important classes of
automorphic forms have only recently been discovered, for instance the harmonic
Maass forms and mock modular forms that underlie Ramanujan's mock theta
functions. The 29th AFW will feature talks on all aspects of automorphic forms
with a special emphasis on mock modular forms and their applications. The
workshop will highlight recent developments in the field and catalyze future
research progress.