* 1500275
* New Strategy for Encapsulating Integral Membrane Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Marjorie Longo, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical: The PIs goal is to provide a strategy so that the majority of
integral membrane proteins (IMPs) could be routinely encapsulated in the
nanometer-sized pores of gels for drug discovery, and biotechnology, and energy
generation. IMPs are nanometer-size biological workhorses that produce energy,
serve as receptors, channels, transporters, and enzymes, when they are embedded
in biological membrane hosts. Similarly, nanoporous gels and glasses are
mainstays of modern technology because of their unique photochemical, optical,
and catalytic properties. PIs IMP-containing bio-functional gels will combine
these unique functionalities: e.g. the gel (for solar energy capture) and the
IMP for energy absorption from a broader spectrum of wavelengths. They will
study nanolipoprotein particles (NLPs) as the biological membrane hosts of IMPs
entrapped in inorganic and organic nanoporous gels. NLPs are disc-shaped 10-25
nanometer-sized lipid bilayer patches stabilized by a belt of scaffold proteins.
The NLP approach represents a major breakthrough because NLPs fit precisely into
the 5-50 nanometer-sized pores of the gels and NLPs serve as a robust host for
any IMP so that all components remain functional. On the training side,
engineering undergraduates and graduate students working on this project will
gain valuable experience that will prepare them for new careers that integrate
materials science with biotechnology. Following previous success the PIs will
organize a second international workshop "Biomembrane Frontiers: Nanostructures,
Models, and the Design of Life: II". Further, they will publish a Tutorial
Review on "Creating and Characterizing Biomembrane/Materials Interfaces".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Integral membrane proteins (IMPs)
require a lipid membrane host and carry out a number of useful biological
functions that could be harnessed by routine encapsulation in mesoporous sol-gel
materials. The PIs will study nanolipoprotein particles (NLPs) as the biological
membrane hosts of IMPs entrapped in inorganic and organic mesoporous sol-gels.
NLPs are soluble discoidal 10-25 nm-sized particles comprised of a lipid bilayer
patch stabilized by a belt of apolipoprotein scaffold proteins that can be
formed through in vitro self-assembly. NLPs fit precisely into the 5-50 nm-sized
pores of the gels and NLPs serve as robust hosts for IMPs, therefore all
components may retain their structures and functions. Exploration of the
parameters of nanoscale confinement and chemical environment in relation to
dynamics, structure, and function of the NLP and IMP-NLP are important from a
scientific standpoint as well as toward imagining and optimizing any future
applications. Characterization of these parameters will take place with
integrated studies employing state-of-the-art dynamic TEM, electron paramagnetic
resonance, NMR, circular dichroism, and fluorimetry. Materials Science and
Chemical Engineering undergraduates and graduate students working on this
project will receive valuable interdisciplinary training in new cell biological
and bioengineering techniques, i.e. cell free expression, in the context of
production of a functional biocomposite sol-gel materials. The PIs will organize
an international workshop, "Biomembrane Frontiers: Nanostructures, Models, and
the Design of Life: II" and publish an Instructional Review on "Creating and
Characterizing Biomembrane/Materials Interfaces". In the education arena, PIs
will provide special topical freshman seminars on Biomaterials.