* 1500905
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biome conservatism in Neotropical plant diversification?  A case study in Bignoniaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Richard Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2018
* USD 20,086.00

Species diversity increases latitudinally from the poles to the equator, making
the tropical regions the most species rich on Earth. New World tropical plants -
from Mexico to Argentina - harbor an unprecedented 37% of vascular plant
species. One of the reasons for this high diversity may lie in the history of
the area. South America was isolated from other continental landmasses until
about 3 Mya when the isthmus of Panama closed. During this period, geological
events and global climate change led to the formation and maintenance of many
biomes, creating a heterogeneous landscape with new ecological opportunities for
members of the isolated plant assemblage to adapt. This research will generate
genetic and environmental data from a group plants with a Neotropical
distribution. The goal of this work is to better understand how the evolutionary
patterns in each biome combine to generate this unparalleled level of plant
diversity. This work will help document existing biodiversity in the Neotropics
and foster collaboration with Latin American scientists. Research findings will
be communicated via publications and to the broader public by participation in
museum exhibits and online media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this work is
to explore the balance of two evolutionary patterns - biome conservatism versus
biome shifting- and how it has affected Neotropical plant diversification
through space and time. Biome conservatism is the tendency of plant groups to
remain in similar environments and retain corresponding ecological traits as
they diversify. This pattern implies that evolutionary success through
diversification may come primarily from biome expansion through time or long
distance migration from point of origin to similar biomes. Alternatively, shifts
into novel biomes- biome evolution- could be critical in driving high
diversification rates by providing access to new ecological niches to which
plant species can adapt. To unravel patterns of biome conservatism and biome
shits in the Neotropics, field work will be conducted in Brazil and Colombia to
collect members of the large Neotropical plant family Bignoniaceae. Using high-
throughput amplicon-based sequencing techniques and statistical phylogenetic
analyses, the goals are this project are to (A) detect early diversification
events in Bignoniaceae and (B) estimate diversification rates and correlate
biome conservatism and biome shift events with these diversification rates
across the family. Based on the importance of niche availability to adaptation,
increased opportunities available in newly occupied biomes may facilitate
significant increases in speciation and diversification rate following biome
shifts.