* 1500242
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Biomimetic Composite for Segmental Bone Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Chad Hardaway, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 09/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel bone
graft technology to fill the need for the reconstruction of large traumatic
segmental bone defects. The innovative bone graft material is important in
treating patients involved in vehicle accidents, cancer patients following tumor
resection, soldiers involved in blast injuries, or children with congenital
craniofacial injuries that require large amounts of bone graft to maintain
continuity. The project will result in a prototype bone graft as an alternative
to allograft or demineralized bone for reconstruction of segmental femur or
tibia defects. The unique feature of this bone substitute technology is that the
material mimics the natural structure and composition of dense cortical bone.
This unique feature provides a safe, mechanically-stable, and resorbable graft
that stimulates bone formation without eliciting an immune response and is
ultimately displaced by the patient's own tissue. This results in a more
sustainable healing solution when compared to the leading allograft products in
the market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the gap in technology
for an autologous bone graft in treating patients with large, traumatic
segmental bone defects. A biomimetic approach is used to produce a scaffold
structure similar to that of natural dense cortical bone in order to overcome
the technological gap in insufficient strength as well as tunable resorption of
the graft concurrent with bone formation. In this approach, osteoconductive
microsheets are generated by nucleating calcium phosphate crystals on nanofibers
functionalized with calcium-chelating peptides. Next, rigid, load-bearing
scaffolds are generated by the wrapping and fusion of the microsheets into a
cortical-bone-like cylindrical structure. Then, an array of microchannels are
formed on the surface of the cylindrical structure by laser micro-drilling to
form an interconnected network of Haversian- and Volkmann-like canals for
tunable resorption and uniform nutrient transport in the scaffold. The
biomimetic scaffold is loaded with bone morphogenetic protein-2 to produce a
graft for recruitment of osteoprogenitor cells and regulation of stem cell fate
toward bone formation. The outcome of this project is a non-immunogenic,
mechanically-stable, conductive, and inductive bone graft ultimately displaced
by the patient?s own tissue for a more sustainable healing solution. In
addition, biomedical engineering undergraduates, doctoral students, and post-
doctoral researchers involved in this project will receive training in
entrepreneurship and technology translation through interviewing the people in
different parts of the product ecosystem in collaboration with mentors at the
Faber Entrepreneurship Center and the Office of Technology Commercialization at
the University.