* 1500423
* Turbulence Dynamics in the Presence of Flow Shear in a Collisional Plasma: Experiment-Model Cross-Validation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Barrett Rogers, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This project seeks to further our fundamental understanding of plasma turbulence
and flows by making detailed comparisons of large-scale computer models with
carefully controlled laboratory experiments. Turbulence and its effects are
ubiquitous in magnetized plasmas on Earth, in near space, and throughout the
universe. Turbulence can drive increased transport of particles, heat, and
momentum, which affects our ability to confine plasmas for applications on
Earth, such as fusion energy, and can play an important role in accelerating
particles to high energies, for example in the space weather environment
comprising the Sun and Earth. The large numbers of high energy particles
generated during space weather events have the potential to seriously impact
satellites, communications, and power systems on Earth. Being able to reliably
predict such events requires a detailed understanding of the underlying physics,
including the physics of turbulence and the interaction of turbulence and flows.

The goal of this work is to validate, through controlled laboratory experiments
and close experiment-theory-model coupling, a fully global, nonlinear two-fluid
model appropriate for understanding turbulence and transport dynamics in a
collisional laboratory plasma. Despite a long and ongoing history of work to
understand the dynamics of plasma turbulence in the presence of sheared flows,
there still appears to be no validated model that can accurately reproduce
experimental observations over a wide range of turbulent states in even
relatively simple, well-controlled experiments. Even in these 'simple'
laboratory experiments, enough complicating physics are present so that
interpreting measurements purely experimentally, via quasilinear theories, or
via local nonlinear models seems to be difficult or impossible. The proposed
experiments will take place in the dual-source HelCat (Helicon-Cathode) device
at the University of New Mexico. HelCat is a flexible device that provides
unique capabilities important to these experiments. The GBS (Global Braginskii
Solver), a fully 3D global drift-reduced Braginskii solver that has been used
previously to model both linear and toroidal devices will be used to model these
experiments. Experiment-model comparisons will be undertaken under a wide range
of conditions, from coherent to fully-developed turbulent states.