* 1500939
* Conference on Recent Developments in Continuum Mechanics and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Mikil Foss, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/29/2016
* USD 18,250.00

This award provides partial support for participants in the "Conference on
Recent Developments in Continuum Mechanics and Partial Differential Equations"
held at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), April 18-19, 2015. The subject
of continuum mechanics is concerned with modeling the mechanical behavior of
materials as continua: solids (elasticity) and liquids (fluid dynamics). It
underlies numerous engineering applications, including the behavior of
architectural structures, tires and other vehicle parts, aerospace vehicles, and
a wide range of other deformable substances. Partial differential equations
provide a mathematical language for expressing relationships among quantities of
interest, such as the distortion of an elastic body or the velocity in a fluid,
and most mathematical models in engineering and science are expressed in terms
of partial differential equations. This meeting will be held in conjunction with
the Howard Rowlee Lecture, an endowed public lecture presented annually by the
Department of Mathematics at UNL. This year's lecture will be given on April
17th, and the timing and coordination of the Lecture and the Conference should
enhance the impact of both. The purpose of the Conference is to foster contacts
between mathematicians (junior, senior, and all points in between) within a
broad spectrum of applied mathematics.

The Conference will comprise a series of presentations by established, prominent
researchers, as well as recent Ph.D. recipients. The meeting brings together
specialists who, owing to their respective fields of study, might not otherwise
have occasion to meet and exchange ideas. The meeting will focus on recent
advances in continuum mechanics, partial differential equations, and related
fields in applied mathematics. The interests of the speakers cover areas such as
numerical analysis, variational problems, mathematical modeling, singular
integrals, pseudo-differential operators, dispersive equations, and nonlinear
acoustics. The lectures will address some of the major problems in these fields,
including modeling aspects, and analytic and numerical results. They will also
present new techniques that have been recently developed, as well as open
problems and possible venues for their investigation.

Conference web site: http://www.math.unl.edu/~mfoss3/2015conference/