* 1500234
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Design of functionally-tested, genomics-informed personalized cancer therapy drug treatment plans
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Ranadip Pal, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 238,971.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating mathematical
modeling and design of combination therapy based on Probabilistic Target
Inhibition Maps to fulfill the unmet clinical need of developing functional and
genomic-informed personalized cancer therapy. The goal is to improve treatment
outcomes by directly addressing drug synergy and disease recurrence. Successful
implementation of the Probabilistic Target Inhibition Map innovation is expected
to have a significant impact on society by providing an alternative approach to
therapy design for cancer patients who have failed, or want alternatives to,
first and second line therapies. Even with advances in chemotherapy and
radiation, there are over 450,000 deaths attributed to solid tumor cancers in
the U.S. alone; resulting in a significant need for alternative approaches
involving personalized drug combinations for cancer patients failing standard of
care treatments. The project will result in proof of concept validation for
application of Probabilistic Target Inhibition Maps to synergistic drug
combination design. The Probabilistic Target Inhibition Map framework has the
unique features of (i) integrating functional and genomic data in model
generation, (ii) increased prediction accuracy over existing techniques and
(iii) optimized selection of drug combinations from FDA-approved targeted drugs.
This approach will provide rapid, evidenced-based, reduced toxicity personalized
therapies, leading to greater treatment efficacy and lower chances of
recurrence. The resulting technology will be unlike existing precision cancer
therapy approaches available in the market, and will be very competitive with
comparable approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gaps as it translates from research discovery towards commercial
application: (a) characterizing combination drug toxicities by incorporating
existing side effects data of individual drugs to predict expected system-level
toxicity, and integrate additional compound-level and patient-level data to
identify potentially unexpected toxicity issues, (b) design of optimization
algorithms for selection of drug combinations incorporating toxicity estimation
and (c) integrating mutation data and mapping targets to known Protein-Protein
Interaction (PPI) networks for providing further evidence for the significance
of targets elucidated by the Probabilistic Target Inhibition Map framework. In
addition, graduate students involved in this project will learn about
translating fundamental research to commercially viable product by addressing
technology gaps and being part of the intellectual property development process.
The project engages Children?s Cancer Therapy Development Institute and
University of Utah to provide experimental validation capabilities and
commercialization expertise in this technology translation effort from research
discovery towards commercial reality.