* 1500361
* Workshop on Analysis and Geometry in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Emil Straube, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 11/30/2015
* USD 48,400.00

A workshop titled "Analysis and Geometry in Several Complex Variables" will be
held at Texas A&amp;M University Qatar in Doha, Qatar, January 4-8, 2015. This
workshop will bring together leading researchers, young post-docs, and graduate
students from the Gulf region, Brazil, the US, and Europe. A website has been
set up for this workshop at
http://science.qatar.tamu.edu/Conferences/Pages/Upcoming-Conferences.aspx. The
purpose of the workshop is twofold. First, to generate long term collaborations
between mathematicians from the different regions. Second, to afford the younger
participants an opportunity to interact with leaders in their field, as well as
with each other. The subject matter, several complex variables, enjoys a central
position in mathematics because it draws from, and contributes to, various other
subareas of mathematics. But while it is amply motivated within mathematics
proper, it also arises in various other contexts. For example, causality, one of
the fundamental laws of nature, when transcribed via a mathematical device
called Fourier transform, immediately leads to analytic functions of several (in
this case four) complex variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the Sobolev theory
of the Cauchy-Riemann equation(s) is well developed, the theory for the analogue
on CR submanifolds, the tangential Cauchy-Riemann equation(s), is at a
comparable stage only for submanifolds of hypersurface type. But even in these
cases, fundamental questions concerning compactness, global regularity, etc.,
remain open. It has become clear that in order to address these questions, and
to extend the theory to CR submanifolds that are not of hypersurface type,
techniques of modern CR geometry will be crucial. CR functions and CR mappings
arise naturally form the tangential Cauchy-Riemann operator, as functions in the
kernel and as mappings that respect the CR structures (the basic object),
respectively. A number of classical questions remain open in this very active
area of research as well. By bringing together experts from these areas, the
proposed workshop aims to initiate collaborations that will lead to substantial
progress on these issues. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, a short course on complex
Brunn-Minkowski theory will provide an introduction to an exciting new
perspective on some of the "classical" techniques.