* 1500293
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Hybrid Metal/Glass Composite System for Multihazard Resilient Bridge Columns
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Hadi Bozorgmanesh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 245,809.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
bridge column system to fill the need for cost-effective and sustainable bridges
that are resilient to natural and man-made hazards such as earthquakes,
terrorist attacks, vessel collisions/fires, and corrosive environments. The
hybrid metal-glass composite column system is important because our nation is in
critical need for durable and safe transportation infrastructure. Conventional
structural materials, such as reinforced concrete and steel, are vulnerable to
various hazards and environmental conditions. Traditional bridge construction
methods are expensive, time consuming, and cause major traffic interruptions.
This product enables accelerated construction of new bridges, increased work
zone safety, and reduction of travel delays, which optimizes the stewardship of
public funds to grow the nation?s infrastructure. The project will result in the
proof-of-concept of a novel hybrid composite column system. This hybrid
composite system integrates the unique energy dissipation of steel material, the
excellent strength-to-weight ratio of glass fibers, and the exceptional
durability of polymeric resins. These features provide the following advantages:
superior structural performance, durability, cost-efficiency, and ease of
construction when compared to the leading competing systems like conventional
concrete-filled FRP tube (CFFT) systems in this market space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application: 1)
understanding morphology of hybrid steel-glass composites, 2) validating
superior structural performance of the column system, 3) developing reliable
structural design methodology, and 4) identifying and addressing potential
scalability and manufacturing difficulties. A series of structural experiments
will be performed on tubes with diverse composite architecture under various
loading conditions. This will be complemented by high fidelity finite element
simulations to optimize the design of the prototype. After finalizing the
design, structural testing of a large-scale bridge column will be performed. In
addition, personnel involved in this project including multiple graduate and
undergraduate students, some from underrepresented groups, will receive
entrepreneurship and technology translation experiences through collaboration
with industry partners and communication with Departments of Transportation and
bridge construction companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages NOV
Fiber Glass Systems to provide expertise in manufacturing of filament wound
composite tubes and access to their testing facility in this technology
translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.