* 1500931
* Methane release from thermokarst lakes: Thresholds and feedbacks in the lake to watershed hydrology-permafrost system
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Vladimir Romanovsky, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,086,836.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane is an important greenhouse gas, much
more so than carbon dioxide over the short term. There is a lot of it in frozen
ground, called permafrost, in the Arctic that can be released as the permafrost
thaws, so warming in the Arctic can lead to more warming, a so-called positive
feedback. Understanding such feedbacks is an important part of understanding how
the arctic system works. Much of this process occurs at the bottoms of lakes,
where some of the methane is frozen in lake sediments beneath the lake, but some
also comes from under the permafrost deep under the lake. Methane release from
the sub-permafrost environment under lakes would be a new and poorly understood
feedback to the climate system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a first
step in exploring these processes within the hydrology-permafrost-methane lake-
to-watershed system to inform future biogeochemical models for methane release.
Since lakes in areas of discontinuous permafrost are common, the proposed study
domain will offer process-oriented insights that are applicable across the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also train postdocs, graduate and
undergraduate students and support an early-career scientist. In addition there
will be outreach to science teachers and their students in fieldwork and
classroom activities on lakes and integration of results into K-G12 curriculum
through the National Geographic Society's Learning program, and to millions of
National Geographic magazine readers, television viewers and K- G12 students.
Further, the efforts will contribute to the Alaska Geological and Hydrological
Survey program to develop a detailed understanding of Alaska's groundwater
systems via the central involvement of the Alaska Geological and Geophysical
Survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainties in the
budget of atmospheric methane (CH4), an important greenhouse gas released by
thermokarst lakes, limit the accuracy of climate change projections. The
objective of this grant is to refine climate feedback representations by
integrating permafrost-hydrology-methane processes across scales (thermokarst-
lake to watershed). Methane release from thermokarst lakes is typically
considered to be solely derived from the lake and its talik (thaw bulb beneath
the lake), while not accounting for the production, storage, and potential
escape of CH4 beneath the permafrost. A rugged permafrost bottom is proposed to
favor gas storage in hollow "pockets", which can rapidly release large
sub(below)- permafrost CH4 stores when an open-talik forms that connects the
sub-permafrost to the supra(above)- permafrost environment. Groundwater flow
could accelerate thaw and therefore enhance CH4 formation and release. Model
experiments informed by field measurements and laboratory analyses at Goldstream
Valley, Interior Alaska, will test the hypothesis that the coupled hydrology-
permafrost-methane system releases more CH4 than a scenario with static
hydrology and only supra-permafrost CH4 sources. The resulting radiative forcing
will be quantified via conceptual modeling, also informed by field measurements
and laboratory analyses, to include talik and sub-permafrost CH4 and CO2
emissions, anaerobic oxidation of sub-permafrost CH4, and CO2 uptake and
sequestration as lake sediments form peat. In addition to a watershed-scale
quantification, a first order estimation of the sub-permafrost derived radiative
forcing will be provided for the pan-arctic discontinuous permafrost domain of
yedoma (organic-rich, Pleistocene-aged, loess-dominated permafrost).