* 1500875
* Moduli Spaces of Holomorphic Curves: Properties and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Aleksey Zinger, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2019
* USD 321,000.00

String theory is a model that represents elementary particles by vibrating
strings with the aim of unifying the four fundamental forces of nature. While
string theory is one of the main paradigms in physics today, it has yet to make
experimentally testable predictions. However, it has generated many mathematical
predictions that have led to fundamental developments in algebraic geometry and
symplectic topology, especially in relation to (pseudo-) holomorphic curves.
This project aims to further test string theory mathematically, while deepening
the mathematical understanding of such curves with an eye toward applications to
more classical problems in geometry. Some of the projects in this work will be
pursued by graduate students and other junior researchers in collaboration with
the investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has four distinct directions
at the juncture of algebraic geometry, symplectic topology, and string theory.
It will explore connections between the rigidity of pseudo-holomorphic curves in
symplectic topology and birational algebraic geometry. It will study the local
structure of moduli spaces of stable morphisms of genus 2 and higher, with the
aim of later applications in mirror symmetry and enumerative geometry. The PI
will also apply his method for computing genus 1 Gromov-Witten invariants to
more targets, with the aims of verifying predictions of string theory
predictions in additional cases. The fourth direction aims to develop positive-
genus real Gromov-Witten theory and its relations with open string theory and
real enumerative geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by
the Algebra and Number Theory and Geometric Analysis programs.