* 1501883
* Battery Energy Storage Systems Education and Training Initiative (BESS-ETI)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Riley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 549,559.00

A growing need exists for energy storage systems that enable efficient energy
management and resiliency. This growth is expanding the demand for qualified
technicians to install and maintain battery energy storage systems. The Battery
Energy Storage Systems Education and Training Initiative (BESS-ETI) is convening
experts from the electrical engineering and energy storage industries to create
a robust education and training program for electrical workers and technicians.
The portable curriculum and interactive web-based learning exercises created by
the project will enable the expansion of energy storage training at community
colleges and electrical worker training programs. This project is contributing
to the attraction of a diverse electrical workforce through the expansion of
outreach education and training assets supporting teachers in the Philadelphia
community. This project is also supporting the revitalization and expansion of
domestic manufacturing by reducing barriers to the deployment of much needed
battery technologies in the energy sector and includes a nucleus of
manufacturing partners in Reading, Pennsylvania, which is a distressed economic
region.

A key source of innovation and emphasis in the project is the advancement of
blended learning methods that utilize immersive web-based interactive learning
settings and a remote laboratory in which operation and monitoring of real
energy storage systems and micro grids are made accessible to instructors across
the nation. An important contribution of the project is the demonstration of how
scalable and mastery-based active learning and remote laboratory tools can
improve learning outcomes including safety procedures, measurement and
verification, and systems diagnostics. The project will use quantitative and
qualitative data to assess cognitive (knowledge and understanding) and affective
(confidence) outcomes for students' pre- and post-exposure to the BESS-ETI
curriculum. Internal and external evaluators will conduct formative evaluation
towards continuous improvement of the BESS-ETI program and an external evaluator
will conduct summative evaluation of project outcomes.