* 1501404
* Local Cohomology, the Frobenius Endomorphism, D-Module Theory, and Invariant Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Emily Witt, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 02/29/2016
* USD 127,001.00

It is well known that many of the geometric objects encountered in daily life
can be described using equations. Furthermore, fundamental and interesting
objects can often be described using polynomial equations (for example, consider
the familiar equation for a circle). Though polynomials are based upon some of
the most elementary operations (namely, addition and multiplication), they are
able to describe a rich variety of phenomena, and can sometimes behave in
mysterious and complicated ways. This research project concerns the mathematical
field of commutative algebra, that is, the study of polynomial equations. This
field has many important applications; for example, it is used in cryptography
and physics. The broad goal of this project is to understand mathematical
structures that arise in the study of polynomial equations. Many of the methods
employed in the research project involve techniques from other areas of
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance the
understanding of some fundamental objects in commutative algebra. In particular,
it aims to shed light on the structure of local cohomology modules, rings of
mixed characteristic, Bernstein-Sato polynomials, and singularities in
characteristic p. The investigator is especially motivated by the deep
connections between these topics. The project seeks to do the following: (1) to
study local cohomology modules using group actions and D-module theory; (2) to
use the Lyubeznik numbers (and variants introduced recently by the investigator
and collaborator) to compare rings of equal characteristic and mixed
characteristic, and to understand rings of mixed characteristic; and (3) to find
explicit formulas for F-thresholds and use these to produce roots of the
Bernstein-Sato polynomial. The techniques employed use invariant theory,
noncommutative algebra, and combinatorics.