* 1501342
* Measuring the Gas Content of Extreme Star-forming Galaxies across Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Ximena Fernandez, Fernandez, Ximena
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2018
* USD 266,500.00

Ximena Fernandez is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Rutgers, the
State University of New Jersey. Her research seeks to understand how galaxies
evolve; in particular, she is interested in those that are forming stars at a
very high rate. The high star formation rates are triggered by interactions
between galaxies at the present age of the Universe, but it is still unclear if
this holds true at earlier times. Fernandez will use upgraded and new radio
telescopes to image the gas reservoirs of these systems to better understand the
processes taking place. This will yield important clues since gas provides the
fuel for star formation, making it a key component in the evolution of galaxies.
The educational component of the proposal consists of developing summer STEM
courses as part of the Rutgers Future Scholars program with local public
schools. This program selects local talented seventh graders and provides them
with academic resources and mentoring to help them graduate from high school and
be the first ones in their families to attend college.

Fernandez seeks to measure the evolution of the atomic and molecular gas across
cosmic time, and explore possible differences between the mergers and turbulent
disks. She will study the evolution of ultra-luminous infrared galaxies using
images of neutral hydrogen (HI). The first part of the study will use the COSMOS
HI Large Extragalactic Survey, an on-going survey being done at the Very Large
Array that is expected to image 300 galaxies in the redshift interval 0< z <0.5.
The second part will use data from the LADUMA (Looking At the Distant Universe
with the MeerKAT Array) survey planned with the South African Square Kilometer
Array precursor, which will measure the HI content out to z=1.4. The third part
consists of observing a sub-sample of galaxies in CO with ALMA to compare its
amount and distribution of molecular hydrogen to HI. The educational component
consists of developing several STEM courses that will use astronomy as a gateway
science to illustrate how astronomers use fields such as physics, chemistry,
biology, and engineering to understand the Universe. In addition, Fernandez will
plan activities open to families which will consist of both
lecture/demonstration and observing. She will serve as a mentor and offer
research opportunities to interested students.