* 1501373
* Dissertation Research: Evolutionary transitions: pollination biology and domestication of Artocarpus (Moraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Nyree Zerega, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2017
* USD 17,882.00

The rapid diversification and rise to dominance of angiosperms is one of the
enduring mysteries of evolutionary biology. While coevolution with animal
pollinators is a major driver of angiosperm diversity, the degree of advantage
conferred by animal pollination over wind pollination has been controversial,
and the rarity of appropriate study systems has hampered progress in
understanding the consequences of this transition. This research uses the
tropical tree genus Artocarpus (Moraceae)- one of the rare systems exhibiting
transitions from wind to animal pollination - to investigate evolutionary
implications of that shift. Artocarpus pollination ranges from wind to a unique
mutualism mediated by parasitic fungi that provide a brood site and nutrition
for fly pollinators. This project provides the opportunity to understand
morphological characters associated with pollination shifts, challenge
assumptions about reversions from wind to animal pollination, and expose
characters that may have been involved in the early radiation of flowering
plants as they co-evolved with their animal pollinators. Artocarpus contains
several underutilized crops including breadfruit, jackfruit, and terap. This
research will support efforts to develop and improve important Artocarpus crops
by increasing understanding of their reproductive biology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project combines experimental pollinator-exclusion studies with
morphological analysis to elucidate pollination mechanisms in Artocarpus and
reveal morphological traits correlated with transitions between wind and insect
pollination. These transitions will be combined with phylogenomic analyses for
the group, to analyze changes in morphology in an evolutionary context, and to
resolve the number and direction of wind-insect pollination transitions in
Artocarpus. The research uses microsatellite DNA fingerprinting to uncover the
domestication history of the insect-pollinated species Artocarpus odoratissimus,
one of several underutilized tropical tree crops in this genus. Through
collaborations in Malaysia, this project will promote scientific research on a
group of underutilized crops in developing tropical regions and provide training
in pollination biology to local scientists. The research will also provide
research opportunities for undergraduates. The researchers will engage the
public through displays at the Chicago Botanic Garden to promote awareness of
pollination biology and tropical biodiversity.