* 1501438
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Microbial Responses to Elevation in a Tropical Montane Cloud Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Kathleen Treseder, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,996.00

Tropical montane cloud forests are characterized by persistent low-level cloud
cover. These clouds alter light, temperature, and precipitation. They also
support a large community of plants living on the branches and trunks of trees.
Over time, dead plant material collects and decomposes on these branches,
forming ?canopy soil?. Few studies have investigated the microbial communities
within canopy soils. Nevertheless, this is important because microbial
communities decompose organic material from plants and release CO2 (a greenhouse
gas) into the atmosphere. This process has primarily been measured in soils on
the forest floor. Based on these forest floor measurements, we estimate that
microbes in tropical ecosystems can contribute greatly to global production of
CO2. However, these estimates do not account for canopy soil. Determining how
canopy soils contribute to microbial diversity and carbon cycling will allow us
to better determine the role of tropical ecosystems in the global carbon cycle.
In turn, this knowledge will allow us to make more accurate predictions of how
these ecosystems may respond to future changes in the environment. Moreover,
international research and collaborations are important to promote environmental
stewardship and create networks of researchers with common goals. The project
involves a multidisciplinary collaboration with another researcher and will help
build a stronger, international research network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will incorporate canopy soil into the investigation of microbial
diversity in tropical montane cloud forests. To obtain a full assessment of the
diversity within canopy soils and how they compare to terrestrial soils, the
researchers will measure both fungal and bacterial diversity. Greater abiotic
stress within tropical canopies should select for different microbial
communities than are present in terrestrial soil. Therefore, the researchers
hypothesize that canopy and terrestrial soils will harbor distinct microbial
communities. In addition, extracellular enzymatic activity of C-targeting
enzymes will be higher in canopy soils due to increased organic matter. Canopy
and terrestrial soils will be collected along two elevation transects each on
the Atlantic and Pacific slopes of the Cordillera de Tilar√°n within the
Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve. Collections will occur during the dry (January
to April) and wet (May to November) seasons to explore differences in
seasonality within this ecosystem. Fungal and bacterial diversity and
extracellular enzymatic activity will be measured.