* 1501710
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Phenotypic and Genetic Basis of Facilitation and Competition in Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Lindsay Leverett, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,546.00

Plants growing in the same place harm each other when there are not enough
resources such as nutrients and sunlight to go around. This means poor
competitors are at the mercy of superior ones, and less likely to survive and
reproduce. On the flip side, plants can actually protect each other when faced
with environmental stress such as drought. By blocking sunlight from reaching
and heating the soil, plants that are growing close together prevent the
evaporation of soil moisture. But since environments are constantly changing, a
single plant can receive both harm and protection from neighbors over its
lifetime. These dynamic neighbor relationships raise many intriguing questions.
What makes some plants good competitors, but makes others rely on protection
from their neighbors? How much do genetics versus the environment (nature versus
nurture) control whether plants will harm or protect each other? Do harm and
protection cause plant traits to evolve? The researchers aim to identify
environmental conditions, plant traits, and genes that cause harm and
protection, and use this information to determine if these plant interactions
affect evolution. By identifying conditions that reduce harm, this research
helps ecologists working to develop better methods to protect endangered species
that are poor competitors. The results also can be used to breed crops that can
survive and make food even when resources are low and stress is high.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are combining manipulations of the environment with
selection analysis and other quantitative genetics techniques (e.g. analyses of
trait co-variances) to connect competition (harm) and facilitation (protection)
with natural selection and adaptation in Arabidopsis thaliana (Brassicaceae).
Changes in light, moisture, and temperature caused by neighbors are being linked
with the effects of those neighbors on the survival and reproduction of focal
plants. Genome-wide association mapping is being used to identify genes for
competition and facilitation as those explaining differences in survival and
reproduction in the presence versus absence of neighbors. Once all these
analyses are complete, the researchers plan to use previous knowledge of gene
function to test the hypothesis that genes controlling nutrient processing and
requirements, phenology, and stress tolerance also control competition and
facilitation.