* 1501631
* NBC2: Building Regional and National Networks for a 21st Century Workforce for the Bioeconomy
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Linda Rehfuss, Montgomery County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,662,299.00

The number of biomanufacturing companies in the United States is upwards of 350
and growing. The demand for advanced technology technicians educated in the
skills, knowledge and attributes of biomanufacturing remains high and is
currently not being met by 4-year college graduates entering the job market.
"The Report and Survey of Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing Capacity and
Production" recognized the importance of community college biomanufacturing
programs in educating this workforce, and this Center will continue to create
local infrastructures and a national network to support the development of a
skilled national workforce for the biomanufacturing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will use best practices as they relate
to professional development, curriculum development, career coaching,
partnerships and networks, dissemination and sustainability. Center goals and
objectives include the following. 1) New curriculum will be developed for the
most recent advances and trends in biomanufacturing, including single use
technology, upstream and downstream processing of monoclonal antibody
therapeutics, process development and quality by design, biofuels from
microalgae and the production of stem cells in a Good Manufacturing Practices
(GMP) environment. These curriculum modules will be introduced to faculty in
nine 3-day workshops and as a mini laboratory manual. 2) Partnerships within
local networks of educators and employers will be strengthened and expanded to
emphasize the pathway for students from high school through college to the work
place. There will be a strong focus on high school students with the development
of a series of summer workshops allowing students to gain awareness of the field
and progress through hands-on activities in different areas of biomanufacturing.
3) Professional development will include topic specific mini conferences for
community college faculty, the continuation of "Protein is Cash" workshops, and
a conference for secondary teachers dedicated to implementing biomanufacturing
and biotechnology in the classroom following state and national education
standards. Community college students will have real world experience with
internships and coaching to find employment in the field.