* 1501520
* Using Californias Drought To Analyze Fractured Groundwater Inputs To High Elevation Meadows
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2015
* Christopher Lowry, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 11/30/2015
* USD 25,434.00

Using California's Drought to Analyze Groundwater Inputs from Fractured Bedrock
to Alpine Meadows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the contribution from
groundwater is critical for understanding alpine water supply during both
drought and future climate change. Past hydrologic studies in high-elevation
mountain meadows have focused on water derived from snowmelt, streams, and
adjacent hillslopes to support alpine vegetation. Given California's multi-year
drought, one can better identify previously unrecognized groundwater
contributions to high-elevation meadows from underlying bedrock. This project
will sample and better define the deep groundwater component of the Sierra
system through chemical and isotopic means. The project will develop connections
to scientists at national labs; and two graduate students will gain field
experience, learn new field methods, and participate in laboratory analysis. The
Sierra Nevada National Parks and Forests represent an important outdoor
classroom for education of the general public in the natural sciences. All
project results will be given to the National Park Service for incorporation
into their outdoor education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation
will take advantage of the current drought when contributions from flowpaths in
deep fractured bedrock will yield a high-fidelity geochemical signal that will
enable quantification of the location and volume of groundwater entering meadows
from bedrock sources. This project will demonstrate a computational methodology
for geochemical deconvolution of deep bedrock groundwater and shallow
groundwater geochemical signals that can be transferred to other high-elevation
meadows where groundwater input has generally been unrecognized. This project
will investigate a suite of naturally occurring geochemical tracers in Yosemite
groundwater wells to identify the locations of groundwater discharge from
fractured bedrock contributing to meadows in the Sierra Nevada Mountains of
California. New methods of groundwater sampling for noble gas and isotopic
tracers will be developed. Samples of groundwater and stream water will be
analyzed for multiple chemical constituents through collaboration with the
scientists at Lawrence Livermore National Lab.