* 1501735
* Preparing Students for Advances in Transportation that Utilize Alternative Energy Sources
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* John Frala, Rio Hondo College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

In partnership with the ATE Center for Advanced Automotive Technology (CAAT),
other ATE Centers that focus on transportation or energy, and regional and local
employers, Rio Hondo College in California will further develop and offer a
newly created Electric/Hybrid/ Fuel-Cell Technician Associate Degree. The
project will build on the expertise and partnerships the institution has
developed with local schools, companies, Workforce Investment Boards (WIB's),
the State of California Employment Development Department (EDD), the Governor's
Green Team, and the California Energy Commission. It will create and evaluate
improved models for work-based learning tools to assure students are more
successful and to increase diversity in the technical work force. The project
will integrate high-performance electronics, computer management skills, and
advanced technology diagnostic skills that make students highly employable while
assisting the diverse high school population in the service area served by the
college. It will encourage students to continue their education and attain two
and four year technology degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
a clear and defined pathway that will allow articulated high school students
from diverse backgrounds to enter a new form of automobile and energy technician
training. It will also create the career pathway to an Associate of Science
degree that is transferable to articulated universities in the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) areas of Mechanical Engineering
or Electrical Engineering, degrees not commonly associated with the automobile
technician in the past. The project will integrate a high-performance STEM based
energy curriculum using innovative teaching strategies at the college and high
school and university partners. It will track students in the new
Hybrid/Electric/Fuel-Cell Technician program to assure that they graduate with
sufficient learning and work experience to qualify for employment as an
Electric/Hybrid/ Fuel-Cell Technician and will use manufacturers' supported
industry certifications and technical training for faculty. Industrial partners
will provide internships and supervised work experience for technicians that
allow graduates to be successful when they secure employment. The project will
demonstrate significant improvement in the STEM learning using interdisciplinary
and applied approaches to areas of Career and Technical Education (CTE). Problem
solving and technical skills will be enhanced by this curriculum as it will
integrate work-based skills, clearly defined career pathways, and stackable
certificates that industry demands from employees. A Summer Energy Academy for
13 year old students brings teachers and students together to build and test the
latest alternative energy technology.