* 1501215
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of hyperaccumulation in wild Helianthus: a phylogenetically explicit assessment of evolutionary history and adaptive hypotheses
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Lisa Donovan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2018
* USD 19,362.00

Over 500 species of flowering plants are metal hyperaccumulators, meaning they
possess the ability to take up extremely high concentrations of normally toxic
metals into their shoot tissues. This natural ability may be harnessed for
useful technological applications, including phytoremediation (the use of plants
for environmental cleanup of polluted areas) as well as biofortification (the
enrichment of crops with key nutrients like iron). The broad objective of the
proposed research is to understand how the development of metal
hyperaccumulation ability depends on metal tolerance, and how hyperaccumulation
ability may benefit wild plants. Proposed benefits of hyperaccumulation to
plants have included reduced herbivory and disease, improved drought tolerance,
and reduced competition. This research will test these proposed benefits using
the genus Helianthus (the sunflowers), a group of diverse species found in
habitats across North America. Sunflowers are known to many for the
agriculturally and horticulturally important crop species Helianthus annuus,
which is itself a known hyperaccumulator of at least five different heavy
metals. In addition to improving our understanding of plant ecology, this
research will provide direct insights into hyperaccumulator physiology for the
improved breeding and use of sunflower in technological applications.

The evolutionary interactions of metal tolerance and metal hyperaccumulation
will be assessed using 35 wild Helianthus species, through a manipulative
greenhouse study generating a soil nickel gradient consisting of ten separate
treatment levels, in which the evolution of tolerance and hyperaccumulation are
parsed apart as separate and distinct traits. The putative costs and benefits of
hyperaccumulation will be examined in greenhouse experiments which will quantify
fitness-related costs while simultaneously evaluating five leading adaptive
hypotheses. A phylogenetically explicit approach to the study of metal
hyperaccumulation evolution can dramatically improve the understanding of the
ecological and evolutionary context of metal hyperaccumulation. More broadly,
this research will promote further development of the newly emerging field of
evolutionary toxicology and will implement novel phylogenetic comparative
methods for assessing environmentally responsive traits, allowing for an
improved range of tools to address existing and emerging environmental concerns.