* 1501207
* Austin Community College Bio-Link Regional Advanced Technological Education Center for Biotechnology and Life Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Sandra Porter, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 12/31/2020
* USD 2,979,962.00

The establishment of this Regional Center for biotechnology technicians
complements the activities of the Bio-Link Next Generation National Advanced
Technological Education Center for Biotechnology and Life Sciences. The common
mission of the two centers is to "(1) increase the number and diversity of well-
trained technicians in the workforce; (2) meet the ever-growing needs of a
continually evolving and diversifying industry for appropriately trained
technicians; and (3) institutionalize community college education practices that
make high-quality education and training in the concepts, tools, skills
processes, regulatory structure, and ethics of biotechnology available to all
students." This regional center will expand on Bio-Link's distributed leadership
network model to build replicable state Bio-Link networks. As a regional center,
its activities will broaden the impact of the national center, while at the same
time focus on the biotechnology workforce needs of Texas and Kentucky, two
states that host a growing biotechnology industry and would benefit from
establishing a Bio-Link network. The Texas and Kentucky leadership teams are
located in areas of highest industry growth.

The goals of the project include: 1) Establish a sustainable, replicable
Biotechnology Community College Distributed Leadership Network in each state to
establish collaboration across educational and industry systems; 2) Scale-up the
Biotechnology High School/College Mentor Network to support high school teachers
to implement industry appropriate life science courses; 3) Develop new student
recruitment pipelines into the industry that include using undergraduate
research as a hook in feeder courses and programs to attract and retain students
in life science careers; 4) Implement an entry-level certificate in high schools
and community colleges to facilitate entry into bio-technician jobs in industry;
5) Establish Contract Service Organizations (CSO) in community colleges pairing
industry projects with student internships and faculty externships to benefit
companies, students, and faculty; and 6) Establish statewide articulation and
reversed articulation agreements among educational partners to facilitate
academic transferability and increase degree completion. By fulfilling these
goals, a collaborative network at several levels and in two separate states,
Texas and Kentucky, will be established to meet the workforce needs of an
interdisciplinary, evolving biotechnology industry. Biotechnology educational
partners will share resources such as curriculum, equipment, best practices in
teaching, utilize state and local resources to sustain them in mentoring
secondary and postsecondary faculty, recruit and mentor students, and develop
stronger relationships between two year and four year institutions so that
students can transfer between the institutions to continue their studies.
Educational partners will build on the strengths of their individual programs
and the needs of area industry, and will work together to identify emerging
technician trends on topics such as regulatory affairs, stem cell maintenance,
biotechnology-related renewable energy technology, and biopharming. The Texas
and Kentucky biotechnology industries will become more competitive in a global
market and a sustainable, replicable model for establishing Bio-link state
networks will be developed. The Center will establish a self-sustaining
biotechnology workforce educational network across Texas, and the start of a
similar system in Kentucky. Taking advantage of established state, local, and
institutional infrastructures, the networks are to be built based on best
practices developed and implemented through the Bio-Link Network.