* 1501828
* Advanced Technological Education in Robotics and Automated Manufacturing Program (ATE-RAMP)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* James Payne, Orangeburg-Calhoun Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 644,220.00

Orangeburg-Calhoun Technical College (OCtech) will implement the "Advanced
Technological Education in Robotics and Automated Manufacturing Program" (ATE-
RAMP) with the overarching goal of increasing awareness of opportunities in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines for women
and underrepresented minorities. To achieve this goal, the project team will
implement a three-step plan focused on awareness, preparation, and career-
readiness. Within the region served by OCtech, interest in STEM careers and
student achievement in STEM subjects lags behind the nation and behind many
areas within the state of South Carolina. The five counties being targeted for
this project are in the top six of South Carolina's forty-six (46) counties with
the highest unemployment rates. Efforts are being made to shore up the lagging
economy in the area by recruiting a variety of high tech industries. These
employers will need workers with knowledge and skills in STEM subjects, namely
robotics and automated manufacturing (AM). Without a skilled workforce to offer,
this region of South Carolina will fail to fulfill its potential role as a home
to these much needed industries. In partnership with local industry and school
districts, ATE-RAMP will help meet current and future workforce needs by
attracting and engaging students from poor, rural communities who are not
typically exposed to robotics, AM, and STEM career opportunities. The partnering
school districts have significant minority and female student populations.

The objectives of the project are to: (1) introduce opportunities for
underrepresented groups to have access to programs involving robotics and AM;
(2) provide dual credit courses in robotics and AM for high school students; and
(3) expand the course offerings in the computer engineering curriculum at OCtech
to include robotics and AM and share developed resources with other colleges.
These objectives will be met through activities including, but not limited to,
hosting Vex Robotics teams, competitions, and summer camps for rural K-12
students, deploying traveling robotics and AM demonstrations, adding dual credit
courses to the STEM Academy of the Middle College at OCtech, expanding capacity
of existing courses to facilitate better hands-on experiences for students, and
revising the Associate in Applied Science (AAS) in Engineering Technology to
ensure that it produces technicians with marketable skills necessary to work in
fields related to robotics and AM. Achievement of desired goals will be
determined by employing mixed methods that assess affective and cognitive
outcomes using both quantitative and qualitative data. The results will help
build the knowledge base on promising practices for engaging students from
underrepresented groups who live in poor, rural communities in STEM activities,
technician programs, and in the workforce.