* 1501110
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Do tradeoffs between water use efficiency and growth explain plant community response to nitrogen deposition?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Edith Allen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2017
* USD 19,749.00

Nitrogen is a largely unrecognized component of air pollution and can negatively
impact ecosystems. Excess nitrogen in the air is eventually deposited in the
soil. While more nitrogen in the soil may seem beneficial for plant growth, many
plant species are adapted to lower nutrient levels. Indeed, previous studies
have shown that nitrogen deposition can be detrimental to ecosystem health.
Southern California, which is notorious for its nitrogen-containing smog, has
high levels of nitrogen deposition in the soil and many invasive plant species
that also reduce native biodiversity. Nitrogen deposition may magnify the impact
of invasive species because it often promotes growth of invasive annual plants
over native shrubs and wildflowers. One possible explanation for the loss of
native species is that added nitrogen makes them grow faster and use water less
efficiently, causing them to be more susceptible to drought. Invasive plants on
the other hand, may be able to grow fast with added nitrogen and still use water
efficiently. The purpose of this research is to compare growth and water use by
native and invasive plants under different levels of nitrogen addition. This
work will lead to a better understanding of the environmental effects of
nitrogen deposition, especially in dry habitats with problematic invasive
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying how trait differences between native
and invasive plant species influence community composition over environmental
gradients is critical to a mechanistic understanding of how ecosystems will
respond to global change. Nitrogen deposition is reported as major driver of
plant diversity loss, invasion and vegetation-type conversion in some areas of
Europe and North America. In arid systems, nitrogen and water will have
interactive effects on water-use efficiency and growth, and these responses may
mediate survival. Trade-offs among plant traits, such as water-use efficiency
and relative growth rate, are known to play an important role in community
assembly and species coexistence. Native and invasive plants may differ in this
trade-off, and added nitrogen may influence these dynamics. The use of stable
isotopes (13C) for the estimation of integrated water-use efficiency in
conjunction with a plant functional trait-based approach and community-level
data will allow for exploration of this important tradeoff as a mechanism of
invasion under N deposition. The researchers will address this hypothesis by
measuring the growth and water-use efficiency of native and invasive plants
along an experimental gradient in nitrogen deposition in the Santa Monica
Mountains of southern California.