* 1501781
* Leading Innovation through Green High-Tech Engineering, Sustainability &amp; Security (LIGHTES^2)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Nina Leonhardt, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2019
* USD 699,486.00

As attention to the potential for cyber-attacks across industries and
municipalities has grown, the need for individuals trained in cybersecurity to
protect the nation's information systems, networks, and infrastructure has never
been greater. This is evident in cybersecurity jobs growing at twice the rate of
all other IT jobs combined. At the same time the potential vulnerabilities in
the nation's information infrastructure carry implications for the
sustainability of the nation's energy infrastructure. In response, this ATE
project will i) engage in the design and creation a new seamless pathway from
high school through college in cybersecurity and ii) enhance its existing
sustainability programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals of this project
are to: 1) increase the capacity to grow and train an advanced technological
workforce in cybersecurity; 2) create a seamless pathway for inquiry-based
learning for STEM students, with attention to increased participation of
underrepresented students, from high school through college; 3) engage and
expand the number of minority and non-traditional students in cybersecurity and
sustainability programs at the College; and 4) foster regional collaboration
among industry, higher education, secondary schools. The cybersecurity degree
will include stacked certifications, permitting both traditional students and
professionals returning to college to enter and exit the program flexibly and to
obtain certifications while "stacking" those certifications towards the degree,
or to complete the program traditionally and exit after two years with a degree
and the certifications. Thus, the program will benefit both new students and
existing professionals looking to upgrade their skills and obtain additional
academic and workplace credentials.