* 1501064
* The p-adic geometry of Shimura varieties and applications to the Langlands program
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Ana Caraiani, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 159,469.00

This is a research project in the general area of number theory. This area of
mathematics has applications to areas such as cryptography and to physics. The
particular branch of number theory considered in this project is arithmetic
geometry where properties of interest in number theory are studied by geometric
methods. The overall theme of the research is the interplay between arithmetic
geometry and the Langlands correspondence for number fields. There have been
many recent breakthroughs in the field, such as new techniques for proving
reciprocity (modularity lifting theorems as well as the emerging p-adic
Langlands program) and the construction of Galois representations associated to
torsion classes in the cohomology of locally symmetric spaces. All of these
developments have depended crucially on being able to p-adically interpolate
automorphic forms. The concept of p-adic automorphic forms has a natural
definition in terms of the geometry and cohomology of Shimura varieties and
therefore p-adic arithmetic geometry is useful for studying
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI investigates two intertwined areas: on one
hand, applications of p-adic arithmetic geometry (specifically the theory of
perfectoid spaces) to p-adic automorphic forms and, on the other hand, p-adic
and mod p analogues of the classical Langlands program. Specifically, the PI
will study a new approach to the p-adic local Langlands correspondence via the
Taylor-Wiles method, to further study torsion occurring in the cohomology of
Shimura varieties and the properties at p of the associated Galois
representations and to develop a new approach to instances of the Tate
conjecture in the context of Shimura varieties. Some of the new techniques that
the PI intends to use are the Taylor-Wiles patching method applied to completed
cohomology and matching parameters in local deformation rings with Hecke
operators. Another key idea involves studying perfectoid Shimura varieties via
their associated period domains. The research project lies at the intersection
of algebraic number theory, representation theory and algebraic geometry, with a
focus on the interplay between p-adic arithmetic geometry and the Langlands
correspondence for number fields. A central motif in number theory is the
classification of algebraic extensions of number fields. Class field theory
addresses this for extensions with abelian Galois group. The Langlands program
provides a framework for a vast generalization of class field theory to the non-
abelian setting. At its heart is the conjectural correspondence between
automorphic representations and Galois representations, which is often realized
by geometric objects, such as Shimura varieties. Therefore, arithmetic geometry
provides many important tools for studying Langlands correspondences. Many of
the most spectacular recent results in number theory are instances of the
Langlands correspondence, such as Fermat's last theorem, the Sato-Tate
conjecture and Serre's conjecture.