* 1501832
* Multiple Dirichlet series, Whittaker functions, and the cohomology of arithmetic groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Paul Gunnells, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2021
* USD 149,999.00

This research deals with the interactions between number theory
and&lt;br/&gt;representation theory. Number theory is the study of the
properties&lt;br/&gt;of the whole numbers, and is the oldest branch of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;Representation theory is the systematic study of
symmetry, through the&lt;br/&gt;development of simple mathematical objects that
encode the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;irreducible pieces of symmetry. A principal aim
of the proposal is to&lt;br/&gt;explore relationships between these two subjects
in the spirit of the&lt;br/&gt;"Langlands philosophy," which predicts deep
connections between number&lt;br/&gt;theory and representation theory. Today the
questions and phenomena&lt;br/&gt;addressed by these subjects serve as driving
forces in much of&lt;br/&gt;contemporary mathematics research. Moreover, the
individual areas&lt;br/&gt;themselves have contributed many applications in such
diverse areas as&lt;br/&gt;coding and data transmission, chemistry, physics, and
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems that
will be investigated in this project focus on&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic groups and
multiple Dirichlet series, objects that are&lt;br/&gt;intimately related to
automorphic forms. The first part addresses&lt;br/&gt;topics related to
cohomology of arithmetic groups and allied areas,&lt;br/&gt;such as the geometry
of locally symmetric spaces and the conjectures&lt;br/&gt;linking cohomology to
arithmetic geometry and Galois representations.&lt;br/&gt;A central goal of this
part is the computational investigation of&lt;br/&gt;torsion in the cohomology
of various arithmetic groups and its&lt;br/&gt;relation to arithmetic. The
second part studies multiple Dirichlet&lt;br/&gt;series attached to Weyl groups.
These are infinite series in several&lt;br/&gt;complex variables that satisfy a
group of functional equations&lt;br/&gt;intermixing all the variables. The
topics in this part emphasize&lt;br/&gt;connections between these series and
combinatorics, representation&lt;br/&gt;theory, automorphic forms, and
mathematical physics.