* 1501357
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Role of Learning in Duet Development and Sex-specific Repertoire Acquisition in Plain Wrens
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* William Searcy, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 16,355.00

Many animals communicate vocally according to a set of rules. In human
conversation for example, individuals avoid overlapping each other, a rule known
as "turn taking." Another rule in human conversation, "pair adjacency," dictates
that certain responses should follow certain utterances: a greeting should be
answered by another greeting, for example, and a question should be followed by
an answer. Human conversation is difficult to study because of its complexity,
and therefore a need has been recognized for interdisciplinary studies that
investigate interaction rules in simpler animal models. This study will address
potential biological examples of both turn taking and pair adjacency in a
duetting Neotropical bird: the plain wren. This study will be one of the first
to address experimentally the development of song in a duetting species and the
first to address experimentally the development of the interaction rules that
govern duets. Furthermore, this study will support the education of local field
guides as well as both Latin and American undergraduates by recruiting them for
laboratory and field work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mated pairs in various songbirds
sing together to produce duets. In some species, including the plain wren, the
male and female of a pair alternate their songs so rapidly and precisely that it
sounds as if a single individual is singing. In many species that duet, again
including the plain wren, males and females have repertoires of sex-specific
song elements and follow a "duet code" that specifies which syllable of one sex
is used to answer a particular syllable from the other sex. This research will
provide the first thorough study of how aspects of duets such as precise
temporal coordination, sex-specific elements, and duet codes develop. Plain
wrens will be hand-reared in captivity and tutored either with duets and solo
songs or with solo songs only. This experiment will answer four main questions:
1) Do plain wrens need experience of duet singing during early development to be
able to duet with temporal precision? 2) Do plain wrens have an innate
predisposition to learn their own sex-specific songs? 3) Are duet codes learned
from duets heard during the early stages of life? 4) Can duet codes be altered
after individuals have reached adulthood? A list of published material and
primary data available upon request will be posted on the Principal
Investigator's laboratory website
(http://www.bio.miami.edu/searcylab/karla.html) after publication.