* 1501097
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Geographic complexity in the recovery of terrestrial vertebrate assemblages from mass extinction
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Christian Sidor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2017
* USD 15,878.00

This project will improve our understanding of how terrestrial life diversified
after the largest extinction event of the last 500 million years. This event
took place just over 252 million years ago at the boundary between the Permian
and Triassic periods, when more than 70% of terrestrial animals went extinct.
The fossil record is one of the main sources of data for many questions
concerning the history of life on Earth. For the end-Permian event, our
understanding of what occurred on land is known almost entirely from just two
places - Russia and South Africa. This new research will build a database of
fossil material belonging to terrestrial vertebrate animals from two additional
places - Tanzania and Zambia. Before the extinction the fossil communities at
those two new locations were similar to those of South Africa, but afterwards
they were very different, and included new animals such as close relatives of
mammals and, surprisingly, early relatives of the first dinosaurs. This research
will combine data collected from recent research with that stored in museums
across Europe and Africa to develop the most extensive fossil database of end-
Permian land animals. This will allow paleontologists to determine
diversification patterns across a larger region than has ever been done for this
time period, and to discover the reasons that particular species survived the
largest mass extinction event of all time and subsequently thrived.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will synthesize several facets of diversity
among terrestrial tetrapods, including species richness, evenness, relative
abundances, trophic structure, and ecological niche diversity, and adds a new
component of geographical complexity from poorly-sampled basins in Tanzania and
Zambia (TZAM). Substantial fieldwork there in recent years has confirmed that
the sedimentary rocks can be correlated with those of South Africa and Russia,
and can therefore act as independent tests of hypotheses about the extinction
and recovery processes. Preliminary data indicate that a homogeneous fauna
existed between TZAM and South Africa before the extinction event, but that
during the recovery process ecosystems fragmented, resulting in increased levels
of endemism and biogeographic differentiation. This project aims to test
hypotheses related to ecological structure and biogeographic patterns of
vertebrate communities on either side of the end-Permian extinction, both within
and between basins. Additionally, the researchers will test in deep time an
ecological hypothesis developed for extant species, the abundance-range
hypothesis.