* 1501802
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of convergent functional systems in a hyperdiverse clade of parasitic wasps (Hymenoptera, Ichneumonidae, Cryptini)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* James Carpenter, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,250.00

Convergent evolution - the presence of similar characteristics among independent
lineages - is one of the oldest and most fascinating patterns in evolutionary
biology. Convergence shapes so many aspects of life?s diversity that
understanding it is essential to our knowledge of biological variation and
evolution. In spite of that, convergent traits have often been documented only
qualitatively. This study will use a rigorous methodological approach to
investigate how similar life strategies can produce convergence in the body
shape of a diverse group of insects. Cryptine wasps are a dominant but poorly
known group of parasitic insects. Their hosts are concealed to various degrees,
from mimicking leaf rolls and twigs to tree logs and clay nests. Species
attacking insects that are deeply concealed have evolved a number of adaptations
to find and reach their hosts. We will investigate the hypothesis that these
features are linked in a complex functional system, and that the convergence of
life strategies imposes constraints on the body shape of cryptine wasps. In
addition to the scientific products resulting from this project, outreach and
mentoring work will broadly disseminate scientific knowledge about convergent
evolution and parasitic wasps, taking advantage of the unparalleled resources
for scientific education available at the American Museum of Natural
History.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will use a phylogenetic framework to
investigate the impact of convergent life strategies in the morphospace occupied
by cryptine wasps. This will require a comprehensive analysis of the
evolutionary relationships among cryptine wasps, with data derived from both DNA
sequences and morphological characters. Statistical methods will be used to to
reconstruct the ancestral features for host location adaptations and to test
hypotheses of correlation among life history traits and multiple morphological
characters. Finally, a series of quantitative traits and measurements will be
used to generate a multi-dimensional estimation of body shape (morphospace),
allowing for quantitative tests of morphological overlap and convergence