* 1501499
* A Simulation-Based Curriculum to Accelerate Math Remediation and Improve Degree Completion for STEM Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Ching-Song Wei, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2021
* USD 875,794.00

Success in basic algebra is a major stumbling block for students seeking
technical careers. Although it is often assumed that STEM majors start with
calculus as their first college math course, this is not the case for many urban
and minority community college students. This project is addressing the national
problem of mathematics remediation for STEM majors by creating a game- and
simulation-based algebra and trigonometry curriculum. The curriculum features
three to five video games that place math content within real-world GIS
scenarios. The curriculum is used in a summer immersion program for in-coming
Geographic Information Science (GIS) majors at the Borough of Manhattan
Community College (BMCC). The project will impact STEM education at a national
level by providing all materials free and open-source to secondary and post-
secondary institutions via a project website with downloadable curricula, game
software, video tutorials, professional development materials for faculty and
staff, and support forums. The summer immersion program pairs MAT 056, the most
common remedial math course for BMCC STEM majors, with GEO 100, the first course
in the GIS sequence. Students in the program are recruited from NYC high school
graduates participating in BMCC's Science Technology Entry Program. After
completing the summer program, students will receive special support services
and internships in GIS to advance them into an articulating baccalaureate
program at CUNY or in related industries. This project targets BMCC's large
population of minority students (over 90%) and women students (nearly 60%).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence-based research has shown gaming in the
mathematics curriculum has the power to transform mathematics education from an
intimidating and negative experience to one that is fun, engaging, and
successful. While there are many promising NSF-funded science games that are
engaging and promote deep learning, there are very few math games that do so,
and even fewer that specifically cover algebra topics in a way that can be
appreciated by adult learners. Success in basic algebra is a major stumbling
block for students seeking technical careers. This project will build on: 1) a
previous NSF grant award to develop a GIS major at BMCC and 2) a Department of
Education Title V grant for Hispanic-serving institutions to enhance e-learning
initiatives at BMCC, including game-based learning. Games and simulations will
feature real-world applications that focus on skills and contexts necessary for
a career in GIS. Results of this project will be disseminated through conference
presentations and publications. Project outcomes will be assessed through in-
game analytics, traditional quizzes and midterm exams, and the common department
final exam for MAT 056. Department final exam scores and course retention rates
will be compared with rates for the college as a whole, using a logistic
regression analysis of statistically matched cohorts. In addition, differences
by gender and ethnicity will be examined. Student opinion surveys and focus
groups will further gauge the effectiveness of the games and simulations on
student attitudes toward math and technical fields. Finally, the program will be
examined using longitudinal data on student enrollment, two-year retention
rates, and progress toward degree or transfer.