* 1501668
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of individual variation on predator-prey interactions and its joint effect with environmental temperature
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* John DeLong, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 17,285.00

One important goal of ecology is to understand how characteristics, such as body
dimensions and weight, among many others, affect the way species interact with
their environment and how they survive and reproduce. To do so, ecologists have
long measured average characteristics across the individuals of a given species.
However, mounting mathematical evidence suggests that averages can be
misleading, because much information is lost regarding how, and by how much,
individuals differ in their characteristics. These differences may in turn be
crucial to our understanding of whether species can survive in nature, but more
importantly, taking these differences between individuals into account may be
paramount to make accurate predictions about how populations will respond to
environmental change. This research will test these ideas using both
mathematical models and experiments. By quantifying the effects of individual
variation on a critical process in different environments, the research will
promote the advancement of science, support science education and diversity, and
enhance broader understanding of science &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
theoretical predictions, whether variation actually has detectable effects upon
ecological dynamics, and whether this effect interacts with other important
drivers such as environmental temperature, is largely unknown. This project will
quantify the joint effect of individual phenotypic variation and temperature on
foraging rates using an integrative approach that merges mathematical models and
microcosm experiments. Foraging rates of a small copepod, wherein body size
affects predatory activity, on a protist will be quantified for different
temperatures. These results will clarify how this largely overlooked aspect of
every population may help to predict ecological changes with greater precision,
informing decisions about how to respond to climate change. Broader impacts will
include enhancement of science education by involving undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups and minorities in experimental and theoretical
approaches to ecology and through outreach activities on the predator-prey
dynamics to be run in the "Science with a Scientist" childrens outreach event at
the University of Nebraska Museum of Natural History that involves radio
controlled robots as predators and prey.