* 1501764
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Shedding Light on the Complex Relationship Between Circadian Clock Variation and the Trade-off Between Flowering Time and Flower Size
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Ashley Troth, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2017
* USD 20,634.00

A key question in evolutionary biology is how variation is maintained within
populations. One possible mechanism is trade-offs between traits. This research
will demonstrate whether such trade-offs occur in natural populations of the
monkeyflower, Mimulus guttatus, and if developmental patterns influence such
trade-offs. For many plants there is a trade-off between flowering time and
number or quality of seeds. For example, plants that flower early typically have
smaller flowers that are less attractive to pollinators and produce smaller
seeds. However, a single population could maintain genetic variation for both
early flowering and large flowers because either strategy might be successful.
The project also will provide hands-on experience to undergraduates and outreach
to middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mimulus guttatus is a
short-lived annual. In both the greenhouse and field there exists a centrally
important trade-off between flowering time and flower size. Circadian period
length can serve as a highly informative intermediate trait for identifying the
genetic underpinnings of flowering time variation. The circadian clock gene
network is well characterized, is known to affect flowering time, and varies
among populations. The project will identify and characterize loci associated
with changes in period length, and determine relationships between period
length, differential gene expression, and different flowering parameters. The
first aim will be accomplished by determining period length of all members of a
pre-existing set of 200 fully sequenced inbred lines generated from a single
population. By conducting genome-wide association mapping the researchers will
identify loci associated with variation in period length, flowering time, and
flower size. The second aim will be accomplished using an RNA sequencing based
approach to characterize the contribution of alternate alleles at previously
identified loci to differential gene expression.