* 1501487
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The effects of dendritic structure on parasite metacommunities in stream networks
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Lisa Belden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,930.00

Ecological communities are composed of many interacting species and provide
valuable ecosystem services ranging from clean water to pollination. To maintain
these ecosystem services, it is important to understand the processes that
determine where, when and which species occur together. Dispersal, or the
movement of organisms across the landscape, is an important process in
determining what species exist at a specific site; however, the importance of
dispersal is likely to vary for different types of organisms and for different
habitats. To date, most research examining the role of dispersal has focused on
habitats with distinct boundaries, such as forest fragments or ponds. The
primary goal of this research is to explore the role of dispersal in structuring
communities of wildlife parasites live in streams. A second goal of the research
is to develop methods to use new DNA sequencing technologies to quantify the
abundance of parasites in water samples, making it possible to rapidly survey
parasite communities and identify areas of high and low infection. Streams and
rivers can be important channels for the movement of pathogens, and this
research will increase our understanding of infectious disease dynamics in
freshwater ecosystems while also contributing new methods for assessing the
distribution and abundance of freshwater parasites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trematodes, also known as flukes or parasitic flatworms,
are obligate endoparasites of mollusks and all classes of vertebrates. They have
complex life cycles requiring multiple hosts, and because the hosts disperse at
different spatial scales (e.g., fish vs. birds), they represent a valuable
system for examining the role of dispersal in local community structure. This
research will employ field surveys and molecular analyses to characterize
trematode abundance and diversity within and across multiple stream networks in
the southeastern U.S. Proceeding from mainstem to headwaters, investigators will
quantify trematode infection in first-intermediate hosts (snails) from 15 sites
within each stream network. As the obligate first-intermediate hosts of multiple
trematode species, snails integrate information on the entire community of hosts
involved in trematode life cycles. Investigators hypothesize that: i) there will
be an increasing downstream gradient of overall trematode prevalence and
diversity due to the continuous movement of free-living parasite stages and
infected hosts downstream; and ii) that trematodes with mammalian or avian hosts
will have a less pronounced downstream gradient of prevalence and diversity than
those with fish hosts, due to greater host mobility across the landscape. By
focusing on a diverse community of parasites that all use the same snail species
as a first-intermediate host but that vary in vertebrate host use and thus
dispersal potential, this research will provide new insights into the importance
of dispersal in structuring local communities.