* 1501217
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Neurogenetic Framework of Condition-dependent Mate Choice
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Pablo Delclos, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 18,886.00

A major goal of evolutionary biologists is to determine how closely related
species keep from interbreeding. This is often a result of differences in
behavior, such as when females of two species differ in their preferences for
particular mates. These preferences can be highly sensitive to changes in the
environment. The aim of this study is to discover how female preferences in
swordtail fish are affected by different environmental factors. This study is
among the first to attempt to assess how the environment affects the molecular
basis of sensory perception and mating behavior. Furthermore, this study will
shed light on how environmental conditions can promote interbreeding and
therefore affect how species split apart and come together. Throughout the
course of this study, the researchers will train undergraduate students at Texas
A&M as well as local students from Calnali, Mexico. These students will help in
conducting experiments, thereby receiving a firsthand experience with research
and becoming well-rounded scientists. This training will increase interest in
ecology an evolutionary biology and, in the case of Calnali, will create
exemplary scientists in a region where there are few.

Specifically, the researchers will use the swordtail fish Xiphophorus birchmanni
to determine which genes in the brain and sensory tissue are sensitive to
changes in female diet and her social environment, and how these environmental
factors affect female preference for males of the same species. Newborn
swordtails will be submitted to one of three social treatments (raised with
adult conspecifics, adult heterospecific Xiphophorus malinche, or no adult
exposure) and one of two diet treatments, varying in protein content, which has
been shown to affect the strength of female swordtail preference. Upon
maturation, female preference for conspecific versus heterospecific male odors
will be assessed using a dichotomous mate choice assay. Female brains and
olfactory epithelia will then be dissected and undergo RNA-Seq analyses to
quantify gene expression. The researchers will then use in situ hybridization on
candidate genes found from RNA-Seq to identify where these genes are expressed
and therefore what brain regions are implicated in female mate choice. Tissue
samples and extracted RNA will be archived in the Texas A&M University
Biodiversity Research and Teaching Collections. Whole specimens will be
accessioned to the Ichthyology collection of UNAM, Mexico. Data collected will
be backed up on two workstations and a dedicated external drive. Data associated
with accepted manuscripts will be archived in appropriate electronic
repositories.