* 1501147
* Engineered for Success: Engineering Technician Training for Rural Arizona
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* John Morgan, Yavapai College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 855,350.00

Through its project, Engineered for Success: Engineering Technician Training for
Rural Arizona, Yavapai College (YC) will implement enhancements to its Applied
Pre-engineering Program to increase capacity, improve student learning, and
respond to industry's need for highly-skilled engineering technicians. As
indicated by the project title, the focus will be on improving opportunities for
students in rural Arizona communities. A new pathway leading to certification as
an Integrated Systems Engineering Technician will be incorporated into an
existing Applied Pre-engineering Program. The new pathway will help students
gain a deeper understanding of complex systems and how they are connected and
work together. The introduction of problem-based learning (PBL) pedagogy will
help students connect diverse knowledge from multiple courses to solve real-
world challenges. New internship opportunities will give students exposure to
the actual work environment. Nine stackable industry-recognized credentials,
three certificates and two Associates Degrees will give students options for
employment in middle skills jobs or additional postsecondary education. Outreach
events targeting rural high school students will be expanded and a summer
Robotics Camp for middle school girls will be instituted with the aim of
increasing enrollment of female students in the program. A marketing campaign
will improve parents', teachers' and students' access to information about
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers and training
programs. The improved Applied Pre-engineering Program, which will include an
early college program for high school students, will incorporate best practice
student support strategies, such as on-site tutoring and expanded access to
applied learning using modern equipment. The actions to be undertaken in this
project were determined as a result of a preliminary assessment of the YC
Applied Pre-engineering Program that was developed and implemented based upon
the STEM Pathways Guide, which was developed by Science Foundation Arizona
(SFAz).

The overarching goals of the Engineered for Success: Engineering Technician
Training for Rural Arizona project are to: 1) produce more qualified engineering
technicians to meet workforce demands, and 2) improve engineering technician
education. Strategies for accomplishing these broad goals include, but are not
limited to, assuring technician training meets industry needs by engaging an
Industry Advisory Council, increasing enrollment and course capacity, raising
awareness and interest through targeted outreach efforts, and improving teaching
to more strongly demonstrate relevance and practical industry applications.
Attainment of anticipated outcomes will be assessed using institutional data to
measure quantitative impacts of the project (e.g. enrollment,
degrees/certificates completed, demographic changes, etc.) and surveys to gauge
qualitative impacts (e.g. changes in teaching practices, student
attitudes/perceptions). As a member of Science Foundation Arizona's STEM
Pathways Network, YC will seek to demonstrate the applicability of and expand
knowledge about the organization's STEM Pathways Model through this project.