* 1501420
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: One plant, many mutualists: the tritrophic response to plant defenses mediated by nitrogen-fixing rhizobia.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Daniel Ballhorn, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2016
* USD 16,380.00

Humans depend on protein from crop plants. To produce protein, some crop plants
such as beans have a unique relationship with bacteria in the soil. These
bacteria, called rhizobia, help plants obtain nitrogen, one of the major
components of protein, from the air. Nitrogen can be used to make more than
proteins, however; it can also be used to create chemicals that help protect
plants from attack by pest insects. This project will examine how nitrogen
provided by rhizobia is used by lima bean plants to help them grow and protect
themselves against plant-eating insects. Lima bean plants have two ways to
protect themselves from insects: they make poisonous cyanide and they provide
nectar to ants, which act as bodyguards. Both of these defenses change when
plants have rhizobia in their roots providing nitrogen. Plants with rhizobia
make more cyanide but less nectar. These changes in protection can affect not
only lima bean plants and the insects that feed on them but also the predators
that feed on the plant-eating insects. The overall goal of this project is to
understand whether rhizobia in the soil can impact an entire food chain. This
research has relevance for improving the quality of life among a growing human
population because many members of the bean family provide nutrient-rich crops
for humans and livestock. These crops depend on rhizobia to re-introduce
nutrients in the soil when nutrients have been depleted by other crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research incorporates rhizobia into food webs by
using field experiments in the native range of wild lima bean (Phaseolus
lunatus), where it has evolved specific defensive and mutualistic relationships.
To test the hypothesis that rhizobia influence aboveground invertebrate
communities, researchers will combine physiological, ecological and theoretical
approaches. Specifically, this research will test how rhizobia: i) affect
production of extrafloral nectar used to attract ants, ii) impact aboveground
food webs differently when bacteria cooperate by providing nitrogen or "cheat"
by not providing nitrogen, and iii) influence production of plant defensive
compounds. More generally, the native invertebrate community's response to
rhizobia treatments will provide new functional insights into how belowground
nitrogen-cycling bacteria affect aboveground ecosystems.