* 1501194
* Ohio Region Cybersecurity Technician Training Pipeline
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Gary Clark, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2019
* USD 599,680.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. Many key companies in the Ohio region are finding it difficult to
locate skilled cybersecurity technicians. In response to this need, Columbus
State Community College, Franklin University, a consortium of technology-focused
area high schools, and regional cybersecurity companies are collaborating to
develop a comprehensive "2 + 2 + 2" Cybersecurity Technician Training Pipeline.
This program will target high school graduates, college-aged students, adult
learners, and incumbent workers and will include multiple entry and exit points
for these students and stackable certificates that lead to entry-level, mid-
level, and management-level cybersecurity careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is to increase the supply of qualified cybersecurity
professionals for industry and government. Major activities
include:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Developing and implementing a 60 credit-hour Associate of
Applied Science (AAS) degree and related academic certificates in cybersecurity
at Columbus State Community College, which will prepare high school graduates
and incumbent IT and non-IT workers to obtain the (ISC)2 Systems Security
Certified Practitioner (SSCP) certification.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Conducting workshops
for high school teachers and establishing a pre-college program for regional
high schools, which will serve as the first link in a "2 + 2 + 2" educational
pathway in cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Establishing a model articulation
agreement with Franklin University, which will serve as the final link in the "2
+ 2 + 2" pathway, allowing AAS graduates from Columbus State to transfer
seamlessly into a BS degree program in cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;Many components
of the new curriculum, as well as the professional development activities for
faculty, will draw on resources offered by the National CyberWatch Center.