* 1501646
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Geographic variation of gut microbial community in natural populations of house mice across the Americas
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Taichi Suzuki, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,330.00

Recent research shows that the gut microbial communities can have significant
effects on an individual's health as well as on susceptibility to obesity. This
project combines laboratory experiments with quantitative information on body
size variation from 26 populations of wild house mice across North and South
America to shed new light on factors contributing to the composition and the
function of gut microbes. Because humans and wild mice show similar variation in
their gut microbial composition across the globe, the findings in wild mice may
serve as a model to help understand the role of gut microbes in digestion and
human health more broadly. The project will support the research to improve a
doctoral student's dissertation. Data and specimens collected in the field will
be publicly available through the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology at University of
California, Berkeley and electroically.

House mice are an ideal mammalian model system that can be used, through
manipulative laboratory experiments, to disentangle confounding factors that are
associated with microbial community variation in natural populations. Mice
derived from natural populations at high and low latitudes show pronounced
differences in body size. Laboratory-reared descendants of these extreme
populations will be used in manipulative experiments to test the effects of two
dietary types and the two host genotypes on gut microbiota. Comparative
metagenomics of the cecal contents of wild and laboratory-reared individuals
will quantify the differences in microbial metabolic capability (for example,
efficiency in energy extraction) between populations. Results will improve
current understanding of mammalian gut microbial ecology.