* 1501182
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Interspecific Competition Increases Cooperative Group Sizes in Brown-headed Nuthatches (Sitta pusilla).
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Janis Dickinson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2016
* USD 18,805.00

Brown-headed nuthatches live and breed in family groups. These family groups
appear to work together to defend nesting holes from other species that also
need holes in trees to nest. Since nuthatches are small birds (10 g), they often
lose their nests to larger species if they do not cooperate. This project seeks
to understand if cooperative defense of nesting holes by brown-headed nuthatches
increases the number of offspring they contribute to the next generation.
Cooperative breeders often cooperate with relatives because outside
opportunities for breeding are rare, and it is unclear whether this cooperation
is an adaptive strategy or whether the birds are simply making the best of a bad
situation. This project addresses those alternatives by testing whether
cooperating nuthatches actually have more offspring than non-cooperators. This
project therefore could uncover a potential new benefit of cooperative breeding,
and it also provides information on the natural history of brown-headed
nuthatches, a species facing the dual threats of global warming and
urbanization. This project has already increased local population sizes of
brown-headed nuthatches, and the Co-Principal Investigator will continue to
participate in conservation efforts for this species by speaking informally at a
farmer's market booth and encouraging locals to place nuthatch-sized boxes out
on their property.

This project tests the previously untested idea that interspecific competition
functions as an important selective force on group size in the Brown-headed
nuthatch (BHNU, Sitta pusilla). The key hypothesis is that competition among
equally sized competitors influences the benefits of cooperative breeding and
selects for larger group sizes. By uncovering how competition with other species
impacts inclusive fitness for group members under differing competitive
pressures, and at various group sizes, this project tests whether heterospecific
competition can increase the fitness of BHNUs in groups, and thus select for
increased cooperative group sizes. A traditional hypothesis for the existence of
cooperative breeding is that ecological constraints prevent independent breeding
and drive increases in group size, predicting that the inclusive fitness of
individuals will decrease as group sizes increase. However, the motivating
hypothesis of this project, that fitness increases as group size increases
through helper efficacy in heterospecific defense, predicts exactly the opposite
pattern. Genetic parentage determination, and the calculation of inclusive
fitness, will allow this research to distinguish between ecological constraints
and heterospecific defense benefits as drivers of increased group size in the
cooperatively breeding BHNU.