* 1501872
* Collaborative Proposal : CNC Advanced Multi-Axis Programming (CAMP)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Stuart Rolf, Athens Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2018
* USD 143,674.00

Georgia's largest export in 2013, at $6.75 Billion, was aerospace products and
parts. Exports from this sector grew by 19.8% in that year alone. Historically,
machine tool technology has always been a foundational underpinning of
manufacturing and this is especially true in the aerospace industry. While there
is a national shortage of workers available with multi-axis CNC skills, and
industry's demand for them is continuing to increase, the advanced training
required to produce them remains unavailable. Professional development for
machine tool instructors will directly address this problem by building the
capacity for industry-recognized training at technical colleges and 4-year
institutions involved in the Coalition of Machine Tool Technology Programs of
Georgia (COMP-GA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Athens Technical College (ATC) in
conjunction with COMP-GA and Southern Polytechnic State University (SPSU) are
creating a Computer Numerical Control (CNC) Advanced Multi-axis Programming
(CAMP) certificate program, to enhance the quality of Georgia's machine tool
technology programs. Machine tool instructors from majorly rural areas in
Georgia are receiving formal training from the renowned Vincennes University
(VU) in Indiana to help sharpen their expertise in the field. Instructors are
learning how to set-up, program, and use advanced multi-axis CNC machines, to
incorporate the industry-recognized certification in to their classroom
curriculums. COMP-GA and SPSU are partnering with the Regional Advanced
Machining Partnership (RAMP) and Central Maine Community College (CMCC) who are
also NSF/ATE recipients currently developing an advanced machining certificate.
The CAMP project is responding to industry needs for trained workers, and
meeting the specific demands of the aerospace industry in Georgia. The CAMP
project is disseminating knowledge among Georgia machine tool programs while
providing a model for working with four-year institutions to determine best
practices for technical education. Machine Tool educators are learning to
sustain technical instruction and maintain relevancy in the field. The
professional development activities are influencing curriculums designs, and
participants are creating strong foundations and practices that are benefiting
the workforce in Georgia. The partnership between COMP-GA and SPSU is increasing
the participation of underrepresented groups, including women and minorities, as
all students matriculating are accessing greater job opportunities with higher
rates of pay.