* 1501199
* Dissertation Research: Systematics, biogeography and taxonomy of the pantropical legume genus Cynometra
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Patrick Herendeen, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,111.00

Legumes are the third largest family of flowering plants. These economically and
ecologically significant plants range in size from tiny desert herbs to giant
rainforest trees. While recent research has elucidated relationships among the
major lineages in the family, little is known about many of the nearly 20,000
species, especially the processes that generate this diversity. This study will
use recently developed 'next generation' DNA sequencing methods and statistical
computer modeling to resolve the evolutionary relationships among a large and
widespread group of tropical legumes and to infer what role, if any, adaptation
to new environments has played in the diversification of these species. Given
their wide distribution and ecological diversity, understanding the
relationships among these species will provide a framework for future
comparative studies and enhance our understanding of the overall evolution of
the legume family. The project will also include a significant training
component to expose undergraduates in STEM fields to the latest tools and
analytic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will combine phylogenomics,
ecological niche modeling, and information from the fossil record to elucidate
the relationships among the species of the tropical genera Cynometra and
Maniltoa and will investigate the role niche conservatism plays in biogeography
and speciation mechanisms. Next generation sequencing is revolutionizing the
practice of systematics, biogeography, and evolutionary biology. While the
technology has been applied to both very deep and very shallow evolutionary
questions, its application to species level phylogenetics, particularly in
plants, remains limited. However, it is at the species level that these new
techniques hold the greatest promise to resolve previously intractable
relationships. In addition, when combined with ecological niche modeling and
geographic range data, the well resolved phylogenies these methods are capable
of producing allow researchers to study speciation mechanisms and the role of
niche conservatism in generating observed patterns of diversity. If, for
example, allopatric sister species consistently segregate along environmental
axes, then ecologically mediated selection may have a role in speciation,
whereas if allopatric sister species are consistently identical or nearly
identical in abiotic niche space, then ecological divergence is not a major
factor driving speciation. To address this question, the researchers will: 1)
conduct field work and visit herbaria in Brazil (the center of diversity for the
genus) to better characterize diversity and distributions of Brazilian species;
2) reconstruct a well resolved species level phylogeny using data generated with
targeted sequence capture techniques; and 3) characterize the abiotic niche of
the constituent species using ecological niche modeling and distribution data.
Analyses of these data will provide a much more precise understanding of
evolutionary and biogeographic history of Cynometra and Maniltoa and the
mechanisms driving these processes.