* 1501692
* Kansas City Kansas Biomanufacturing Training Laboratory (KCKBTL): Developing the Bioscience/  Biotechnology Workforce for the Kansas City Region
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* alphonse mendy, Kansas City Kansas Community College
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 08/31/2019
* USD 315,797.00

From discovering pharmaceutical agents to combat health disorders, to developing
vaccines to prevent diseases, to increasing yields of food production and more,
the life sciences enterprise impacts each of our lives daily. Through advances
in science and technology and educational ventures to produce well-qualified
professionals who utilize those advances effectively, the life sciences
industries contribute significantly to the strength of the United States economy
and to the health of its citizenry. The bi-state region of Kansas and Missouri,
with the Kansas City metropolitan area serving as a hub, is experiencing robust
growth in the life sciences industries, as a reported 21% increase in employment
occurred across the 240 life science companies in the region from 2009 to 2012.
In response to workforce needs and the continual innovations in science and
technology, Kansas City Kansas Community College (KCKCC) will develop the Kansas
City Kansas Biomanufacturing Training Laboratory (KCKBTL). The KCKBTL will
provide educational opportunities that lead to employment in the local life
sciences workforce to residents of communities served by the college.

The KCKBTL will establish educational pathways that lead from high schools
through institutions of higher education and ultimately into professional
careers in the life sciences. Educational partners in this collaborative
endeavor include KCKCC, the Kansas City Kansas Public Schools and the University
of Kansas Medical Center. Project goals include: (1) working closely with
representatives from the life sciences workforce to define and develop sequences
of industry-validated courses that lead to a Certificate in Biomanufacturing or
an Associate Degree in Bioscience to prepare KCKCC students for multiple entry
points into careers in the local industry and (2) providing professional
development opportunities for high school science teachers and community college
faculty members in topical areas that facilitate technician education in the
life sciences. KCKCC students will be placed into internships at local companies
and in academic research laboratories at the University of Kansas Medical
Center. Methods to evaluate project success and its impact include stakeholder
interviews and focus groups, along with collecting data that monitors student
success in the technician education programs and employment statistics for
program graduates.