* 1501511
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A global molecular phylogeny of the problematic genus Epyris (Hymenoptera: Bethylidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* James Carpenter, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,327.00

Parasitoid wasps are found worldwide and in order to complete their life cycle
they first parasitize another insect and eventually kill it. Some wasps are
potential biocontrol agents because they parasitize major pest insects such as
the Coffee Berry Borer and Navel Orange Worm, and even the Emerald Ash Borer,
which currently decimates North American hardwood forests. The agricultural and
economic importance of parasitoid wasps in controlling destructive insects is
clear, but choosing the correct wasp is difficult. Parasitoid wasps are
extremely diverse and choosing the wrong wasp can have dire consequences - they
may oust native wasps from similar niches and become pests themselves. Studying
the evolutionary history and producing phylogenetic trees explaining the
relationships amongst different groups of wasps helps applied entomologists by
providing a necessary comparative framework upon which biological criteria can
be assessed. With a phylogeny, entomologists can track the evolution of host
choice, biogeographical changes, and test predictions of introduced parasitoid
success. As a broader impact initiative, the researchers will build off of a
previously successful series of science comics, using parasitoid wasps as an
engaging topic to introduce high school students to topics of parasitoidism,
evolution, and systematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research
focus is on the Epyris wasps, one of the largest genera in Bethylidae, which has
been shown to be non-monophyletic, meaning that it is likely composed of several
distinct genera. In prior research, a phylogeny of 150 Epyrinae taxa from 26
countries based upon DNA sequences from five genes (16S, CytB, COI, 18S and 28S)
resulted in an evolutionary tree with a non-monophyletic Epyris. While the genus
is polyphyletic as currently circumscribed, there were monophyletic groups of
named Epyris species spread throughout Epyrinae phylogeny that likely represent
new genera in need of description. To better resolve relationships among
Epyrinae, fifty more species of Epyris representing potentially new genera will
be included within this new research and three nuclear protein-coding gene data
sets -- Elongation factor-1 alpha, long-wavelength Opsin, and Wingless -- will
be added, resulting in a final matrix comprising eight genes and 200 taxa. These
data will be analyzed using parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian
phylogenetic methods. The three protein-coding genes are expected to resolve
ambiguities present in prior phylogenies and provide greater support for new
genera. With this new phylogeny, and subsequent morphological analysis, the
researchers will revise the taxonomy of the old Epyris, describe new genera, and
produce a new identification key for the Epyrinae for broad dissemination.