* 1501721
* Dissertation Research:  The effects of precipitation change on microbial drivers of salt marsh greenhouse gas emissions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Hollie Emery, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,201.00

It is predicted that, in the next several decades, Eastern North America will
experience an overall increase in annual precipitation, as well as an increase
in the intensity of precipitation events. Rainfall will be concentrated into
fewer, larger storms punctuating longer periods of drought. The effects of this
intensification may be especially important in ecosystems like salt marshes,
that are already under water stress. Salt marshes provide critical ecosystem
services including nursery habitat for fish and birds, and nutrient filtration.
They also store vast amounts of organic carbon. Changes in precipitation may
alter their ecology, and disrupt their nutrient filtration and carbon storage
activities, much of which is mediated by salt marsh microorganisms. The
objective of this research is to quantify the effects of precipitation
intensification on on microbial processes in a New England salt marsh. This
doctoral dissertation improvement grant research will also examine mechanisms
behind patterns of greenhouse gas (CH4 and N2O) emissions and uptake by salt
marsh microbes by studying microbial gene expression patterns in the
environment.

Precipitation changes, especially the intensification of precipitation events
(e.g. longer droughtsand stronger storms) are an important aspect of
anthropogenic global climate change. The impact of precipitation intensification
may be especially great in ecosystems that are chronically water stressed,
either from extremely dry conditions, or from extremely wet conditions that lead
to anoxia in the sediment. As tidal wetlands, salt marshes are subject to a
variety of stressors including high salinity and anoxia, making them potentially
very sensitive to changes in rain and other freshwater inputs. Over the past
year an experiment has been performed to test the effects of precipitation
change onsalt marsh biogeochemistry. Rainout shelters have been used to
intercept incoming rain, and deliver it to one of four precipitation treatments:
ambient rainfall, doubled ambient rainfall, prolonged drought, or simulated
intense drought with strong storms. Monthly measurements were made of greenhouse
gases, the overall productivity and shoot:shoot allocation of marsh grasses, and
the cycling of silica and other nutrients through plants, sediment, and
porewater. Funding from this award will support the addition of a molecular
component. The primary objectives will be to determine 1) whether climate-
induced changes in precipitation (prolonged drought, doubled growing season
totals, or alteration between the two) will alter salt marsh microbial community
structure and species richness, and 2) to what degree changes in the expression
of key functional genes by the microbial community can be linked to measured net
rates of trace greenhouse gas flux. This research will test two hypotheses: (1)
Prolonged drought and doubled precipitation rates will both lead to decreases in
microbial species richness, but when drought and increased precipitation are
combined this intensified precipitation regime will lead to an increase in
microbial species richness, and (2) trace greenhouse gas fluxes (CH4 and N2O)
are positively correlated with functional gene transcript copies for production
and negatively correlated with those for consumption of each gas. Hypothesis 1
will be tested by determining microbial community composition and species
richness with next-generation sequencing of genomic DNA in sediments at an
ongoing field experiment. Hypothesis 2 will be tested by pairing high-
sensitivity gas flux measurements with quantification of transcript copies of 6
functional genes (mcrA, pmoA, mxaF, nosZ, norB, and norZ) governing microbial
production and consumption of CH4 and N2O. The proposed research will be
integrated with new outreach activities. A Ph.D. student will work with the BU
Upward Bound Math and Science program, which prepares low-income and first
generation college bound students for a successful higher education experience.
She will lead a one-day workshop with Upward Bound high school students on the
importance of salt marshes, and the linkages between microbial communities and
greenhouse gases. She will also host a summer Upward Bound high school student
intern to work on this project. Second, the Ph.D. student will coordinate in a
Citizen Science Outreach Program that leverages the experiment's high-visibility
location in a frequently-visited area of a National Park to involve interested
parties in the monitoring of the experimental treatments.