* 1501769
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Plant-microbe effects on soil carbon storage in a changing global environment
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,760.00

Our planet's environment is changing. Since the Industrial Revolution, land use
change, fertilizer use, and fossil fuel combustion have increased atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentrations by 40% and nitrogen inputs twelve fold. Plants and
soils could either mitigate or accelerate this global change because of their
role in taking up and cycling carbon and nutrients. This research addresses how
one key player in plant-soil systems affects carbon storage and release. Fungi
in soil connect to plant roots and transfer nutrients from the soil to the plant
in exchange for carbon from the plant. However, it is unclear whether these
fungi will facilitate net retention or release of carbon in the soil. On the one
hand, fungi could protect carbon in soil under elevated CO2 concentrations. It
is also possible that soil fungi have the opposite effect, and accelerate
decomposition of carbon. This doctoral dissertation improvement grant project
will test the extent to which each of these scenarios is accurate. Experiments
will take place at Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve in Minnesota where the
Ph.D. student has conducted her main dissertation research. Results from this
research, combined with the student's ongoing work, will inform how total soil
carbon storage might be affected by soil fungi in a changing global
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will not only advance
understanding of global change effects on C cycling but will also provide unique
educational opportunities. This award will greatly enhance the Ph.D. student's
graduate training through collaboration in stable isotope analysis - a novel
tool for studying flow of C through ecosystems - which would not be possible
otherwise. Through performing the proposed work in collaboration with Dr. Elise
Pendall (University of Western Sydney), who has significant experience with
stable isotope analysis, the student will develop a strong skill set, building
off her participation in the NSF-funded Stable Isotope Biogeochemistry and
Ecology course at the University of Utah. Developing skills in using stable
isotopes in ecological research could also generally increase the value she
would bring to future collaborations. Additionally, the graduate student will
leverage her ongoing leadership with the Boreas Environmental Leadership Program
at the University of Minnesota's Institute on the Environment to explore new
professional development opportunities for graduate students in the sciences to
discuss and practice sharing their research to non-academic audiences.