* 1501497
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  New Cretaceous Mammals from Gondwana and their implications for the systematics of Mesozoic Mammaliaformes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Erik Seiffert, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 16,080.00

By the Middle Jurassic (about 165 million years ago), mammals were already
geographically widespread and lived in ecologically diverse habitats. Recent
discoveries reveal that early mammals climbed, dug holes, swam and some mammals
even ate dinosaurs. Despite the tremendous increase in anatomical information
from fossils, one question still remains unanswered: when did mammals originate?
This project will investigate the origin of mammals by incorporating skeletal
material of several, until recently, poorly known early mammals into a broad-
scale phylogenetic analysis. Detailed morphological descriptions, character
matrices, illustrations, and 3D reconstructions will be openly accessible
through MorphoBank and MorphoSource. This work has already generated
collaborations with high school students and has formed part of a course offered
to undergraduate Women in Science and Engineering at Stony Brook University.
More specifically, this project centers on an early mammalian grouping called
Allotheria (including Gondwanatheria, Haramiyida, Euharamiyida, and
Multituberculata). Recently, Allotheria became a focal point in the debate on
the origin of mammals as it may include species that are more than 50 million
years older than the oldest, previously known mammalian fossils, pushing the
origin of mammals back into the Triassic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Allotheria have
specialized dentition which is more similar to that of modern rodents than any
other early mammal. Most early mammals either retained primitive reptilian-like
teeth or developed a pre-tribosphenic or tribosphenic dentition (a pattern seen
in modern placental and marsupials). The clades of Allotheria do not fit this
scheme, but whether this is due to a common origin or to convergent evolution is
uncertain. Rigorous tests of their phylogenetic relationships have not been
possible, because several allotherians were, until recently, represented almost
solely by highly specialized teeth and jaws. Fortunately, largely complete
skeletons of basal multituberculates, euharamiyids, and haramiyids have been
found in China, while a complete and exceptionally well-preserved skeleton of a
gondwanatherian-like mammal has been found in Madagascar. Together with a
complete skull of a gondwanatherian from Madagascar, these remarkable
discoveries provide a tremendous amount of morphological data that was
previously unavailable. By including this information into the Tree of Life
(AToL) matrix, it will finally be possible to provide more robust tests of the
position of Gondwanatheria, Haramiyida, Euharamiyida, and Multituberculata
relative to extant mammalian lineages. On a broader scale, scoring previously
unsampled specimens for more than 1,500 characters in the AToL Mammal Tree of
Life matrix will contribute significantly to the ongoing growth of that project.