* 1501990
* Necessary Skills Now: Developing Employability Skills Through Sector-Specific Integrated Scenarios in Information Technology and Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,04/30/2019
* John Sands, CORD
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 04/30/2019
* USD 849,010.00

Surveys of U.S. employers across multiple industrial sectors indicate that
students entering the technical workforce continue to lack critical
"employability skills" (also referred to as "soft skills," "workforce-readiness
skills," "professional skills," "21st-century skills," "non-cognitive skills,"
etc.), such as teamwork, problem-solving, and communication. This project will
engage teams of community college faculty and employers representing two
important, growing fields of technology -- cybersecurity and mechatronics -- in
jointly developing curriculum modules that integrate technical content with
employability skills. Instead of developing stand-alone courses covering
employability skills in isolation from technical content, the project will
integrate employability skills within existing technical courses and will use
authentic workplace scenarios to prepare students for the day-to-day situations
they will encounter in the workplace. The project will benefit other fields of
technological education by producing a faculty implementation guide and by
offering workshops on how to collaborate with local employers to replicate the
project's integrated curriculum design process. Ultimately, the project aims to
develop technicians who are more effective on the job, whether in a team
environment or working individually -- workers who are better problem-solvers,
have improved communication skills (written and verbal), and can efficiently
utilize and manage workplace resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the Center for Occupational Research and Development (CORD) will collaborate
with three NSF Advanced Technological Education (ATE) centers -- the Center for
Systems Security and Information Assurance (CSSIA), the Florida Advanced
Technological Education Center (FLATE), and the South Carolina Advanced
Technological Education Center (SC ATE) -- as well as employers in cybersecurity
and mechatronics across the country. The project will develop, pilot, and revise
instructional materials that integrate sector-specific technical skills and
employability skills within a continuum of coursework, from foundational to
advanced specialty courses, in associate degree programs in cybersecurity and
mechatronics. This approach of integrating employability skills across a whole
program of study is novel. The following six major categories of employability
skills, which have been repeatedly mentioned in surveys and reports, will serve
as the focus of the integrated curriculum: (1) teamwork, (2) problem solving,
(3) verbal communication, (4) written communication, (5) dependability/work
ethic, and (6) planning and organizing. Teams of faculty and employers will
develop six integrated curriculum projects for each sector (cybersecurity and
mechatronics), using a common instructional design template. Once drafted, each
of the 12 integrated projects will be piloted by at least three community
colleges using a common evaluation rubric to provide feedback to the project
team, which will then revise the curricula. The work of the project team and
evaluator will also help contribute to the overall knowledge base regarding the
circumstances that govern successful embedding of employability skills within
curricula in advanced technology and the audiences for whom such approaches
prove effective.