* 1501304
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Form, function, and modularity in the modern bat skull: understanding the evolution of phenotypic complexity
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Jeff Shi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2018
* USD 19,663.00

Bats are one of the most species-rich groups of modern mammals, and are
particularly known for their ecological diversity. Bats fill numerous ecological
niches worldwide, performing a variety of ecosystem functions and services.
Evolutionary biologists often study ecological diversity in conjunction with
morphology, as physical traits can be closely tied to performance and function.
The bat skull has a highly complex shape that encodes information about
ecological interactions. Multiple selective pressures influence the complex form
of a modern bat skull, and by studying its morphological evolution, this
research will reveal the ecological context of those evolutionary processes.
This research will synthesize museum collections with cutting-edge imaging
technology and shape analyses to model the evolution of a highly complex
biological structure. The findings will be integrated into outreach programs in
partnership with educational nonprofits and natural history museums. Both
morphological and ecological diversity are critical components of biodiversity,
and by emphasizing both facets in public education, the researchers will stress
the importance of both ecological and evolutionary context in understanding
ecosystem functions and services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these
goals, the researchers will produce high-resolution X-ray computed
microtomography (microCT) scans of a wide range of modern bat skulls. MicroCT
scanning capture much of the complexity of biological structures that is lost
with traditional, simple measurements. The data can be used for multidimensional
analyses of trait evolution and physical reproductions. After scanning, bat
skulls will be digitized for analysis using landmark-based geometric
morphometrics, a method for quantifying shape variation. The researchers will
then quantify the amount of morphological diversity present among modern bat
skulls, and will model rates of shape evolution across the bat phylogenetic
tree. Modules of the skull, which may be optimized for different functions like
feeding, echolocation, and hearing, will be analyzed independently, to test the
hypothesis that different ecological pressures interact with each other to
govern skull shape evolution. Ultimately, these data will be used to test the
links among morphological diversity, ecological function, and evolutionary
diversification across modern bats.