* 1501411
* Sn whiskers: fundamental mechanisms of nucleation and growth and applications to mitigation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Eric Chason, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Tin whiskers are long filaments that grow
spontaneously out of coatings and solders used in electronics manufacturing.
They are a critical reliability problem because they create short circuits that
have led to satellite crashes, a nuclear power plant shutdown and a medical
pacemaker recall, among many other failures. The risk from whiskers has become
worse because the element lead (Pb) has been restricted from manufacturing for
environmental reasons. In the past, addition of this element helped to suppress
whisker formation. The research is focused on understanding the causes of
whisker formation as well as developing and testing methods for suppressing
them. The work uses a unique system that enables the surface of the coating to
be monitored for whisker formation at the same time as the stress in the coating
is measured. Since stress is believed to be the reason for whisker formation,
this allows the connection between stress and whiskering to be directly
measured. In addition to fundamental studies, there are collaborations with
industrial partners to study issues related to whisker prevention. In science
and technology education, a major problem has been the retention of first
generation and underserved students in these fields. The principal investigator
is improving this through team-based mentoring efforts to support new students
and exposing them to laboratory research early in their academic
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Although stress is
believed to be the driving force for whisker formation, it is not understood why
whiskers form from specific sites (nucleation) and what controls their volume
evolution (growth). This research builds on the development of a unique system
to simultaneously measure the whisker density and the stress (induced by thermal
expansion when the sample is heated). Measurements show how the stress changes
the nucleation rate and how much it decreases the barrier to nucleation. These
studies further suggest a potential nucleation mechanism that is based on
stress-induced grain boundary migration. In situ transmission and scanning
electron microscope studies that monitor the grain structure under stress can
capture the nucleation process to explore this mechanism further. Electron
microscopy measurements of the whisker volume evolution show that the growth
rate is proportional to the average stress, as long as it is above a critical
threshold value. Calculations are being developed that use finite element
methods to model the balance between stress relaxation due to rate-dependent
plasticity and stress-driven diffusion. These model predictions can be compared
directly with the growth measurements to refine the model parameters and allow
prediction of whisker growth rates. In collaboration with industrial
researchers, the experimental capabilities are being extended to measure the
effect of corrosion/humidity on whisker nucleation and growth. A new technique
for using mechanical pressure to induce whiskers is being developed to study new
solder formulations to determine their ability to suppress whiskering.