* 1501940
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics and Biogeography of the tribe Vanilleae (Orchidaceae), and a monograph of the genus Epistephium
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Kenneth Cameron, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 19,034.00

The orchid family may be the largest family of flowering plants, with dozens of
new species being described each year, mostly from the tropics. This research
will contribute to be a better understanding of the orchid family by focusing on
the poorly known neotropical genus, Epistephium. Researchers will first
reconstruct phylogenetic relationships within the genus, and then use the
resulting phylogeny to conduct a species-level systematic revision. One graduate
student and several undergraduates will be trained in systematic revisionary
studies and molecular phylogenetics. International research infrastructure will
be enhanced through collaborations with researchers in Ecuador and Brazil. The
research also offers to provide new insights into evolutionary relationships
within the Vanilloideae subfamily, that contains the economically important
genus, Vanilla.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to fully resolve the
phylogenetic relationships of the tribe Vanillieae, which encompasses most
tropical representatives of the subfamily Vanilloideae. Researchers will employ
next-generation sequencing approaches to collect large amounts of DNA sequence
data from all genera in the tribe and facilitate reconstruction of a highly
supported phylogenetic tree. The resulting phylogenetic hypothesis will in turn
allow a deeper analysis of the current and historical biogeographic distribution
of the tribe (involving two examples of trans-Atlantic disjunctions and the
opportunity to study island biogeography in the Pacific and SE Asia).
Phylogenetic tests for vicariance and long distance dispersal will then be
conducted out to identify how the group attained its current distribution.
Lastly, a species-level monograph of Epistephium, the second largest genus in
the tribe, will be produced.