* 1501928
* Dissertation Research: The effect of cognitive disturbance on functionally-relevant plastic behavioral responses
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Berry Brosi, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2017
* USD 20,252.00

Ecosystems provide an invaluable suite of services to people, including cleaning
air and water, cycling nutrients, preventing floods, and pollinating crops. A
recent finding from the science of ecology is that more of these "ecosystem
services" are provided in areas that contain many species of plants and animals
than in areas that contain fewer; biodiversity has practical benefits. Studies
of this relationship between species diversity and ecosystem services have
focused on how physical differences between species are important in determining
the services provided by a community (a group of species living in the same
area). Recent studies, however, suggest that changes in animal behavior can also
promote ecosystem services. Thus, it is important to understand how behaviors
will be affected by environmental change, including chemical pollutants. This
study will examine how pesticides affect bee behaviors important for plant
pollination, including behaviors that depend on the number of species in a
community. If pesticides disrupt the relationship between biodiversity and
pollination services, they could have negative consequences for both native
plant reproduction and the productivity of agricultural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine the effect of sub-lethal
neonicotinoid pesticide exposure on pollination-relevant bee foraging behaviors
in both single and multiple species contexts. The behavior of pesticide-treated
and control bees will be compared in laboratory experiments that use artificial
flowers with computer-controlled nectar replenishment. Bee foraging behavior
will be measured using RFID technology, which allows for exact tracking of bee
movements. The researchers will measure pollination-relevant behaviors,
including visitation rates, floral fidelity (temporary specialization on a
particular flower type), and flower visitation evenness (the degree to which all
flower species receive pollination services). It is hypothesized that pesticide
exposure will affect bee species differently, altering competitive outcomes and
modulating behaviorally-mediated biodiversity-ecosystem function relationships.