* 1501399
* Conference Proposal: Interactions between Representation Theory, Algebraic Topology and Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Brooke Shipley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

A research program is to be held at the Centre de Recerca Matematica (CRM) in
Barcelona, Spain in the Spring semester of 2015. The focus will be on the
intersection between representation theory, algebraic topology, and commutative
algebra. There is a long tradition of interaction between commutative algebra
and algebraic topology, and commutative algebra and representation theory.
Techniques and concepts that arose and were developed in one field have driven
developments in the other. Regrettably, opportunities for building and fostering
collaborations, especially among graduate students and younger researchers, from
the three subjects (or indeed any two of them) have been all too rare,
especially in the U.S. The three subjects have witnessed remarkable changes and
developments in the last decade, and the CRM program comes at an opportune
moment. This NSF award will fund the travel of younger researchers (graduate
students, recent PhDs, and junior faculty) at U.S. institutions to participate
in some of the key events of the program. This will provide them with a unique
opportunity to learn about current research in these fields and the interactions
between fields; discuss ideas with one another, and begin collaborations on
future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics to be covered by the CRM
program, and in particular the advanced courses and workshops: matrix
factorizations, maximal Cohen-Macaulay modules; cluster algebras and cluster
categories; cohomological theory of support varieties; and tilting theory, to
name a few, are at the intersection of several important and rapidly developing
areas of mathematics, each subject benefitting from advances in the others. The
CRM program will bring together leading researchers in each of these subjects,
and one can be optimistic that this will lead to the new insights and
developments in them. The highlights of the program include two, week-long,
advanced courses, one in February 2015, titled (Re)emerging methods in
Commutative Algebra and Representation Theory, and another in April 2015, titled
Building bridges between Algebra and Topology. Each will be followed by a week-
long workshop. Additionally, a conference is scheduled for 25--29th May, 2015.