* 1501466
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Epidemiology meets symbiosis: modeling symbiont spread through multi-host communities
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Lisa Belden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,930.00

Most new infectious diseases in humans are zoonotic, which means the pathogens
that cause these diseases originate in wild and domestic animals and then spread
to humans. Many pathogens that infect livestock and wildlife species are also
found in other species. Mathematical models that describe pathogen transmission
within single wildlife host species (e.g., rabies transmission within bat
populations) and between different host species (e.g., rabies transmission
between bats and skunks) are critical tools for understanding and predicting
disease outbreaks in humans, livestock, and wildlife. In addition to being used
to understand the spread of pathogens among hosts, these same models can be used
to understand the spread of beneficial symbionts (small organisms such as
bacteria that live in much larger hosts) that help rather than harm the host.
However, the fundamental assumptions that underlie these mathematical models are
rarely tested, because observing animal contact rates and spread of disease in
nature is difficult. This research will use a system of hosts and their
symbionts to test assumptions on which the existing models are built, and will
quantify how well those models can predict disease transmission in wildlife
populations. The results of this research will ultimately lead to mathematical
models that are better at predicting symbiont transmission. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Wildlife population densities often vary across space and time.
Classic epidemiological models use one of two mechanistic transmission functions
to describe the relationship between host density and pathogen transmission
rates. The first assumes that animal contact rates and thus transmission rates
increase linearly with host density (density-dependent transmission), and the
second assumes that animal contact rates and transmission rates are not affected
by host density (frequency-dependent transmission). However, nonlinear
relationships that fall somewhere between those extremes may be more appropriate
in many host-symbiont systems. Using an experimentally tractable multi-host
system - symbiotic annelid worms living on freshwater snails - this research
will: (1) empirically quantify the relationship between host density and both
intra- and inter-specific host contact rates, and (2) use the resulting model to
make and test predictions regarding symbiont transmission dynamics in single and
multi-host host communities at broad spatial and temporal scales in natural
systems. Critical evaluation of fundamental model assumptions and the resulting
model predictions will lead to better predictive models of symbiont
transmission.