* 1501747
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genomic basis of convergent phenotypic evolution in island populations of boa constrictors
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Todd Castoe, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,695.00

Islands often contain unique ecosystems and organisms. Numerous species across
the animal tree-of-life have evolved a dwarfed body size on islands, and some,
including Boa constrictor, the focal species for this work, have evolved
dwarfism multiple times on multiple independent islands. The drastic variation
between normal, large-sized mainland boas and their closely-related dwarfed
island relatives suggests that a relatively small number of genetic variants in
the B. constrictor genome may underlie island dwarfism, and that this system may
therefore provide new insight into the genetics of body size in vertebrates.
This project also leverages the replicated evolution of dwarf populations of Boa
constrictor to investigate if repeated evolution of dwarfism is driven by shared
or unique genes or functional pathways across multiple independently evolved
dwarf island populations. This work will therefore address fundamental topics in
evolutionary biology, including the genetic basis of local adaptation in natural
populations and test for connections between the genetic and morphological basis
for evolutionary convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of evolution to
drive the convergent evolution of phenotypic traits provides some of the
strongest and clearest evidence for selection and adaptation. More recent work
has become particularly interested in whether canalized paths of genetic
evolution underlie convergent phenotypic evolution, or whether instead
idiosyncratic and/or diverse genetic paths and processes lead to convergent
phenotypic solutions. This work will use genome-wide single nucleotide
polymorphisms to first delineate the population structure and phylogenetic
relationships among island and mainland populations of Boa constrictor. These
same markers will also be used to find regions of the genome that are putatively
under selection and that are most variable between island and mainland
populations, which represent the most promising regions in which to identify
genes underlying body size dwarfism. Data collected from independent island
lineages will be used to test whether phenotypic convergence in body size is the
product of genotypic or functional convergence at the molecular level. This work
will therefore answer questions about the genetics of adaptation and about the
molecular basis of convergent evolution.