* 1501600
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Comparative phylogeography of three co-distributed Neotropical mangrove species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Douglas Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,455.00

Mangroves provide valuable ecosystem services and habitats for many economically
important animals, such as fish, birds, and marine invertebrates. Red
(Rhizophora mangle), black (Avicennia germinans), and white (Laguncularia
racemosa) mangroves are coastal trees found in estuarine habitats throughout the
Neotropics. This project will use genetic tools, evolutionary analyses and niche
modeling to analyze current distributions, and then use these data to model past
and future geographical distributions for the three species. The project will
also investigate the correlation between dispersal ability and observed patterns
of genetic diversity, and infer how seed dispersal potential can affect the
genetic structure of populations on broad geographic scales. One graduate
student will be trained in diverse molecular methods, niche modeling and
phylogenetic analyses, and undergraduates will be introduced to a diversity of
field and laboratory techniques. A series of talks and presentations will
broadly disseminate results of the study in Florida, Aruba, Cayman Islands, and
Jamaica where the three mangrove species will be collected.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comparative phylogeography of coastal and marine
animals in the southeastern U. S. has been well studied, with many taxa
exhibiting a phylogeographic discontinuity at the southern tip of Florida. In
contrast, only two studies have examined the phylogeography of coastal or marine
plant species in this region. In the Caribbean, studies of historical
biogeography have similarly been heavily biased towards vertebrates. Further
study of coastal plants is needed in Florida and the Caribbean to facilitate
phylogeographic synthesis for the region. The researchers will investigate the
phylogeographic histories of three mangrove species (Rhizophora mangle,
Avicennia germinans, and Laguncularia racemosa) in Florida. They will test the
hypothesis that phylogeographic structure is less pronounced in these highly
dispersed organisms than in other coastal organisms, and that propagule size,
longevity and proximity to water will be negatively correlated with
phylogeographic structure. To help place these patterns in a broader context,
the researchers will also investigate the phylogeography of R. mangle in the
Caribbean. This project will use multiple molecular markers, including complete
plastid genomes, RAD-Seq data, and microsatellites, each with different modes of
inheritance and mutation rates, to thoroughly investigate the phylogeography of
these three species. Data obtained will facilitate a synthesis of animal and
plant phylogeographic and biogeographic studies in Florida and the Caribbean,
and also help identify future conservation priorities in the different areas.