* 1501306
* Dissertation Research:  Testing the effects of large mammalian herbivores on savanna dynamics and community structure with regional- and continent-scale natural experiments
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Robert Pringle, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2016
* USD 15,144.00

The goal of this project is to determine how population declines of large
mammalian herbivores (e.g., elephants, wildebeest, buffalo, antelopes, and
zebra) affect African savanna habitats. Small-scale experimental studies have
shown that because these large herbivores consume huge quantities of plant
material, losing these species is likely to profoundly affect vegetation. The
researchers will test how population declines and consequent changes in the
frequency of two types of large herbivore-plant interactions alter savanna
vegetation. In order to determine whether tree species reliant on large-mammal
seed dispersal have declined in abundance, the research team will conduct
fieldwork in Gorongosa National Park, Mozambique, where poaching during the
1977-1992 civil war nearly eliminated all large mammals. Second, by analyzing
historical and modern satellite imagery, the researchers will test whether
recent, human-driven declines in elephant populations across African protected
areas lead to increased tree cover and possibly consequent threats to species
adapted to historically sparse tree cover in African savannas. Elephants are
particularly important savanna herbivores because they topple trees, potentially
maintaining open savanna habitats. Many U.S. ecosystems have also experienced
recent, dramatic changes in mammalian herbivore pressure as deer populations
have exploded, and this research will advance our understanding of ecosystem
responses to changed herbivory regimes. Project results will be incorporated
into an undergraduate course on ecology and conservation. Results will be
disseminated through scientific articles, blogs on park and affiliated websites,
and online videos produced by the E.O. Wilson Biodiversity
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vegetation structure and composition is
shifting in savannas across Africa due to altered fire regimes and climate
change, but the extent to which declining herbivore populations are responsible
for changing vegetation is unclear. Fieldwork in Gorongosa will include
comparisons of vegetation in woodland patches that recruited prior to and since
large mammal declines to test whether new woodland communities are relatively
devoid of mammal-dispersed plants. This pattern is known from tropical forests
where seed-dispersing mammals have declined, but the extent to which savanna
trees depend on large mammals for dispersal is unknown. To test support for the
hypothesis that recent declines in elephant populations lead to increased
savanna tree cover, the researchers will build statistical models predicting
changes in remotely sensed tree cover for African parks from published estimates
of elephant density along with remotely sensed fire and rainfall data.