* 1501675
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Origins of Parthenogenesis in the Common Checkered Whiptail
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Matthew Fujita, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,993.00

One of the primary advantages of sexual reproduction is its ability to generate
and maintain biodiversity, yet some species reproduce clonally. This project
will address the ability of clonal reproduction to generate genetic diversity in
unisexual lizards, the only group of vertebrates capable of reproducing without
any input from males. Understanding the evolutionary trajectories of unisexual
populations will help identify why sex is the prevalent mode of reproduction for
multicellular life. Results and discoveries from this project will connect with
the broader community by: 1) promoting training and mentoring, 2) clarifying
species level relationships in a taxonomically-challenged species complex, and
3) facilitating exchange of intellectual expertise via international
collaborations with Mexican researchers. Using emerging genomic approaches,
unique lizard models, and the talents of an international team of researchers,
this project addresses a persistent evolutionary question about the evolution
and maintenance of sexual reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to identify the evolutionary processes that shape organismal
diversity in a clonally-reproducing lizard. Most vertebrate species maintain
genetic variation by reproducing sexually, but several all-female lizards
reproduce without males by cloning themselves; mothers beget daughters whose
genomes are all but identical. However, cloning is imperfect, as individuals may
not produce genetically-identical clones due to mutation. To investigate what
generates diversity (including phenotypic diversity) among clones this project
uses DNA sequence from one parthenogenetic, all-female species and its related
sexual species to determine if either multiple founding events or genetic
mechanisms after inception best explain the diversity in phenotypes. Combining
genome-wide genotyping with a novel approach to sequence entire mitochondrial
genomes, these data should permit a clear picture into the origins of the
parthenogenetic species and infer species level relationships among the sexual
species. This research will investigate the tempo and mode of mutation processes
generating diversity in a clonally-reproducing lizard, thus providing insight
into the origins and evolution of unisexuality in vertebrates.