* 1501188
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  A next-generation sequencing framework for understanding trait evolution across multiple scales in the Viburnum lentago clade
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Michael Donoghue, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 21,645.00

Many plant species are extremely variable. Even within a population, plants of
the same species can differ from one another in characteristics such as leaf
shape or flower color. However, almost all broad-scale studies of trait
evolution ignore such variation within species and instead assign a single value
to each species. Partially for this we know little about how variation within
species relates to evolutionary differentiation over longer timescales. This
project focuses on six closely related species of shrubs that are native to the
Eastern United States. The goal is to quantify different types of variation
within species and to relate the observed patterns to how these species evolved
over the past 5-20 million years. Special emphasis will be placed on describing
variation in a set of leaf characteristics (size, shape, leaf margins) within
individual plants, within populations, across populations spanning a latitudinal
gradient in growing conditions, and across species. These data will allow a
better prediction of which traits are most likely to evolve and how plant
species might respond to future climate change. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project uses a new next-generation molecular method to generate phylogenetic and
phylogeographic data for the Lentago lineage within the flowering plant clade
Viburnum. RAD (Restriction site Associated DNA) markers will be sequenced for
over 30 individuals per species to create a high-resolution phylogeny that spans
across levels of divergence, linking populations that diverged only several
hundred years ago to speciation events in the Miocene. This phylogenetic
framework will resolve species relationships, determine the extent of
hybridization within the clade, and enable the researchers to reconstruct the
phylogeographic (population-level) history of each species. The resulting
detailed understanding of common ancestry and migration history will provide new
insight into how adaptation and gene flow generate and maintain trait variation
within and among species. The project will improve understanding of the genesis
of variation in morphological traits, of how types of variation translate across
levels of organization, and of the emergence of the traits that mark deeper
branches in the tree of life.