* 1501195
* Integrating Soft/Entrepreneurial Skills for Success in Cybersecurity
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Allan Anderson, Northeast State Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 02/28/2019
* USD 190,733.00

Today more than ever organizations need cyber defense technology to protect
their valuable, private, and confidential assets. According to the U.S.
Department of Labor Statistics, employment of information security analysts is
projected to grow 37% from 2012 to 2022, much faster than the average for all
occupations. In 2012 the Computer and Information Sciences Department at the
College developed an Information Assurance (IA) concentration focusing on
cybersecurity as part of the Computer and Information Sciences Associate of
Applied Science degree programs. A recently conducted DACUM identified "soft
skills" as critical for success as a cybersecurity professional.

The focus of this project is to recruit and retain high school students, and
provide them with combined technical, entrepreneurial, and soft skills. By
modifying existing courses, developing new courses, introducing problem-based
learning into the classroom, and engaging industry leaders as guest lecturers,
the project will improve the quality, quantity, and diversity of cybersecurity
technicians in the area workforce. Utilizing existing resources developed by the
college and various ATE cybersecurity centers; the project will also build on
partnerships at local high schools and expertise currently in place at
industries in the college's service area. The outcome of this effort will
positively impact area high schools, colleges, and local industry by providing a
skillful, trained employee or a prospective continuing student in information
technology and cybersecurity. The project will also employ strategies for
student recruitment and retention through a variety of activities such as:
visitations by faculty with high school guidance counselors, teachers and
prospective students, and sponsoring high school career days. In today's
competitive work environment, the required technical skills are not enough for
future employers. This project will also equip students with the requisite
combination of technical and soft entrepreneurial skills needed to excel in the
field of cybersecurity.