* 1501660
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Understanding Variation in Motor Performance and Mate Choice in a Lekking Species with Complex, Acrobatic Displays
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Emily DuVal, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2018
* USD 19,760.00

Many animals have complex courtship displays, and these displays are often
essential for reproduction. This project asks how and why individuals differ in
their performance of complex displays and the consequences of that variation.
Research focuses on the complex, acrobatic displays of a small, tropical bird,
the lance-tailed manakin. Researchers will analyze continuously recorded video
of display sites to determine how the courtship performance of males is
influenced by female preferences. Analyses will quantify fine-scale variation in
complex displays and determine how courtship performance affects reproductive
success. Undergraduate mentoring is an essential aspect of this research
program, and will promote opportunities for minority students. Findings will be
disseminated to the public through informal presentations, published in peer-
reviewed journals, and presented at international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motor performance (the execution of visible
body movements) is an integral component of many courtship displays and has the
potential to be an important signal of male quality. The whole organism is used
in the execution of such movements, which involve factors such as respiration,
muscular capacity, and current energy reserves; therefore, motor performance may
be an even more valuable signal than static traits more commonly investigated in
sexual selection studies. In lekking species, mate choice by females is expected
to depend on which males she observes. Therefore, it is important to quantify
phenotypic variation among the particular subset of males among which each
female is choosing. This research will investigate the causes of variation in
the performance of complex, acrobatic displays in the lance-tailed manakin, and
the fitness consequences of that variation, specifically addressing three key
questions: 1) What factors influence variation in display performance? 2) How
does male display performance influence female choice? and 3) How do males
choose which female to direct their displays toward when multiple females are
present? This research utilizes advances in video technology to quantify fine-
scale variation in complex courtship displays. Researchers will employ genetic
techniques to determine how display performance and female visitation patterns
relate to genetic siring success. Understanding what causes variation in motor
displays is the first essential step in disentangling complex courtship displays
and how these displays may influence fitness. All data associated with this
research will be archived at Florida State University for a minimum of 5 years
following project completion.