* 1501620
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Flowers as hubs of nectar-microbe diversity and dispersal in flower visitor networks
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Jay Rosenheim, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,702.00

Many plants can only be fertilized when pollen is deposited on flowers by flying
insects such as bees, wasps, beetles, flies, and butterflies. While these
insects move around gathering nectar and pollen from flowers, they also tend to
move around microbes such as yeast, bacteria, and viruses that can impact the
plant or other flower visitors. For example, some of these microbes infect crops
through the flowers, some infect honeybee and bumblebee colonies, and others
affect whether or not an insect is attracted to the flower. While it is known
that these floral microbes are moved around by insects, and affect the plant
they land on, little is known about how predictable the distribution of floral
microbes are in flowering plant communities. This research seeks to understand
how the pattern of insect visitation to flowers affects the distribution of
microbes on flowers. It is important to learn this because it could help address
management of plants and insects that are critical to our food and fiber
production as well as native ecosystems. Nectar-inhabiting microbes can alter
floral attractiveness to pollinators and thus shape the success of pollination
services. Since nectar microbes are primarily flower-visitor dispersed, they
have great potential to affect and be affected by flower visitor network
structure. However, the interactions of plants with their flower visitors and
nectar microbes have yet to be considered in a network framework. The aim of
this project is to test the hypothesis that hub plant species (plant species
that have very high diversity of flower visitors) are also hubs of floral
microbe diversity and dispersal in a native plant community. Network hubs are
known to be responsible for a disproportionate amount of pathogen spread within
animal species ("super-spreaders"). In flower visitor networks, hub plant
species might function as super-spreaders of floral microbes between plant
species. The project goals are to construct a dataset of plants, their flower
visitors, and nectar microbe composition as well as perform a manipulative
experiment on a species with high variation in flower visitors, Aquilegia
formosa, in a high elevation wet meadow plant community. Simulation models will
be used to evaluate the effects of visitor diversity and visitation frequency on
the diversity of nectar microbes at the plant level. The researchers will
empirically test the hypothesis that certain flowers are hubs of nectar microbe
diversity.