* 1501451
* iCREAT: A pathway to middle-skill positions through the Introduction to Coding, Robotics, Electronics, And Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* George Barnett, Massachusetts Bay Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 891,414.00

This project at Massachusetts Bay Community College (MBCC) establishes a STEM
pathway towards middle-skill careers in electronics and associated technology.
The plan starts by targeting high school students during the junior year and
provides a program leading to certification and/or associates degrees. This
project aims to address state of Massachusetts and national workforce needs for
trained technicians. The program therefore engages high school-aged youth and
community college students in learning electronics, coding, and engineering
design and manufacturing through an interdisciplinary project-based approach
that serves as a launching point along technical career pathways such as
information technology technical hardware support, computer numerical control
(CNC) operation, computer aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM), and others.
The project is designed to broaden participation by recruiting, retaining, and
preparing students from underrepresented populations in STEM. To attract and
engage students, the project is creating a year-long course sequence co-taught
by MBCC STEM faculty from multiple departments. The courses are designed to
mirror learning and work in the workplace by engaging students in applying
critical thinking skills and leveraging technical knowledge and skills from many
content areas. The courses, available for college credit for high school
students in the junior to senior years, allow the students to get a head start
on post-secondary education and retain admitted MBCC students in STEM fields.
Partnerships with local organizations and industry will help provide career
guidance and find internship opportunities for students. A web-based mentoring
program will aid retention by connecting participants with STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a research goal to provide
the community with an evidence-based model around how program components support
or do not support students to pursue a STEM career pathway. The study focuses on
the role of intentionality and adaptability as optimal outcomes of engaging in
STEM education. Using an expanded version of Navarro's (et alia, 2007)
Math/Science Intentions and Goals Scale and Savickas' &amp; Porfeli's (2012)
Career Adapt-Abilities Scale, the project is studying 1) intention, referring to
"orientation toward action," by examining intentions to pursue a STEM career
pathway and to actively consider STEM careers and 2) career adaptability which
is a psychosocial construct denoting an individual's resources of self-
regulation or capacity for coping with tasks, transitions, and traumas in
occupational roles. A key hypothesis is that the interventions will enhance
individuals' skills for self-regulation and will develop their capacity to
internalize these skills.