* 1501882
* Local and Global Study of Automorphic Forms and Galois Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Sug Woo Shin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 359,989.00

This research project concerns work in number theory, a branch of mathematics
that has seen applications in cryptography and in coding theory and that has
connections with physics. There have been many fruitful interactions between
number theory and other areas of mathematics, as exemplified by the Langlands
program and the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem. The proof of Fermat's last
theorem included verification of a small part of the Langlands program, a vast
web of conjectures involving disparate areas of mathematics, which, in this
case, connected Galois representations and automorphic forms and the L-functions
of elliptic curves. The investigator will pursue research directions that
involve strong global techniques to study automorphic forms and Galois
representations. These may include methods such as the trace formula, Shimura
varieties, p-adically completed cohomology, or the Taylor-Wiles-Kisin patching
construction.

This research project will address the following topics. (1) The Langlands-
Kottwitz approach to the cohomology of Shimura varieties of abelian type with
good reduction in full generality; (2) Arithmetic statistics for families of
automorphic representations and their L-functions; (3) The endoscopic
classification for representations of local and global unitary groups that are
not quasi-split; and (4) p-adic Langlands program beyond GL(2,Qp). The common
theme of the investigator's research is to obtain strong consequences from these
techniques via a clear understanding of interactions between local and global
theories. The Langlands-Kottwitz method is a fundamental component of the
Langlands program, and its completion for Shimura varieties of abelian type will
not only be a milestone but also lead to further arithmetic applications. The
study of families of L-functions makes a connection with random matrix theory
and would shed light on families of algebraic varieties. The project on unitary
groups settles an interesting case of Langlands functoriality as well as the
local Langlands classification with several expected applications in arithmetic,
which rely essentially on the use of (often non-quasi-split) unitary groups. The
continued effort on the p-adic Langlands program aiming at general groups would
have growing impact and open up new research directions.