* 1501796
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Discovering the Evolutionary History of Nocturnality in Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Karen Carleton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2018
* USD 16,575.00

Historically, transitioning to a nocturnal lifestyle allowed some birds to
operate during a time when fewer predators were active and there was less
competition for food. Adaptation to nocturnality contributed to the great
diversity of birds seen today and that transition likely began with the
evolution of night vision. This research will develop a novel method to uncover
the ways that birds adapted to see in the dark, and thus became nocturnal. This
method incorporates detailed analyses of the genetic foundation of vision in all
birds, and will help uncover other modes of avian diversification, such as the
origin of diverse plumage coloration. The insights into bird vision gained
through this research will be applicable and relevant to research on human
vision and visual diseases, such as colorblindness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little
is known about night vision in birds, but phylogenetic analyses offer evidence
of multiple independent origins of this trait and of nocturnality. The DNA
sequence capture probe set developed in this proposal will allow isolation and
sequencing of the entire phototransduction cascade from the genome of any bird.
The phototransduction cascade is a pathway of approximately 30 genes, beginning
with the absorption of a photon in an opsin, and resulting in the generation of
a neural signal. For this project, these genes will be captured and sequenced
from all major nocturnal bird lineages and their diurnal relatives. Analysis of
these data will identify evidence of spectral tuning in opsins, evidence for
selection, and potential loss or pseudogenization of genes in this cascade. This
information will indicate how many times nocturnality has evolved across the
avian tree of life, providing insight into the evolutionary origin of those
adaptations, whether they were independently derived, represent convergent
innovations, or are due to deep homology.