* 1501522
* Pacific Northwest Viticulture and Oenology Education Collaborative
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Trent Ball, Yakima Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2019
* USD 853,290.00

A Washington needs assessment conducted in 2014 estimated that through 2018
there will be a shortage of technically-trained employees in the areas of
Viticulture (grape growing), Oenology (winemaking), and Wine Marketing/Sales.
This project is a collaboration among three community colleges in Washington
(Yakima Valley Community College, South Seattle Community College, and Wenatchee
Valley College) that will jointly develop and implement comprehensive technician
level training in Viticulture and Oenology that can be delivered across the
entire state. The collaboration will address the needs of the Washington grape
and wine industry without creating duplicative programs at all three colleges.
The project will develop best practices in curriculum design, professional
development, and technical- and science-based training.

The collaborating colleges will share resources and develop new online and
hybrid curricula for Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degrees in Vineyard
Technology and Winery Technology while maintaining practical hands-on training.
This project will increase the number of employable graduates of wine industry
education and training programs across the State of Washington by providing
hybrid curricula for Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degrees in Vineyard
Technology and Winery Technology at three community colleges in Washington. The
curricula developed include certificates in Wine Business Entrepreneurship and
Viticulture Sustainability that develop business and entrepreneurial skills for
students, and can be taken from any college within the collaboration. This
project will increase partnerships with industry representatives to develop
work-based educational experiences for students. The colleges are developing
articulation agreements creating pathways from high school through baccalaureate
programs. This project will also create a science-, technology-, and
mathematics-rich training opportunity for current employees in the wine grape
industry. A DACUM process is being used to address workplace competencies for
the two new certificates in Entrepreneurship and Sustainability. Additionally, a
career pathway will be formalized for students in articulated high school
courses to move into technical certificate, Associate degree, and Bachelor's
degree programs. The college partners are working with the Washington wine
industry to provide practicum sites for hands-on-learning activities not
obtainable on some of the college campuses as well as increased internship and
work experience opportunities, which further strengthen graduates' competencies
in the discipline.