* 1501580
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary Dynamics in Rapidly Evolving Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Michael Desai, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2016
* USD 21,936.00

Evolution is one of the most fundamental processes in biology, but it can be
notoriously difficult to observe directly. Evolutionary change accumulates over
many thousands of generations as a result of a relentless competition between
different genetic variants in a population. Except in a few rare cases, the
intermediate steps of this competition are only partially preserved in the
fossil record or the diversity of present-day species. This makes it hard to
obtain the empirical data necessary for building and testing theories about the
adaptive process. The present work aims to fill this void by constructing a
high-resolution 'molecular fossil record' documenting 60,000 generations of
evolution in experimental populations of bacteria. The unique duration of this
experiment --- almost a quarter of the time since the human-chimpanzee split ---
allows one to directly observe how the tempo of molecular evolution changes over
long evolutionary timescales, and the biological replication will show which
aspects of this process change when the evolutionary tape is replayed. These
data will play a key role in testing existing theories of adaptation in a
constant environment, and will help suggest new ways to model the evolution of
large microbial populations.

To achieve these goals, this study will leverage new experimental techniques for
massively multiplexed DNA sequencing to measure genetic diversity in the frozen
``fossil record'' of a well-studied evolution experiment in Escherichia coli.
Combined with new bioinformatic techniques, these regularly preserved, whole-
population samples allow one to trace the trajectories of new mutations as they
arise and compete for dominance in the population. The ?molecular fossil
records? that emerge from this analysis will constitute the longest and most
detailed view of the dynamics of molecular evolution in any natural or
experimental population. They will also generate a wealth of genetic data that
will be used to compare patterns of molecular convergence and parallelism across
populations and through time. These new measurements will be combined with a
recently developed computational framework in order to test long-standing
theoretical predictions about the dynamics of evolution in a constant
environment.