* 1501531
* Dissertation Research: Parent-embryo Interactions in Glassfrogs - Female Mating Strategies, Paternal Effort, and Adaptive Plasticity in Hatching
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Michael Sorenson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 16,380.00

A fundamental goal of behavioral ecology is to understand how shared interests
and conflicts among related individuals shape family life. Offspring benefit
from increasing parental care, but parents' ability to care for young is limited
by resources needed for future reproduction and survival. This conflict is
thought to favor strategies that allow individuals to balance the costs and
benefits of parenting. Research on this topic has typically focused on species
with conventional sex roles where females care for young. In glassfrogs, males
care for eggs and embryos can hatch early to escape from abandoned eggs. This
project will evaluate hypotheses about father embryo co-evolution by assessing
heritability and variation in ecologically important paternal and embryonic
traits. It will test if females select good fathers or mate strategically to
induce good parenting and how interactions between parents affect the evolution
of embryos' hatching strategies. This project will offer new perspectives on
family life by testing how sexual selection influences the behavior of fathers
and embryos. Glassfrog family interactions have substantial appeal for
scientific education and public outreach. The PIs will work with the media,
museums, and zoos to disseminate results broadly. This project will offer
training in integrative methods of genomics, behavioral ecology, and
quantitative genetics for a graduate student and an undergraduate assistant and
foster collaborations with Latin American researchers.

This research uses adaptive plasticity in hatching to examine parent offspring
interactions and their consequences in a glassfrog with male care of eggs. In
Hyalinobatrachium colymbiphyllum, higher mating success results in more paternal
effort, longer embryonic periods, and higher offspring survival. The team will
use a next-generation genotype-by-sequencing method for maternity analysis, in
combination with detailed histories of male mating and caring behavior, to
assess female mating choices in the context of social environments.
Specifically, they will test whether females mate tactically to exploit male
care and assess potential mutual benefits to co-nesting females. The team will
test hypotheses of father embryo co-evolution by assessing covariation between
paternal traits, measured in a field experiment, and hatching responses of their
embryos, measured in a common-garden experiment. This study extends fundamental
tests of parent offspring interactions to a system with male-only care, and will
inform and motivate other research on parental and embryo strategies. Data will
be shared in online supplements to publications or in public archives (DRYAD,
the Sequence Read Archive, GenBank) as appropriate. Outreach materials will be
posted online.