* 1501676
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating Biogeography, Cytology, Niche Modeling and Phylogenetics to Understand the Evolutionary History of Endemic Campanula Species in the Mediterranean
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Nico Cellinese, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,026.00

Accurate delimitations and estimates of species diversity are critical aspects
for many areas of biology, including biogeography, ecology, and conservation.
This research focuses on improving our understanding of species diversity in the
Mediterranean Basin - one of the most biologically diverse areas in the world.
As threats to biodiversity mount, due mainly to climate change and human
pressure, accurate assessments are increasingly important for conservation
efforts. To study fine-scale evolution and biogeographic patterns and processes,
the researchers have identified a poorly understood group of bellflowers (the
Campanula erinus species complex) that can serve as a model for understanding
the drivers of evolution in this highly diverse area. This project will focus
specifically on inferring the evolutionary history and providing an accurate
assessment of species diversity in this group of plants. Results will have
important implications for understanding the origins of Mediterranean
biodiversity, designing successful conservation efforts, and anticipating
possible responses to future climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will employ a next-generation sequencing approach, involving
targeted enrichment of numerous nuclear loci across populations of both the
widespread Campanula erinus and the narrow endemic, Campanula creutzburgii.
Though sequencing will focus on the Campanula erinus species complex, the
nuclear probe set will be designed such that it will be useful across the
Campanulaceae (more than 2400 taxa). This targeted sequencing technique, in
conjunction with morphological data, and recent coalescent and model-based
methods, will serve as a model for future studies integrating traditional
systematic and genome-level data for evaluating species boundaries and detecting
cryptic speciation in vascular plants. The probe set developed during the course
of this study will be made available to the scientific community, facilitating
future evolutionary studies within the family. Studying the Campanula erinus
complex in a phylogenetic and biogeographic framework will illuminate the
drivers of diversification and persistence of species and allow the researchers
to relate these mechanisms to factors such as ecology, geologic history, and
climatic fluctuations. Three hypotheses will be tested regarding these taxa: i)
Cryptic taxonomic diversity is present within the Campanula erinus aggregate;
ii) Historical sea level changes contributed to allopatric speciation; iii)
Polyploidy (genome duplication) has been an important historical factor in this
group and polyploids may represent species distinct from their diploid
progenitors. An understanding of these evolutionary processes will be especially
critical in this biodiversity hotspot, where conservation efforts are expected
to be most challenging but likely give the highest payoff.