* 1501703
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Assessing controls, fates, and significance of animal egesta in stream ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Michelle Evans-White, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,045.00

Animals can play key roles in freshwater ecosystems by converting food resources
into waste products that affect the cycling of nutrients such as nitrogen and
phosphorus. Previous research has focused on the ecological importance of
dissolved wastes (e.g. ammonium and phosphate) from animals, termed excreta,
because these wastes are nutrient-rich and readily bioavailable to plants and
bacteria. However, animals also produce substantial amounts of particulate
wastes, termed feces. For example, leaf-shredding stream invertebrates convert
plant litter into fine particulate feces that can be subsequently transported
downstream, broken down, or consumed by other animals. Feces may vary widely in
attributes depending on diet and the source animal, suggesting species-specific
roles of animal feces in larger functioning of ecosystems. In this project,
researchers will explore factors influencing attributes of animal feces and
compare the impact of feces on nutrient cycling to that of excreta in stream
ecosystems. This project will benefit society by contributing novel information
about the importance of animals in ecosystems and providing career development
for multiple undergraduates and one graduate student. Results can help guide
management of human activities that drive changes in animal species distribution
and nutrient pollution in freshwaters.

This project will employ a combination of laboratory experiments and field
surveys to assess controls, fates, and the significance of animal egesta (feces)
in stream ecosystems. Dominant grazing and shredding macroinvertebrates from
multiple species will be brought to the laboratory, fed diets of low or high
nutrient content, and their egesta collected to characterize size and chemical
binding as well as measure rates of microbial decomposition and nutrient
leaching, uptake, and mineralization over the course of several months.
Recurrent surveys of an Ozark headwater stream will quantify total excretion and
egestion of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus by extant macroinvertebrates and
compare these animal fluxes to background stocks and fluxes of dissolved
nutrients (in the case of excreta) and fine particulate organic matter (in the
case of egesta). All findings will be synthesized for modeling of how variation
in background nutrient concentrations, animal community composition, and
background stocks and fluxes of dissolved and particulate elements can affect
the roles of animals in stream ecosystems.