* 1501672
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Bridging micro- and macroevolution in a top Neotropical predator
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Corrie Moreau, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 17,167.00

The large-scale, macroevolutionary patterns observed in the fossil record span
millions of years, and the processes behind these patterns are responsible for
generating the diversity in biological organisms that exist today. On the
microevolutionary scale, examples of natural selection are common - both in
nature and in laboratory experiments - and often can be observed over a few
generations. A large advantage of working on the microevolutionary scale is the
ability to manipulate organisms to understand the underlying mechanisms and
processes behind observed patterns. However, extending the knowledge of
microevolutionary processes to deeper time scales will be crucial to
understanding the generation of biodiversity. Elucidating the contexts in which
microevolutionary processes extend beyond short time scales aids both in
advancing the clarity of evolutionary theory as well as strengthening
application to broader non-scientific aims. Furthermore, understanding how
complex traits are inherited across time scales and genetic diversity can have
important impacts on biomedical and agricultural
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neotropical army ants are keystone predators
of leaf litter communities with broad geographic ranges and diverse physical
forms shaped by dietary ecology. This project leverages existing genomic data
demonstrating the macroevolutionary pattern for Neotropical army ants to
determine whether changes in physical form at intermediate time scales occur due
to heritable and non-heritable variation in existing lineages. The project
explores whether change in physical form at the macroevolutionary scale can be
reduced to one of the most basic Darwinian microevolutionary processes - natural
selection by heritable variation. The data to address these questions will be
generated by measuring variation in genetics and physical form, and using a
range of quantitative genetic, genomic, and morphometric analytical methods.
This work will take place at the Field Museum of Natural History, an ideal
location for public science education, community outreach, and mentorship.