* 1501205
* Constraining Stellar Evolution Models using Observations of Stars in Nearby Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Philip Rosenfield, Rosenfield              Philip
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 05/31/2018
* USD 231,258.00

Philip Rosenfield is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. The focus of his program is to improve
models of stellar evolution using observations from the Hubble Space Telescope
of tens of thousands of stars in other galaxies. Massive stars are largely
responsible for regulating the intensity of star formation over cosmic stretches
of time. Nearly any attempt to interpret observations of galaxies requires
understanding the massive stars. Despite their importance, current models of
massive stars do not match current observations. Historically, calibrations of
massive stars models are limited to a relatively small number of stars formed in
similar environments, and models of massive stars in other environments are
largely extrapolations. With the recent surge in large surveys that reveal
individual stars in more distant galaxies, astronomers now have the necessary
data to significantly improve massive star models in a diverse set of
environments. The educational program aims to increase the confidence and
enthusiasm in learning astronomy of Boston Middle School students by preparing
students to create and present their own digital planetarium shows.

The primary goal of this program is to systematically calibrate the uncertain
aspects of widely used, state-of-the-art stellar evolution models, using the
best possible data as constraints across the widest range of metallicity. All
new models will be publicly disseminated and Rosenfield will work closely with
population synthesis modelers to ensure the models can quickly and easily be
incorporated into their analysis routines. To assess which is the most probable
stellar evolution model given the observational constraints, Rosenfield will
calculate large sets of stellar models spanning the uncertain model parameter
space as well as the metallicity range of the data. Each set will then be
statistically compared to observational data. By requiring acceptable fits
across all metallicities and masses, not only will the best fitting parameters
become known, but any degeneracies between parameters will be revealed. For the
educational program, Rosenfield will work with volunteers and teachers to
prepare Boston Middle School students to give digital planetarium shows to their
peers.