* 1501096
* RUI:  Cirrus Ice Crystal Surface Structure and Kinetics at the Nanoscale
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Nathan Magee, The College of New Jersey
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 197,700.00

The role of cirrus clouds in the radiative balance of the climate system is
still a poorly constrained problem. The successful modeling of cirrus coverage,
cloud evolution, and response to a changing climate has been limited by
fundamental uncertainties in the microphysics of the constituent ice particles.
Important questions remain regarding cirrus ice particle nucleation, growth and
sublimation efficiency, and particle morphology. This project will address two
of these fundamental uncertainties through novel use of modern nanotechnology
tools. First, do ice crystal facets in cirrus clouds exhibit roughened surfaces
at the nanoscale and microscale, and if so, what factors affect the degree and
character of roughening? Secondly, does the presence or absence of roughened
surfaces alter predicted rates of water vapor-ice phase
exchange?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Improved modeling
of cirrus clouds is of widely acknowledged strategic importance for climate
modeling, and there is broad agreement that a paucity of laboratory measurements
of ice microphysics is among the most significant constraints on progress.
Aircraft probes and cloud chambers are making advances, but one avenue of
potential discovery remains largely untapped: modern materials imaging and
analysis tools have yet to be fully applied to ice surfaces under
atmospherically relevant conditions. Such analysis can be expected to reveal new
information about ice crystal surface structures and kinetics. Preliminary data
acquired by Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM) have already
demonstrated the ubiquitous presence of ice surface roughness in lab-grown
crystals, and revealed growth rates that deviate from classical predictions.
However, the ice crystals already analyzed by ESEM have been made on a substrate
in a pure vapor environment; the relevance of these findings to the atmosphere
cannot be fully established without a revised experimental approach. This
project aims to address this question head-on by conducting laboratory
experiments under gaseous conditions more representative of the atmosphere and
through balloon-borne capture, retrieval, and analysis of actual cirrus
particles. Successful completion of the project will firmly establish the
character of surface roughness on cirrus particles, contribute to improved
modeling of vapor deposition/sublimation, and provide the clearest, highest-
resolution images of cirrus ice particles ever
acquired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project will be
conducted by physics department faculty and students at a primarily
undergraduate institution, The College of New Jersey (TCNJ), in Ewing, NJ.
Undergraduate research has proven to be a highly effective tool for recruiting
outstanding students into careers in the field of atmospheric science. Largely
because of the relative scarcity of undergraduate programs, the atmospheric
sciences lag behind other natural sciences in developing this pipeline. This
project will help to more firmly establish atmospheric science within the
physics department at TCNJ, a large and growing department. By providing
cutting-edge research opportunities to outstanding physics undergraduates, the
project will pave the way for an under-utilized path into careers in atmospheric
science. In addition, during each year, two of the undergraduate researchers in
the program will be dual science/secondary education students who will carry the
excitement of scientific discovery into their high school classrooms. These
future teachers will engage high school students from the high-need school
districts of Trenton and Ewing, New Jersey in inquiry-centered laboratory
experiences based on the scientific questions being addressed in the proje