* 1501198
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny, biogeography, and convergent evolution in a radiation of Southeast Asian Rock Geckos (Cnemaspis Strauch, 1887).
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Perry Wood, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 16,335.00

Southeast Asia is one of the most intriguing and understudied biodiversity
hotspots in the world. A prominent geological feature of this area is the Sunda
Shelf, which is currently submerged beneath the South China Sea and underlies
the Malay Archipelago. This region has a complex geological and climatic
history, and serves as an excellent system to study drivers of biotic
diversification. One group that occurs throughout this region is the rock gecko
genus Cnemaspis. Theses geckos live on various substrates including different
types of vegetation and rocks, including limestone, which is heavily mined in
Southeast Asia for the production of cement. Mining and clearance of rainforest
comprise serious threats to the unique biodiversity of this region. Studies of
the endemic organisms of this region can contribute to conservation planning
through the discovery of cryptic species and identification of local areas of
high species diversity. This kind of knowledge is crucial to the implementation
of effective science-based conservation strategies. This study will also further
our understanding of the processes of speciation and adaptation to unique local
environments, and the long-term accumulation of biodiversity which make this
part of Asia so rich in endemic species. Portions of this research will be used
to train undergraduates, and to develop a public display about biodiversity and
species discovery at the Bean Life Science Museum at Brigham Young University.
&lt;br/&gt; The genus Cnemaspis is widespread throughout Southeast Asia and is
one of the most species-rich gecko genera in the region, with 54 described
species. These presumed low vagility geckos live on a variety of substrates and
vary in ecomorphology; and the clade is characterized by a number of micro-
endemics, making it a great system for evolutionary study. In this project we
will: (1) generate a well-supported multilocus time-calibrated phylogeny of the
genus and test spatial and temporal divergence across the Sunda Shelf; (2)
evaluate whether the polytomy in the preliminary phylogeny for the genus is
'hard' or 'soft', and if the former, whether it is an adaptive or non-adaptive
radiation; and (3) investigate the effects on Cnemaspis species diversification
(e.g. speciation and extinction rates) derived from the convergent evolution of
ecomorphological characters. Currently one mitochondrial gene and three nuclear
gene sequences resolve well-supported clades towards the tips of the tree, but
fail to resolve deeper nodes. To test the hard vs. soft polytomy hypotheses, a
'Next Generation' sequence-capture method will be used to generate hundreds of
loci. From this dataset a phylogenetic tree will be constructed to explicitly
test alternative biogeographic hypotheses for colonization of parts of
Sundaland, as well as test morphological disparity through time (DTT),
convergent adaptive regime shifts, and evolution of ecomorphological characters.