* 1501287
* HOME4TECHS - Hands On Maintenance Education for TECHnicianS
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Thomas Wylie, Northwest State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 199,996.00

In Ohio, manufacturing supports 17% of the state's economy. For many years
Northwest State Community College supported programs on separate skilled trades
based on industry practice related to their separate job classifications. A
recent trend has been the combining of these separate skilled trades into a
multi-craft maintenance position. This project will convert a traditional
automation maintenance technology program to a competency-based, hybrid
instructional model with flexible laboratory scheduling options. The Hands On
Maintenance Education for Technicians (HOME4TECHS) project will support
professional development for faculty on competency-based education, and the
development and deployment of modular online courses. This project will advance
the knowledge and understanding of competencies required by manufacturing
companies for students entering the automation maintenance field. The project
will also advance the knowledge and understanding of the steps a college needs
to take in order to convert a traditional college curriculum and delivery
system, to an employer-driven, competency-based curriculum, delivered through
hybrid learning.

The goals of the project are to: re-structure 3 courses in the automation
maintenance curriculum to a competency-based curriculum, so that they will be
aligned with the needs of the local industry. This will involve moving the
lecture portion of the courses to a modular online format, and developing an
open lab delivery model for the hands-on portion of the 3 courses. Restructuring
the delivery system will make the courses more accessible to students and
incumbent workers. The project will engage college faculty and manufacturing
employers in a collaborative effort to develop a competency-based, hybrid
learning model that can be widely disseminated and scaled to promote applied
learning in the technical workforce. Project outcomes will be disseminated
through a meeting of the Northwest Ohio College Presidents. Research data on the
effectiveness of moving from the traditional learning model to the hybrid
learning model will be made broadly available.