* 1501954
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How is the Selfing Syndrome Assembled? A Common Garden Fitness Study of its Component Parts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2017
* USD 20,565.00

This project will test five evolutionary explanations for why plants self-
pollinate, which will deepen our understanding of an important characteristic of
plant evolution and will improve our breeding of self-pollinating crops such as
tomatoes, corn and soybeans. Plants reproduce in a variety of ways, and 10-15%
of plant species are primarily self-pollinating. The evolutionary transition
from outcrossing to selfing is often accompanied by reductions in many floral
traits. The researchers will determine the genetic bases for these changes in
the morning glory. The study species are closely related to the sweet potato, a
key global food resource that has proven challenging for modern selective
breeding. Genetic resources developed in this study may help in the creation of
more vigorous and disease-resistant sweet potatoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
transition to selfing is often accompanied by reductions in flower size, nectar
production, pollen-ovule ratio, pigmentation, and the distance between the
anther and stigma, collectively called the selfing syndrome. Five models of
selfing syndrome evolution (resource allocation, marginal environment and
florivory, efficiency of autogamous selfing, and general size reduction in
response to inbreeding depression) will be tested by a combination of field and
greenhouse experiments. Researchers will develop hybrid backcrossed lines
between the morning glory species Ipomoea lacunosa, a selfing species, and its
sister species, I. cordatotriloba, which both outcrosses and self-pollinates.
The project will determine (1) whether traits in I. lacunosa characteristic of
the selfing syndrome evolved in response to direct selection or were correlated
responses to selection on other traits and, (2) what selective pressures
encourage the adoption of the selfing syndrome. The investigators will measure
selection on three selfing syndrome traits (pollen number, nectar volume, and
corolla size) in a field experiment comprising 2400 individuals from a set of
nearly isogenic lines and wild-type controls. Fitness will be assessed through
three proxy measures: survival after transplant, seed set, and outcross
paternity.