* 1501076
* GeoTech Consortium of Western New York: Get the GIST (Geospatial Information Science Technology) Certificate
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Daniel Robertson, Monroe Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,838.00

The Department of Labor considers the geospatial industry to be high growth
(U.S. DOL, 2012). The GeoTech Consortium of Western New York (GTCWNY) is
developing a geospatial certificate program to help support growing geospatial
industry needs. The consortium focus is on program development and improvement
by increasing the importance of geospatial technician education and the number
of students with relevant geospatial and STEM competencies. It also focuses on
professional development for educators, which has resulted in awareness of the
geospatial industry at the high school level, and dual-credit opportunities for
high school students. Led by Monroe Community College (MCC) of the State
University of New York, GTCWNY is bridging the gaps among high schools, our two-
year college, and the local and regional geospatial industry. The consortium is
composed of Monroe Community College, three school districts, Monroe County, New
York Geographic Alliance, Geographic Information Sharing-Special Interest Group,
Northeast Area Development GIS Scholars, and a major geospatial corporation.
With over 40 regional geospatial companies/agencies, GTCWNY serves industry
demand and has an impact on STEM education. GTCWNY is combining leveraged
courses from the GeoTech Center with current MCC courses to create a geospatial
certificate program. The new courses are being aligned with the new Geospatial
Technology Competency Model (GTCM) 2014 and the GeoTech Center Course Content
Tool. The GTCWNY Geospatial Information Science Technology (GIST) Advisory Board
is identifying local and regional employment skills, allowing GTCWNY to modify
the geospatial courses to regional industry needs.