* 1501158
* Workshop Proposal: Integrating Citizen Science into the STEM Learning Ecosystem
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Sarah Kirn, Schoodic Institute at Acadia National Park
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 01/31/2016
* USD 49,470.00

This project will identify opportunities and strategies to support the
integration of citizen science into science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) education. Public participation in scientific research is growing
rapidly. It is resulting in important scientific insights and is engaging the
public in authentic scientific experiences. However, citizen science has yet to
achieve its full potential for improving STEM learning by enabling learners'
full participation in the practices of science in the process of leading to
scientific insight. This workshop will bring together researchers and
practitioners from across disciplines to identify citizen science projects that
are also exemplary models for learning by the public. Workshop participants will
generate ideas and potential solutions to overcome barriers to implementing
citizen science to improve learning outcomes in schools, museums, parks, and
other learning environments with diverse audiences. Consistent with the aims of
the Advancing Informal Science Learning program of the Division of Research on
Learning, this workshop will advance new approaches to and evidence-based
understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments and pave the way to broaden access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences for underrepresented audiences.

This two-day workshop will be held in San Jose, California on February 11th and
12th, 2015, as a component of the Citizen Science 2015 Conference. It will be
led by the Citizen Science Association Education Working Group. The goal of the
workshop is to facilitate growth, innovation, and improved outcomes in the use
of citizen science in STEM education for diverse, informal audiences. The
workshop will result in (1) interdisciplinary discussions and sharing of
perspectives, best practices, and innovations among leading researchers,
educators, and citizen science practitioners; (2) a framework for bridging
citizen science and STEM education communities and effectively implementing
citizen science in a variety of learning environments; and (3) a draft research,
resource development, and action agenda to advance the use of citizen science
for STEM learning. The workshop will help to establish a global community of
practice invested in improving STEM learning outcomes through citizen science in
informal learning environments.