* 1501126
* Conference on Ergodic Theory and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Mate Wierdl, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kitchens
* 04/30/2016
* USD 40,000.00

This award supports the participation of U.S.-based researchers and graduate
students in the conference "Ergodic Theory and Combinatorics," held at the
University of Agder, Kristiansand, Norway from June 8 to June 12, 2015. The
theme of the conference is the fusion of two mathematical theories. The part of
combinatorics that is of interest is Ramsey theory. Ramsey theory finds order in
completely random structures, such as the relationships among an arbitrary set
of people. Ergodic theory is the mathematical theory behind statistical
mechanics. The strong connection between the two theories is unexpected, and
since its discovery in the late 1970's, Ergodic Ramsey Theory has become an
increasingly vibrant area of research.

The activity in the area of Ergodic Ramsey Theory area has greatly accelerated
after the ground breaking work of Green, Tao, Host, and Kra less than a decade
ago. The main theme of the conference is at the cross section of ergodic theory,
combinatorics, number theory, and Fourier analysis. Ergodic Ramsey Theory has
contributed to all four areas and serves as a perfect example of how the
interplay of many areas of mathematics can facilitate progress. The conference
will highlight recent developments in this area and introduce students and new
researchers to many open questions.

Conference web site: www.uia.no/en/ergodic-theory-and-combinatorics-conference