* 1501775
* Dissertation Research: Drivers of plant invasions: The role of fungi, nutrient availability and competition among plants
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2016
* James Cronin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2016
* USD 19,240.00

Invasive species are major drivers of biodiversity loss worldwide and cost
billions of dollars each year to control. Understanding why particular species
become invasive is critically important to developing effective methods for
their management. In this regard, the interactions between invasive plants and
their associated fungi may be particularly important. These interactions are
noteworthy because fungi can have both positive and negative effects on plants;
some may benefit plants by increasing their competitive ability and others may
damage plants by causing disease. This study will determine the diversity and
impacts of fungi on a wetland grass, common reed (Phragmites australis), that
has both native and invasive forms in North America. Experiments will be
conducted to determine whether fungi differently influence how native and
invasive forms of common reed respond to changing nutrient conditions. In
addition to providing a better understanding of how fungi may help spread some
invasive species, results from this study may reveal how fungi can be used in
novel ways to control the spread of invasive species. Furthermore, this project
will provide important research training for graduate and undergraduate
students. Research findings will be shared through scientific meetings,
publications in peer-reviewed journals, and a poster on invasive species that is
designed for children and displayed at a popular nature park in Baton Rouge,
Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although native genotypes of P. australis are
widely distributed in North America, a European genotype has spread rapidly over
the past 150 years. Using field surveys and a greenhouse experiment, the
following predictions regarding the invasibility of P. australis will be tested:
invasive P. australis genotypes will 1) have lower foliar and soil fungi
diversity, 2) have less damage from foliar and soil pathogens, and 3) be
superior in competitive and nutrient uptake ability in comparison to native
genotypes. In addition, tests will be performed to determine if nutrient
availability, soil fungi, and plant competition interact in complex ways to
promote invasion success of P. australis genotypes from Europe. Field surveys of
foliar and soil fungi will be conducted throughout North America, ensuring
adequate replication of native and invasive P. australis genotypes and
maximizing the diversity of fungi encountered. Foliar fungi will be cultured in
the laboratory from diseased leaf tissue, and DNA sequencing will be used to
identify fungi from cultures and soil samples. A plant-soil feedback greenhouse
experiment will also be conducted to examine the interactive effects of soil
biota, nutrients, and competition on the fitness of native and invasive
genotypes of P. australis.