* 1501085
* Topics in Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Lawrence Ein, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2019
* USD 336,000.00

This is a project on algebraic geometry, which is one of the oldest disciplines
in mathematics. It studies geometric objects defined by algebraic equations.
Algebraic geometry has important connections to mathematical physics and coding
theory. The research will improve understanding of the relations between the
geometry of algebraic curves and higher dimensional varieties and the set of
higher relations among the equations defining the varieties. These relations are
called the syzygies of the varieties. The investigator and collaborators will
investigate the properties of the syzygies of algebraic curves and higher
dimensional varieties. They will study singularities of higher dimensional
varieties and their relations to the minimal model program and other branches of
mathematics. The project has extensive training components as well. The PI has
already trained several successful young algebraic geometers and is currently
supervising two graduate students who are working on various problems related to
the project. The PI and co-authors are writing a book on multiplier ideals,
extension theorems, and geometry of arc spaces. The book aims to help young
researchers understand how these techniques can be applied to understanding
higher dimensional algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project
involves study of syzygies by studying properties of the Hilbert schemes of
points on the curve. It is also planned to investigate the asymptotic behavior
of syzygies of an algebraic variety and their relations to the intrinsic
geometry of the variety. The project would extend the classical results
previously only known in the case of algebraic curves to higher dimensional
varieties. Multiplier ideals together with their vanishing theorems play an
important role in the development of the higher dimensional minimal model
program; these ideals are also an important measure of the complexity of
singularities. Mather-Jacobian ideals have an advantage over the classical
multiplier ideals because these ideals are defined for non-Q-Gorenstein
singularities. Higher co-dimension effective cycles should be very useful in
understanding the geometry of higher dimensional varieties. The investigator and
collaborators are planning to study numerical invariants such as log-canonical
thresholds and minimal log-discrepancies attached to the singularities of
algebraic varieties. These invariants play central roles in the study of minimal
model program. They also show up naturally in the theory of D-modules, positive
characteristic commutative algebra, and the geometry of arc spaces.