* 1501374
* Balancing Gas Loss, Star Formation, and Black Hole Activity in Cluster Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Rukmani Vijayaraghavan, Vijayaraghavan          Rukmani
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2018
* USD 278,000.00

Rukmani Vijayaraghavan is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Virginia. Galaxies in dense groups and clusters, unlike ordinary field galaxies
like the Milky Way, are subject to extreme astrophysical processes that remove
their gas and shut down star formation. These processes are far from gentle;
many galaxies go through a violent evolutionary phase before settling into their
eventual passive gas-poor states. During this phase, star formation and
supermassive black hole activity within galaxies can be triggered by strong
pressure in the ambient gas. Energy injected by these stars and supermassive
black holes can in turn replenish gas lost from galaxies, further continuing
this cycle. These processes, mysteriously, operate in the presence of other
mechanisms in dense environments that should destroy galactic gas. While there
is abundant observational evidence that these processes operate in cluster
galaxies, a theoretical understanding of the physics driving the energy cycle in
group and cluster galaxies remains elusive. Vijayaraghavan will exploit recent
advances in computing and astrophysical software development to carry out a
simulations-based investigation into these extreme astrophysical phenomena. She
will also run an educational program to promote enthusiasm for computational
astrophysics in middle-school-aged girl students. These students will be exposed
to the latest scientific developments and techniques in modern astrophysics
through computer- and telescope-based activities.

Solving the problem of galaxy evolution in cluster environments requires
modeling and disentangling the contribution of multiple simultaneous complex
physical phenomena, operating over six orders of magnitude in physical scale.
Vijayaraghavan will perform a series of supercomputer simulations using the
FLASH code to progressively incorporate multiple physics modules, and use
adaptive mesh refinement to focus computational resources on interesting
regions. In these simulations, cosmologically realistic red and blue galaxies,
including their stellar and gas components, will be allowed to evolve within
massive group and cluster environments in the presence of progressively complex
physical processes. Based on these simulations, Vijayaraghavan will identify and
disentangle the physical mechanisms triggering star formation and black hole
activity in cluster galaxies, and investigate the impacts of these processes on
cluster galaxy evolution. She will also generate mock observations from
simulations to directly compare with radio, optical, and X-ray observations of
the hot and cold gas, star formation, and black hole activity in cluster
galaxies. This project will use supercomputing resources at the University of
Virginia and NSF XSEDE supercomputers. The educational component of this program
will be based around summer day camps, where girls will gain an understanding of
modern astrophysics through a combination of interactive presentations and
hands-on experience with computers and observatory telescopes. The object of
these camps will be to inspire girls to pursue careers in STEM fields.