* 1501462
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The species versus subspecies conundrum: quantitative assessment from integrating multiple data types under a single Bayesian framework in Hercules beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Jen-Pan Huang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,205.00

Are there differences in how species and subspecies are designated among
different groups of organisms? If so, surveys of biodiversity could be biased,
potentially either under- or over-estimating levels of species diversity.
Researchers will address this issue using genetic and morphological data from
two groups of Hercules beetles (genus Dynastes), where diversity patterns differ
between North and South America, perhaps because of differing applications of
species versus subspecies designations. Through quantitative assessments of the
observed differences among taxa, researchers will test if genetic and
morphological differences between species are more pronounced than those found
among subspecies. Knowledge gained by this research will demonstrate how
taxonomy can be assessed consistently, objectively, and quantitatively across
distinct groups of organisms and between geographic regions. Such a standardized
approach is critical to avoiding potential biases in biodiversity surveys of
species diversity and the identification of taxa in need of conservation. One
graduate student will be trained in diverse systematic methods and a website
will be established to broadly disseminate the species delimitation methods
developed by the researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While considerable recent
research has focused on quantitative methods for objectively delimiting species,
an overlooked, but equally important, issue regards the nature of the taxonomic
entities being delimited. A model-based approach will be applied to test whether
species and subspecies of Hercules beetles are statistically equivalent.
Researchers will also test if currently recognized taxa represent different
points along the speciation continuum and whether levels of differentiation fit
with expectations based on the time taxa have been diverging. Because both
phenotypic and genetic data will be analyzed in a Bayesian framework, the
research will be able to determine whether disagreements in species boundaries
among data types reflect (i) discordance with the actual history of lineage
splitting, or (ii) differences in the amount of time required for
differentiation to become apparent among the taxa in different data types
(specifically, different rates of evolutionary change in genetic versus
morphological data). This work advances biodiversity studies by making it
possible for the theoretical view of speciation as a continuous process to be
applied in practice in a quantitative manner such that the taxonomic equivalent
units of biodiversity can be determined for comparisons of species diversity in
different geographic regions and across different groups of organisms.