* 1501706
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  From Metabolites to Continent: Host-parasite Interaction across Spatio-temporal Scales
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* David Hughes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 13,923.00

All living organisms interact with parasites. Often, the outcome of these
interactions is either morbidity or the death of the host. However, in some
instances, the behavior of the host can be manipulated by the parasite. This
behavioral manipulation increases the transmission of the parasite, either to a
new environment crucial for its development, or to a new host. Although many
examples of parasitic behavioral manipulation exist, little is known of the
mechanisms underlying it. Investigators will study the genetic basis of
parasitic manipulation by analyzing the gene expression of host brains at the
exact moment they are being manipulated. Because the parasite that manipulates
the behavior also results in host sickness, the investigators will use a non-
manipulative parasite as a comparison. Thus, they will be able to distinguish
between the genetic basis of sickness and manipulation. Since many manipulators
exploit immune systems and neural connections, understanding how they manipulate
their host has practical and theoretical applications, leading us to better
understand sickness behavior and mental disorders. Brain snatchers are very
popular among the general public, including K-12, as they turn their host into
"zombies." Investigators will leverage this popularity to bring science to K-12
classrooms and local communities.

Investigators will study the proximate mechanisms of parasitic behavioral
manipulation, by studying gene expression of the host during the moment of
behavioral manipulation. Because the manipulative parasite also causes sickness,
and the manipulation is immediately followed by death, a generalist non-
manipulative parasite that also results in sickness and death of the host will
be used as control. Healthy, uninfected, host brains will be used as a baseline
for normal gene expression. Investigators will use Illumina HiSeq 2500
technology to compare the transcriptome of manipulated host brains with those
that present general sickness and death symptoms. This will allow the research
team to capture the genes that are differentially expressed during manipulation
and are not related to general sickness or death processes. Understanding the
gene expression of a manipulated host is a fundamental step to understand the
mechanisms underlying behavioral manipulation by parasites. Additionally, the
data will be interpreted in an interdisciplinary broader context, together with
other approaches (different ecological scales) employed by the same research
group to fully understand the parasitic manipulation. Results of this project
will be published in peer-reviewed journals and also presented at conferences.
All data from this project will be hosted on public databases such as Genbank
and Dryad as well as stored on Penn State's publically accessible databases.