* 1501324
* New Hybrid Materials by Controlled Polymerization of Monomers with Bulky Functional Substituents
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2022
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,165,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is focused on
synthesis, characterization and potential applications of well-defined polymers
containing bulky functional substituents (BFS). Until recently many polymers
with precisely controlled architectures were prepared, yet essentially with
small chemical substituents attached onto their molecules. The main aim of this
project is to enlarge the range of these substituents to include various BFS
such as inorganics, biomolecules or short polymer chains in the form of
macromonomers. The resulting polymers will have a very high local concentration
of functional groups and consequently could provide new materials with unusual
thermal, mechanical, optoelectronic or biological properties. Unfortunately,
direct polymerization of monomers with BFS is very challenging and therefore
this research will explore new pathways to overcome these challenges. This
project should impact not only science, but also education and our society.
Undergraduate and graduate students, a postdoctoral fellow, and visitors from
collaborative groups will work together in the PI's group and with industrial
members of a consortium on specialized novel polymerization techniques. Some
hybrid functional materials resulting from the proposed activities may be of
commercial importance and should benefit our society. Dissemination of
information will be accomplished by publications, presentations at national and
international meetings and at the PI's web site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This main aim of this research is synthesis,
characterization and potential applications of polymers with bulky functional
substituents (BFS) such as inorganic nanoparticles, short polymer chains, or
biomolecules. BFS reduce thermodynamic and kinetic polymerizability of such
monomers, and new pathways and reaction conditions to overcome these challenges
will be explored. Three classes of monomers with BSF will be investigated: (i)
inorganic systems with polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) with various
substituents as well as gold nanoclusters with spacers linking them to
polymerizable (meth)acrylate group; (ii) macromonomers based on poly(ethylene
oxide) and poly(n-butyl acrylate) with (meth)acrylate function; (iii)
biomolecules (proteins or oligonucleotides) linked to (meth)acrylamide
polymerizable groups. They will be polymerized under the range of conditions
(solvent, concentrations, pressure, chemical or physical activators, pre-
assembly) to generate novel hybrid materials with high local concentration of
bulky functional groups. Their properties (thermomechanical, catalytic, bio-
relevant) will be thoroughly characterized and their potential applications will
be explored. The generated information will be disseminated through the PI's
website, timely publications, student presentations at national and
international conferences, and also to industry through the industrial
consortium at Carnegie Mellon. Some hybrid functional materials resulting from
the proposed activities may be of commercial importance and should benefit our
society.