* 1501863
* Student Support: 2014 Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC) and 42nd North American Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC); Ann Arbor, MI; 09-13 June 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2015
* Ihab Ragai, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 09/30/2015
* USD 8,699.00

This grant provides funding for offsetting registration and travel expenses to
enable 83 undergraduate and graduate students to attend the 2013 joint
conference of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers International
Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (ASME MSEC) and the Society of
Manufacturing Engineers North American Manufacturing Research Conference (SME
NAMRC). The attending students will participate in the conference by giving
technical papers, participating in a poster session to display their research,
and taking part in a design competition. The conference will be held June 9-12,
2014, in Detroit, Michigan, hosted by the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor.
The funding opportunity will be broadly announced, affording students ample
notice and time to apply. Applications will be reviewed by committee, and he
support provided will cover the student registration fee of $300. If there are
not enough accepted applications to award all of the funds, the balance will be
awarded to the accepted students in the form of a partial travel reimbursement.

The support will provide 83 selected students with the opportunity to
participate in the preeminent manufacturing research conference in the US.
Student participation at national manufacturing conferences is crucial to
expanding the manufacturing research base in the US. Students obtain unique
experiences and interactions with academic and industry researchers, and are
motivated by the opportunity to present their own work. Participation at
conference also gives them the opportunity to learn about the latest research
results in their area, and to explore interest in new areas of manufacturing.
Additionally, exposure to research from others helps to instill a good
foundational understanding of the scientific method, which will serve them well
throughout their careers.