* 1501187
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny of the Liolaemus montanus group and high resolution species delimitation in the L. robustus clade (Squamata, Liolaemidae).
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Cesar Aguilar, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 16,362.00

The tropical Andes provide a natural laboratory for biodiversity studies for
many animal and plant groups, yet many of the endemic species are restricted to
remote high-elevation areas that are poorly studied. One of these poorly-known
groups is the lizard genus Liolaemus, and this project will use DNA sequences
to: 1) propose a hypothesis of evolutionary relationships for one major subgroup
of this genus (thought to contain ~ 45 species); and 2) evaluate alternative
methods of delimiting species in a smaller species group of Liolaemus. For both
objectives we will sample new geographic locations, and for the first time
employ 'Next Generation' DNA sequencing technologies to collect large molecular
data sets for the target groups, and newer statistical methods for resolving
species boundaries based on multiple independent classes of data (morphology,
ecology, DNA, etc.). These lizards will serve as model organisms for other
biodiversity studies, and stimulate further field sampling and integrative
taxonomic studies of the tropical Andean biota. Our study will reveal cryptic
diversity, promote the discovery of the new species, and provide a better
understanding of the region?s biodiversity. The description of new species will
involve undergraduate student co-authors, while reconstruction of evolutionary
relationships will serve as a framework for comparative studies of the evolution
of viviparity in these lizards, and how they have colonized the harshest high-
elevation Andean climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate new
data via development of a large Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) dataset,
and employ new non-tree based species delimitation methods (SDL) to test
alternative species hypotheses in the lizards of the Liolaemus robustus species
group. This research will test SDL hypotheses based on mitochondrial (mt) DNA,
morphological, and bioclimatic data. The project will test these alternatives
with SNP data using a new Bayes factor SDL approach that does not require a
guide tree, and compares across non-nested alternative models. This study will
provide new knowledge about the evolutionary history of this particular clade of
lizards, and test the utility of this approach in a poorly-known but
biodiversity-rich part of South America. We will also develop the most complete
phylogeny for the poorly-known Liolaemus montanus clade, based on the most
extensive sampling of species and characters available to date.