* 1501657
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mapping the Molecular Basis of Pleiotropy Across Diverse Environmental Conditions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Elizabeth Jerison, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2016
* USD 21,955.00

To evolve to meet environmental challenges, organisms must acquire new genetic
mutations. Understanding the spectrum of effects caused by individual mutations
is therefore central to predicting the paths evolution might take. Many
organisms face the additional challenge of fluctuating environmental conditions,
where mutations that are beneficial in one condition may not be advantageous in
others. The fitness effects of particular mutations, and their dependence on the
environmental conditions, can be systematically measured in laboratory microbial
populations. Previous large-scale studies using this approach have primarily
characterized disadvantageous mutations. Yet despite their rarity, beneficial
mutations are the primary drivers of evolution. This project will use laboratory
evolution and recently-developed sequencing technology to measure the effects of
thousands of novel beneficial mutations in several environments. The work will
produce a large, publicly-available dataset detailing how the effects of
beneficial mutations change with the environmental condition, which will help
illuminate the patterns underlying mutational effects, facilitating the modeling
of evolution in fluctuating environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mutations are the raw material that drives
evolution. Understanding the competitive fitness benefit conferred by new
mutations is important to quantitative modeling of evolution. Past work has made
significant progress towards characterizing the costs and benefits associated
with mutations. To understand evolution in fluctuating conditions, however, it
is also important to know how the fitness effects of mutations depend on the
growth condition. This project will use massively-parallel lineage tracking to
characterize the effects of thousands of individual, spontaneously arising
beneficial mutations across multiple environmental conditions. This broad
statistical dataset will enable mathematical modeling of evolution in
fluctuating conditions. The project will additionally address the genetic basis
of evolutionary tradeoffs, using whole genome sequencing to identify hundreds of
mutations with benefits in some conditions but costs in others. Ultimately, this
project will contribute to the theoretical understanding of evolution in
fluctuating conditions and the biological basis of evolutionary tradeoffs.