* 1501903
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of Habitat Heterogeneity on Songbird Fecundity in an Experimental Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Brett Sandercock, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,407.00

Landscape heterogeneity promotes higher biodiversity in natural ecosystems. In
North America, tallgrass prairie was historically maintained as a mosaic of
different habitats by the interaction between fire and selective grazing by
large herbivores, including bison, elk and pronghorn. In recent decades,
agricultural intensification has led to more homogeneous landscapes in managed
grasslands, which has been linked to widespread declines in songbird populations
in North America and Europe. A loss of heterogeneity in grasslands could have
major consequences for birds by changing food availability, predation risk, or
rates of brood parasitism by Brown-headed Cowbirds (Molothrus ater). The
proposed field study will estimate the effects of habitat heterogeneity on
movements and survival of juvenile Dickcissels (Spiza americana), a songbird of
conservation concern. The project will provide a better understanding of the
reproductive ecology of grassland songbirds in managed grasslands, and will aid
in understanding the relationships among grassland management and ecology, bird
populations, and conservation.

This field study will be conducted in the Flint Hills ecoregion of eastern
Kansas and Oklahoma, where large tracts of native tallgrass prairie still
remain, however habitat quality has been impacted by ongoing changes in
rangeland management. Konza Prairie is an NSF-funded Long-term Ecological
Research (LTER) site in the northern Flint Hills, and provides a unique
experimental landscape with different levels of habitat heterogeneity created by
long-term grazing and fire treatments. Patch-burn grazing management increases
heterogeneity in vegetative structure because only a third of the pasture is
burned each year in a three-year rotational scheme, and movements of grazing
cattle are unrestricted. A fourth pasture with annual burns and season-long
stocking of cattle will be a negative control, and a fifth pasture with annual
burns but no grazing will be a positive control. The researchers will attach
small radio-transmitters to a total of 60 fledglings, across the five
experimental treatments. Fledglings will be re-located daily during the first 30
days after leaving the nest to determine movements and survival. The research
will estimate fledgling movements, arthropod prey availability, and fledgling
survival using field methods and statistical analyses. Understanding how biotic
factors interact with demographic parameters like nest and fledgling survival
will help to understand the role of landscape heterogeneity on the life-history
strategies of birds.