* 1501474
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Inferring the Evolutionary History of Arthropods Associated with Pitcher Plants using Phylogeographic Concordance Factors.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Bryan Carstens, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 11/30/2016
* USD 20,020.00

Interactions among species are driving forces behind the formation, structure
and existence of ecological communities. In these communities, species interact
with one another, compete for resources, and ultimately shape the existence and
distribution of biodiversity on Earth. A central question of evolutionary
biology is how these ecological communities came to be, and how long these
interactions have persisted. This research will provide a new tool for
understanding if ecological communities have persisted over evolutionary time
scales, and to what extent the co-occurring species show similar patterns in
their genetic diversity. If ecological communities exhibit strong patterns of a
shared evolutionary history, the extinction of a single member may be dire for
other ecologically associated species. Understanding these attributes will
provide insight into how species responded to the dynamic landscape and climatic
changes during the Pleistocene ice ages, and will help conservation managers
identify regions in need of protection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims
to develop phylogeographic concordance factors, a novel statistical approach
testing for co-diversification in an ecological community. This synthesis will
identify common diversification patterns across species as well as species that
do not conform to these patterns. Phylogeographic concordance factors take in
species tree distributions from multiple co-occurring species, and identify
patterns shared among the clades. These clades are then used to construct a
concordance tree, providing a phylogeny with support values that best represents
diversification patterns of the community. Importantly, this method will
identify species that are outliers of a dominant pattern. Along with developing
the method as a package for the statistical platform R, this approach will be
demonstrated in the Sarracenia alata carnivorous pitcher plant system. This
system is located in the topographically and geologically complex region of the
southeastern United States, where a number of previous studies have documented
emergent biogeographic patterns. Mitochondrial data from five arthropods from
this community indicate that genetic variation has been structured in a similar
way to the host plant, but preliminary sequence data generated from the nuclear
genome implies a more complex evolutionary history for this system, making the
system ideal for studies using phylogeographic concordance factors. This new
tool will enhance the ability of researchers to identify shared patterns of
diversification, and the evolutionary processes that have influenced
biodiversity.