* 1501937
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Partitioning rhizosphere effects on microbial community structure and carbon cycling across a peatland water table gradient.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Allison Gill, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 21,091.00

Peatlands, such as bogs, are unique ecosystems that occupy only a small fraction
of the Earth's land surface but contain vast quantities of carbon. Peatlands
store so much carbon because they are saturated with water, and this creates an
anaerobic environment that slows decomposition of complex organic (carbon-
containing) substances. Over the next 100 years, heightened drought frequency
and severity is projected to reduce water table heights in high latitude
peatlands, causing them to emit more carbon gases to the atmosphere. The goal of
this project is to identify the effect of water table reduction and associated
changes in plant community structure on the microorganisms living in a northern
peatland. The release of carbon gasses is controlled by these microorganisms
through their decomposition of organic material. The work will provide novel
insight into the impact of physical and plant-mediated environmental changes on
microbial community structure and activity, and will deepeour understanding of
ecosystem responses to climate change. In addition to support the graduate
student's doctoral dissertation research, this project will also provide
opportunities for Boston University undergraduates to learn laboratory
techniques and methods of data analysis, and the research scientists leading
this project will develop educational modules related to peatland carbon storage
that will be presented at area elementary schools and community festivals.

Microbial (bacteria and funga) groups have distinct physiology and developmental
histories that will impact their responses to water table decline and contribute
to changes in ecosystem carbon and nitrogen cycling. Changes in vascular plant
abundance and root biomass associated with water table decline may further
impact the microbial environment through increased plant-carbon allocation to
mycorrhizal fungal communities. In particular, this research seeks to determine
if the physical effect of water table reduction on microbial community
composition, enzyme production, and carbon mineralization is amplified by
increased vascular plant abundance and carbon allocation to mycorrhizal fungal
communities. The research will leverage an ongoing rhizosphere partitioning
experiment across a natural water table gradient in Caribou Bog, Maine.
Microbial community composition in three rhizosphere communities isolated within
root and fungal ingrowth and exclusion cores installed across the water table
gradient will be compared to separate the influence of physical changes in water
table from the biological influence of plants and mycorrhizal fungi. The
proposed analyses will complement ongoing microbial functional analyses and
identify relationships between microbial activity and composition in response to
declines in the water table and in the presence or absence of plant and
mycorrrhizal inputs.