* 1501321
* P2C2: Amazonian Tree-Ring Chronologies for Climate and Streamflow Reconstruction
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Song Feng, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 418,656.00

This project aims to develop 200-400 year-long tree-ring chronologies from the
Amazon Basin to extend the short instrumental record of precipitation and
streamflow.

Amazon River discharge, the largest on Earth, is modulated in part by ocean-
atmospheric forcing from the tropical Atlantic and Pacific. Amazon discharge has
been monitored since 1902 and appears to have entered a new regime of amplified
hydrological variability. The recent divergence in minimum and maximum flows has
no precedent in the short instrumental record. The cause of this intensified
hydrological cycle over Amazonia is not known, but may arise from deforestation
or moisture advection changes associated with the observed warming of the
tropical North Atlantic.

A severe decline in annual precipitation is predicted for the mid-21st century
over most of Amazonia based on CMIP5 climate model ensemble simulations under
business-as-usual greenhouse gas emissions and land cover changes. How
unprecedented the recent and predicted hydroclimatic changes might be in the
context of natural climate variability during the late Holocene cannot be
determined empirically from the few short and spatially discontinuous
instrumental observations from the Amazon Basin.

Tree-ring reconstructions have provided well-dated spatially distributed
estimates of past megadroughts and pluvials needed for verifying model
simulations of the dynamics responsible for decadal moisture regimes over North
America and Asia. However, the most biodiverse forest ecosystems in the world,
the forests of Amazonia, have not produced freely available multi-century tree-
ring chronologies useful for exact dating or climate reconstruction.

In the absence of a cold winter dormant season, most tropical tree species do
not produce anatomically distinctive annual growth rings and therefore cannot be
used for routine dendrochronology. However, strong environmental rhythms do
exist in some tropical forests and can induce annual tree-ring formation in a
few native species. These annual changes include the profound precipitation
seasonality and prolonged flood pulse of lowland forests in the central,
eastern, and southern Amazon. Colleagues on the research team have proven that
annual rings exist in Macrolobium acaciifolium in these inundation forests and
have demonstrated their potential value for hydroclimatic applications. Annual
rings have also been proven in Bertholletia excelsa, Cedrella fissilis, C.
odorata, and Centrolobium microchaete from seasonally dry upland forests of
Brazil and eastern Bolivia, and ring width and oxygen isotope chronologies
derived from them are related to large-scale climate variability.

This project will use new tree-ring chronologies to develop gridded regional
moisture reconstructions, to frame the most extreme pre-instrumental and modern
droughts in the context of climate change using CMIP5 ensemble simulations of
the past millennium and the 21st century, and to explore the stability of ocean-
atmospheric forcing of climate over Amazonia. The project will also leverage
research resources and unite students and investigators from the United States,
Brazil, Bolivia, and Argentina in the application of dendroclimatology to select
tropical hardwoods in Amazonia. An international collaboration of
climatologists, dendrochronologists, and forest scientists has been organized
with the expertise required to solve the complexities involved in the exact
tree-ring dating of tropical hardwoods.