* 1501813
* Stability, derived categories, and mirror symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Matthew Ballard, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 07/31/2019
* USD 140,000.00

This project strives to understand problems in algebraic geometry through
homological algebra, with inspiration from theoretical physics. Algebraic
geometry is one of the oldest and richest fields of study in mathematics, dating
back to the fifth century B.C. It is concerned with understanding geometric
objects, called algebraic varieties, defined by the vanishing of polynomial
functions, like circles or hyperbolas. Over the centuries, a vast array of
technical tools have arisen for studying algebraic varieties. Relatively
recently, homological algebra and mirror symmetry from physics have provided
impressive insight. Even so, pressing questions persist. One in particular: What
is the precise extent of the differences that can be detected between two
varieties when using homological algebra or physics? This project seeks to
elucidate this and related questions.

The project focuses on a new tool for comparing derived categories: windows.
Windows are a robust framework for establishing derived equivalences and semi-
orthogonal decompositions, but, being very new, they are still developing. The
project seeks to push the theory of windows by generalizing the framework and by
reinterpreting the functors arising in terms of the geometry of
compactifications and kernels. The project seeks to apply this new understanding
to symplectic topology through mirror symmetry. Additionally, the project
proposes to relate algebraic geometry to noncommutative algebra through the
language of kernels and to use Hall algebras to study generation-style
invariants of triangulated categories.