* 1501265
* Geometry of Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Samuel Grushevsky, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2019
* USD 234,001.00

In geometry, one often tries to classify all possible shapes of objects of a
given type: for example, all triangles are classified by the lengths of their
sides - which must then be positive, and satisfy the triangle inequalities. Such
parameter spaces often themselves have rich geometric structures, and are called
moduli spaces. In complex geometry, one studies objects that have complex
coordinates - that is, from close up look like complex numbers. In complex
algebraic geometry, one further restricts to studying shapes defined by
polynomial equations in complex numbers - and the basic classification problem
is to study all such shapes of a given type, find the parameters for such
shapes, and what conditions these parameters must satisfy. Moduli spaces are
ubiquitous in algebraic geometry, and in recent times have provided some of the
most powerful tools for understanding individual geometric objects, by
deformation and degeneration. In particular, algebraic curves (Riemann surfaces)
permeate many constructions in algebraic geometry; abelian varieties appear
naturally in varied contexts ranging from number theory to integrable systems to
physics. The proposed research aims to obtain new information about the geometry
of moduli spaces and relations among them. The investigator will seek new deep
relations and properties of various moduli problems with the aim of providing
further tools that could be used by researchers in complex and algebraic
geometry, Teichmuller theory, string perturbation theory, and integrable
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will work to further understand
the geometry of moduli spaces over complex numbers, especially focusing on the
moduli spaces of abelian varieties, and of curves. The investigator will build
on the techniques and results he developed with Hulek, Tommasi, and Zakharov to
define and study an extended tautological ring for suitable compactifications of
the moduli space of abelian varieties, trying to determine whether it may be
Gorenstein, and whether the intersection numbers may satisfy an interesting
recursion relation. The investigator will apply the real-analytic techniques he
developed with Krichever, and inspired by integrable systems, to study the
classical problem of bounding the number of cusps of plane curves, and to study
complete subvarieties of the moduli space of curves. The investigator will use
this work to characterize geometrically the locus where the Prym map fails to be
injective. With Salvati Manni, the investigator will study the slope of the
effective cone of the moduli space of curves.