* 1501406
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: C4 Photosynthetic Evolution; Sub-types, Diversity, and Function within the Grass Tribe Paniceae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Joseph Pires, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 15,329.00

Most plants convert sunlight to energy using a process known as C3
photosynthesis, but in areas with higher daytime temperatures a second type of
photosynthesis, C4, is often more efficient. C4 photosynthesis has evolved
independently in at least sixty different plant lineages including over 20 times
in the economically important grass family, Poaceae. Transitions from C3 to C4
are particularly common within the grass tribe Paniceae, which contains the crop
plants pearl millet and foxtail millet, and the potential biofuel source,
switchgrass. This research will use a variety of complementary approaches to
better understand the systematics of Paniceae grasses and the evolution of C4
photosynthesis. One doctoral student will be trained in diverse phylogenetic,
molecular and computational modeling skills, and high school students from
diverse backgrounds will learn about photosynthesis at a one-day workshop at the
University of Missouri. A better understanding of C4 photosynthesis could
eventually lead to the development of higher yielding crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multiple independent derivations of C4 photosynthesis
has resulted in a diverse group of photosynthetic subtypes, many of which are
poorly understood. Paniceae is an ideal system for remedying this deficit
because there are multiple origins of C4 phenotypes among its species. Using a
novel integration of comparative phylogenomics, metabolic network modeling, and
cell-type-specific gene expression data, this research will lead to a better
understanding of the relationships among Paniceae grasses, and the evolution and
function of C4 photosynthesis. Specific key questions that will be addressed
include: Is C4 photosynthesis an example of convergent evolution on genomic and
metabolomic levels or only phenotypically convergent? Have the three C4
photosynthesis biochemical sub-types evolved from one another or has each
originated independently? To what extent do two or more C4 photosynthesis
biochemical sub-types operate together within a single organism, and what are
the evolutionary implications of sub-type mixing? A better understanding of C4
photosynthesis will facilitate future research on crop improvements that could
lead to less waste and fewer environmental impacts, and increased profitability
of agricultural and bioenergy systems. In addition to providing new insights
into the evolution of C4 photosynthesis this research also provides a foundation
for further work on the evolution of other complex traits.