* 1501294
* Characterizing Star Formation in the Tidal Debris of Minor Galaxy Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Karen Knierman, Knierman                Karen          A
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 278,000.00

Karen Knierman is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Arizona State
University. Mergers between galaxies of different mass are very common in the
universe and may affect the majority of galaxies including our own Milky Way
galaxy. The debris produced in these minor mergers is a unique place to study
the factors that influence star formation since it is away from the dense
centers of the mergers. Due to the lower pressures and densities in the tidal
debris, this study probes the lower bounds of where star formation is possible.
To attract a diverse workforce in science and engineering, a new astronomy
outreach initiative, Multicultural Milky Way, will engage under-served
populations in Arizona in learning about our Milky Way and other galaxies.
Arizona is home to many diverse populations with rich cultural histories such as
Mayan, Navajo, and Apache. Linking astronomy practiced by one's indigenous
culture to that of Western astronomy may increase the interest in science.
Through multicultural planetarium shows and associated hands-on activities,
under-served families will learn how the Milky Way is represented in different
cultures and about the science of galaxies.

This project will characterize how star formation occurs in tidal debris and the
origin of the debris. Narrowband infrared images of molecular hydrogen will
provide a picture of the hot molecular gas component and how the interstellar
medium of the tail has been molded by in-situ star formation. This project will
provide the first survey of molecular hydrogen in minor mergers. With optical,
H-alpha, and submillimeter observations, these data will give a more complete
picture of star formation in tidal debris of minor mergers. Using the
metallicity calculated from spectra of tidal clumps in minor mergers compared to
regions in the parent spiral and dwarf galaxy, the origin of the tidal debris of
minor mergers can be determined: the cannibalized dwarf, the outer regions of
the spiral, or the center. In addition, a new astronomy outreach initiative,
Multicultural Milky Way, will engage under-served populations in Arizona in
learning about stars and galaxies. New shows featuring how different cultures
view the Milky Way will be created for the Digistar static and STARLAB portable
planetariums. STARLAB shows and associated new hands-on activities will feature
at Community Astronomy Nights around Arizona. For authentic assessment,
evaluation techniques and procedures will be developed with education mentors.