* 1501443
* Investigating the Nature of the Circumgalactic Medium Using Realistic Synthetic Observations
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Cameron Hummels, Hummels                 Cameron
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 278,000.00

Cameron Hummels is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Caltech. One of
the most important open questions in the field of astrophysics is how galaxies
acquire their gas and transform it into stars, a process that uniquely
determines the evolutionary path of each galaxy over cosmic time. Observations
of the circumgalactic medium, the gas reservoir surrounding a galaxy, are the
key to understanding how galaxies accrete and process gas; however these
observations are difficult to interpret because they require infrequent bright
background objects to illuminate the foreground circumgalactic medium. Hummels
will construct a "synthetic telescope," a piece of software for mimicking the
observations made by real telescopes of this gas reservoir, and apply it to
advanced supercomputer simulations of large volumes of the Universe containing
thousands of galaxies. These simulated galaxies will provide context for better
understanding observations made by real telescopes. In addition, Hummels will
organize a public education program as a collaborative effort between Caltech
and Pasadena City College. This outreach program will have frequent traditional
and non-traditional events focused on increasing scientific interest and
awareness in the general population of the greater Los Angeles area.

Hummels will integrate several existing open-source codes into a "synthetic
telescope" software pipeline for post-processing hydrodynamical simulations of
galaxy evolution to generate simulated observations. This pipeline will account
for (1) dust; (2) self-shielding effects of dense gas pockets; (3) atomic line
transfer; (4) local photoionizing sources including stars and active galactic
nuclei; (5) metagalactic ionizing background radiation; (6) collisional
ionization; and (7) equilibrium and non-equilibrium ionization. It will be
compatible with standard hydrodynamical codes and will produce photometric
images, IFU data, and spectra spanning the wavelength range from the ultraviolet
to the submillimeter. Hummels will apply this pipeline to the FIRE, CGM@HR, and
AGORA simulations. He will compare these synthetic observations to the COS-Halos
and KBSS surveys of the circumgalactic medium to investigate the origin and
structure of the circumgalactic medium as it varies with galaxy mass,
environment, and redshift, to better understand galactic gas accretion and
ejection. Hummels will then release the software pipeline to the astrophysical
community. Concurrent to this research effort, Hummels will organize a public
education program to host frequent activities for scientific enrichment of the
general public. This effort will use traditional and non-traditional events to
focus on reaching out to people and communities who are otherwise ambivalent to
science.