* 1501836
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Riverine reserves: Testing marine reserve design theory in an existing network of community-based protected areas in Southeast Asia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Peter McIntyre, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,860.00

Pollution, habitat degradation, and harvest have resulted in dramatically
reduced freshwater fish stocks and diversity around the world. For many people,
especially those in developing countries, fish constitutes a critical source of
daily nutrition. In marine ecosystems, to increase fish abundance and diversity,
large areas have been set aside as marine protected areas. Previous research has
shown that by restricting harvest in areas containing important fish habitat,
fish abundance and diversity generally increases compared to adjacent
unprotected areas. This in-creased number of fish inside the reserves also
results in a greater number of fish entering fished areas, and can increase
local harvest rates overall. To date, however, this research has not been
applied to freshwater systems. This research project will explore a network of
protect-ed areas in northern Thailand in order to test the effectiveness of
river protected areas in in-creasing the abundance and diversity of fish in
rivers. Additional information regarding the age of the reserves and level of
protection will also be collected. Finally, the researchers will map river
habitats and measure fish movement in and out of reserves. Results will be
shared with government officials, academics and resource managers. This research
will provide new in-sights into new ways of conserving global freshwater
biodiversity, and potentially increase the ability of rivers to continue to
provide important nutrition to people globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will apply the body of theory developed for marine protected
areas (MPAs) to a network of freshwater protected areas in the Ngao River,
northern Thailand. Previous meta-analyses of MPAs has suggested that factors
including duration of protection, size, spacing, and dispersal are key to
predicting MPA success. Researchers will use extensive fieldwork to map an
existing network of over 40 small, local community-initiated no-take reserves
within a 1,000 square kilometer watershed. Fish densities and species richness
will be measured for paired reserve/non-reserve areas using a variety of visual
census methods. Additionally, side-scanning sonar will be used to generate
accurate habitat maps of both reserve and non-reserve areas and to track
dispersal of fish out of reserve areas. Researchers will use generalized linear
mixed-effects models to test for significant relationships between dependent
variables (species-specific reserve response factors, trophic group response
factors, and Bray-Curtis community dissimilarity indices) and the measured
characteristics of RRs listed above (e.g., reserve size, age, habitat
composition, etc.). The results of this study will inform future freshwater
conservation strategies and may also reciprocally inform marine protected area
theory as well.