* 1501733
* Dissertation Research: Reconstructing a mitogenome-based intraspecific tree to test for phylogenetic inertia in a morphological study of island dwarfing in Southeast Asian mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Robert Martin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,540.00

This project explores what happens to mammals isolated on islands. According to
a generalization known as the ?Island Rule?, there is a trend on islands for
large-bodied species to evolve smaller body size (island dwarfing) because food
resources are severely limited. However, little work has been done on changes in
individual anatomical components, such as brain size and skull shape, that
accompany decreases in body size. The overall goal of this research is to
explore potential differences in brain size and skull morphology between island
and mainland representatives of large-bodied mammals in Southeast Asia: deer,
pigs and primates. The research will use DNA sequencing to resolve relationships
among island populations and take these relationships into account during
statistical analyses. Because this research is based at The Field Museum in
Chicago, the researchers are actively involved with a wide range of outreach
programs directed toward museum visitors, which allow both adults and students
to learn about evolution on islands. Together, the outreach and investigation of
mammal diversification on islands will contribute to public understanding of the
evolutionary history of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how
intraspecific relatedness influences skull morphology and brain size in island
mammals. To achieve this, researchers will focus on the long-tailed macaque,
Macaca fascicularis, because it is the most widespread primate species in
Southeast Asia. They will generate a well-resolved population-level phylogeny
for museum specimens based on entire mitochondrial genomes. DNA will first be
extracted from dried tissue samples from museum specimens in a sterile, ancient
DNA lab at University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Then, the scientists will
build genetic libraries for each sample and target only the genomes of the
mitochondria using specific enrichment techniques. These enriched samples will
then be used for high-throughput sequencing. The resulting mitochondrial
sequences will be trimmed and assembled, for reconstruction of a robust within-
species phylogeny. The inferred tree will be used to control for relatedness in
statistical analyses of brain size and skull morphology, and to gain insights
into (a) the relative timing of colonization of Southeast Asian islands by M.
fascicularis, especially of smaller islands, and (b) overall phylogeographic
patterns and rates of diversification.