* 1501538
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Nutrient-mediated Manipulation of Host Feeding Behavior by a Parasitoid
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Michael Singer, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 07/31/2018
* USD 18,520.00

This project investigates how an animal's nutrient intake affects its
interaction with its parasites. Using an experimentally tractable model system
of a caterpillar and its parasitic wasp, Dr. Singer and Ms. Bernardo will
conduct experiments designed to reveal how the parasitic wasp benefits by
manipulating its host caterpillar's highly regulated nutrient intake. The basic
scientific value of this research stems from integrating the perspectives of
animal nutrition, immunology, and behavioral ecology, while also contributing to
scientific knowledge used in pest control in agriculture and forestry. Public
outreach impacts will happen through Elementary Schools in Middlesex County, CT,
and Ms. Bernardo's position as vice-president of the Connecticut Entomological
Society. The school program will highlight the natural history of insects kept
in the lab, while the CT Entomological Society program will organize outreach
activities for Connecticut residents of all ages and provide opportunities for
other students to share their research with the community at an annual Student
Symposium.

Parasitoids must battle host defenses and alter the behavior and physiology of
their hosts to their own benefit. Parasitoid manipulation of host nutrient
intake might be a fundamental component of such interactions, yet it has
received limited study in the broader field of host-parasite interactions. This
research will test alternative functional hypotheses that could explain
manipulation of caterpillar host feeding behavior by a parasitoid wasp.
Preliminary evidence from this host-parasitoid interaction suggests that host
caterpillars exhibit altered nutrient intake when parasitized by the parasitoid
wasp, and this change in host feeding behavior benefits the parasitoid.
Hypothetically, altering dietary nutrients of the host can have large effects on
parasitoid growth performance and host immune function. Consequently,
parasitoids could manipulate host nutrient intake so as to maximize the nutrient
supply to host tissues eaten by the parasitoid, or to limit nutrients required
for maximal host immune function. The researchers propose to manipulate
macronutrient ratios in host diets and use techniques employed in the field of
ecoimmunology and insect physiology to evaluate these hypothetical mechanisms of
nutrient-mediated host manipulation, and their possible interaction. Data from
this project will be stored at Wesleyan University and made accessible as
published.