* 1501862
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effects of nectar robbery on territorial pollinators and plant reproduction
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Jordan Karubian, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,565.00

Pollination is a critical process for plant reproduction that sustains
ecosystems and bolsters global biodiversity. Of all known factors that may
impact pollination, nectar robbery is one of the least understood. Nectar
robbery refers to when an animal extracts nectar from a flower without providing
the reciprocal service of pollen delivery or pollen receipt, and is usually done
by creating a small hole in the base of the flower. This research is expected to
improve our understanding of how nectar robbery impacts the delicate balance
between plants and pollinators. This knowledge will help us to better understand
the evolution of nectar robbery and its potential role in the conservation of
pollination networks. Undergraduates in the US and Peru will gain experience by
participation in the research, and STEM excitement communicated through the
Tulane University Girls in Science and Technology program. The research itself
promotes the progress of science through improved understanding of the
dimensions of pollination, which has implications for national welfare; the
project also supports education and diversity in a project with K-12 students.

This research will investigate the effects of nectar robbery by Diglossa
flowerpiercers (Family: Thraupidae) on the foraging ecology of hummingbird
pollinators will be investigated, and the consequences for pollen flow and
reproduction of the Andean plant Oreocallis grandiflora (Family: Proteaceae)
assessed. The response of territorial hummingbird pollinators to nectar robbery
in terms of spatial behavior and foraging ecology will be quantified using radio
telemetry tracking. The hypothesis that nectar robbery may have a positive
effect on plant reproduction via improved outcrossing rates caused by an
increase in visitation by non-resident pollinators in the absence of resident
territorial pollinators will be tested. Research experience will be provided to
undergraduates in the US and Peru, and the research process will be communicated
to K-12 students in the Tulane University Girls in Science and Technology
program.