* 1501418
* Measuring the Ages of Stars in the Era of Big Data Time-Domain Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* James Davenport, Davenport               James
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2018
* USD 278,000.00

James Davenport is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Western
Washington University. A key mission in astronomy is to understand the ages and
histories of stars within our galaxy, yet their ages remain one of the most
difficult properties to measure. When stars are young they spin rapidly and
exhibit strong magnetic activity, including frequent high energy flares that can
potentially impact life on nearby planets. Stars lose angular momentum over
time, slowing their rotation, which should decrease this magnetic activity and
generate fewer flares. This change in flare rate can be used as an approximate
clock and is crucial for understanding how stars and planets evolve over time.
To calibrate this clock, Davenport will use the ultra-precise data from NASA's
planet-hunting Kepler mission as a training sample, finding every flare from
over 200,000 stars. This work requires analyzing large volumes of data using
modern computational techniques. Davenport will use this Kepler data to train
students at smaller institutions core principles of data science and
visualization, which are critical for work in technical fields.

Using stellar magnetic activity as a clock has long been suggested as a possible
means for determining stellar ages. Furthermore, planet habitability may be
impacted by the evolution of the host star's magnetic activity over time.
Interest in low-mass stars as exoplanet hosts has fueled a growing need for
better constraints on stellar ages. With the advent of continuous monitoring
from space-based missions like Kepler, we are finally able to calibrate this
method. Davenport will develop the first measurement of this activity-age
relationship by studying the flare rates of stars from the Kepler mission. Over
200,000 stars will be studied for flares using machine learning and time series
statistical techniques. This endeavor will involve using modern data science
techniques to mine large databases. The demand for such skills in the private
and public sectors is growing rapidly, and Davenport will use large, dynamic,
and open access astronomical datasets to teach data science methods. Gaining
experience in data science for STEM majors can be challenging at smaller
institutions, and data from the Kepler mission are ideal for teaching these
skills. The course will also serve as a template for data science STEM training
in other departments at small institutions.