* 1501605
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Thermal heterogeneity in river mainstems prolong a subsidy to tributary salmonids by migratory mayflies
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Mary Power, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2016
* USD 16,380.00

Natural rivers are comprised of many different environments. These environmental
differences create variation in water temperatures, particularly in summer, when
the water levels are low. Warmer temperatures cause many aquatic insects to grow
faster and emerge earlier than cooler temperatures. Given the temperature
variability which occurs within a given river, timing of insect emergence is not
synchronized. Insects emerge from warmer habitats first, then cooler habitats.
Variable aquatic insect emergence extends the overall emergence period of
aquatic insects from the river, and supply food to predators for a longer period
of time than if all insects emerged at once. This project investigates how the
temperature variation in natural habitats sustains prolonged insect emergence
from rivers, and effects of this on the growth of predators, such as fish, that
eat emerging insects from the river. The importance of environmental variation
in nature has been discussed with regard to its effects on biodiversity and
species interactions, however interactions of variation in space and time are
less well-studied. This project investigates how spatial variation translates
into temporal variation through spatially asynchronizing life history events of
a key prey species, and how that affects the transfer of energy to predators,
including the steelhead trout, a game fish in California. This linkage of
spatial heterogeneity with its temporal and trophic consequences is of general
importance, but needs more attention from field ecologists in light river
restoration efforts to support healthy fish populations.

The mayfly Ephemerella maculata emerges from sunlit mainstem rivers, flies into
dark, unproductive tributaries, oviposits, and dies. Their mass migration
subsidizes tributary predators that would otherwise be food-limited. In this
project, the hypothesis that spatial abiotic heterogeneity in the mainstem
strengthens the effect of the E. maculata subsidy on the growth of juvenile
steelhead trout in the tributaries, will be tested in three ways. 1] A field
rearing experiment to see if thermal heterogeneity created by the
geomorphological and hydrological heterogeneity in the mainstem river spatially
varies the emergence timing of E. maculata; [2] Isotope analysis will address
the question if asynchronous emergence and migration of adult E. maculata into
tributaries prolong a trophic subsidy that would otherwise be only a brief
pulse; [3] A field manipulative experiment to see if the prolonged resource
subsidy by E. maculata increases the efficiency of trophic transfer, and
consequently the total growth of juvenile steelhead trout, during their critical
summer growth period.