* 1501267
* Promoting Technology Apprenticeship Consortia
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* George Hendricks, Gaston College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2017
* USD 197,910.00

In recent years manufacturing and industry in the United States have changed
remarkably. Low-skill, labor intensive jobs have moved overseas while processes
have become highly technical and automated. Workers who lost jobs in
manufacturing find they do not have the technical skills needed to qualify for
new jobs in modern industry. High school graduates also will need additional
technical education to compete for good jobs in the current economy.
Apprenticeship, which was for centuries the primary method of technical
training, is re-emerging in the United States as a means to meet the needs of
modern industry. This project at Gaston College in North Carolina will build on
a successful apprenticeship program created in partnership with a local industry
and will provide a model for the creation and support of apprenticeship
consortia in which industries partner with each other, the community college,
the public school system, and local economic development agencies to provide
highly skilled advanced technology workers. The knowledge obtained from the
project will allow other colleges to adapt the model to the needs of their own
local industries and will promote the creation of similar consortia. Through
this program, students will work and receive specific on-the-job training while
concurrently taking technical college courses related to their job. The company
will pay the wages of the students and also pay for their tuition and books.
Upon completion, students will receive an academic certificate from the college,
will be certified as a Journeyworker in a U.S. Department of Labor recognized
job title, and will have secure employment with the company. The company will
have an employee whose education and training is tailored to their specific
needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to promote the creation
of local consortia of industries with similar needs. The primary advantage will
be a pool of students that will allow the college to offer and schedule classes
as well as purchase laboratory equipment that will meet the needs of employers.
Each consortium will belong to the industry members; but the college will
provides advice, support, and coordination for the academic portion of the
program. This project will allow the college to create services and activities
that will promote the formation and growth of apprenticeship consortia for
Chemical Operators and Industrial Mechanics, the two college programs already in
place. A Success Coach will provide assistance to apprentices in the academic
portion of their program. A consultant will assist the companies with
development and maintenance of apprenticeship programs and will facilitate
communications between the companies and the college. Marketing materials will
be created to promote advanced manufacturing and apprenticeships. Partners will
include the industries in the consortia, Lincoln County and Gaston County Public
Schools, the North Carolina Department of Commerce, which administers
apprenticeship programs in the state, and Economic Development entities in both
counties. A comprehensive evaluation will determine the components needed for
these apprenticeship programs to succeed.