* 1501227
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary strategies for adaptation in Wolbachia, a reproductive symbiont of arthropods.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Richard Stouthamer, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,989.00

This project will study the process of evolution of species that live in close
association and benefit each other, symbioses. Wolbachia is a bacterium,
commonly found in close associations with insects, that co-opts the reproduction
of an insect host to ensure its own transmission. The specific lifestyle of
Wolbachia, and the ways in which it manipulates insects, provide a unique
opportunity to (1) study the evolution of symbiosis, and (2) develop alternative
methods for controlling insect populations including disease transmitting
mosquitoes and common pests of homes and crops. However, the successful transfer
of Wolbachia from one species to new target insect species has proven difficult,
likely because Wolbachia is not adapted to the new species of insect since they
have not coevolved. The research project will use a novel system to create
variation in the genome of an insect species that is already part of a natural
symbiosis with Wolbachia. Changes in both the insect and Wolbachia will then be
tracked over time, as Wolbachia adapts to the newly created genetic variation
present in its host. Beyond informing the development of novel insect control
strategies, elucidating the adaptive process in Wolbachia may help us understand
other bacteria-host interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach is
to create genetic variation in a host insect by making a series of recombinant
isofemale lines of the parasitic wasp, Trichogramma pretiosum, and subsequently
to track the performance of Wolbachia in each of those lines. Compared to the
original host, Wolbachia performs poorly in the recombinant hosts initially, but
is able to adapt to the new insects in a short time span. Using this system,
changes to both Wolbachia and Trichogramma pretiosum can be used to identify
genes and molecular pathways that are important in the early stages of symbiont
establishment. A genome re-sequencing approach will be used to identify
mutations in the Wolbachia genome. Reciprocally, transcriptional activity of the
wasps will be compared at early and late time points using RNA-Seq, so as to
identify how the insect responds to the evolving symbiont. This system provides
a platform with which to study changes to the genomes, physiology, and
phenotypes of symbionts and hosts during co-evolution.