* 1501282
* Hyperbolic Properties of Families of Polarized Manifolds and Problems Related to Fake Compact Hermitian Symmetric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Sai Kee Yeung, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2018
* USD 170,000.00

To understand the mathematical properties of a geometric object, often one needs
to group families of objects of similar nature together and study a family as a
whole. This concept arises naturally in quantum physics and string theory as
well. A large part of this research project is devoted to the understanding the
geometric properties of the parameter space inherited indirectly from the
objects that it parameterizes. The Principal Investigator plans to investigate
universal properties of such families in terms of various notions of negativity
in curvature. Some of the problems to be studied are longstanding ones in
algebraic and complex geometry. Another line of research is on the
classification of some special geometric objects known as fake compact Hermitian
symmetric spaces. These objects provide interesting geometric models for
studying a wide range of problems from different areas of mathematics, including
algebraic geometry, differential geometry, number theory, and representation
theory.

More specifically, the Principal Investigator will pursue research in several
directions in algebraic and complex geometry. In the first part of the project,
he intends to apply recently-developed tools involving generalized Weil-
Petersson metrics to understand various hyperbolicity properties of specific
families of polarized manifolds, including the hyperbolicity for families of
Kahler Ricci flat manifolds, families of special log-general type manifolds, and
families of general-type manifolds. In particular, he will investigate a
conjecture of Viehweg about log-general type properties of moduli spaces of
canonically polarized manifolds. In the second part, he plans to complete a
collaborative project on the classification of arithmetic fake compact Hermitian
symmetric spaces, a natural continuation of earlier work on fake projective
planes. In addition, he will study problems related to these fake structures,
such as the investigation of exceptional collections on fake projective planes
from the point of view of derived categories, the characterization of the
universal covering of a complex exotic quadric or a fake quadric, and the
understanding of geometric properties of Cartwright-Steger surfaces.