* 1501347
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of immune gene diversity on immune function and survival in an endangered bird
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Peter Dunn, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 18,508.00

The increasing emergence and spread of pathogens are serious concerns for both
human and wildlife populations. The threat is substantially greater for
populations of endangered species because they often have reduced genetic
diversity, which could impair immune function and increase their susceptibility
to disease. However, to date no studies have directly examined diversity at
immune genes and their relationship to both disease resistance and survival. In
greater prairie-chickens, we previously found that diversity at a variety of
immune genes was reduced in small populations, but it remains unclear how that
will affect individuals. The current study will extend that research and
specifically examine how immune gene diversity in individuals is related to
their immune function and survival in the wild. Thus, the results from this
study will provide a broader understanding of the importance of immune gene
diversity to individual survival and ultimately entire populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Attwater?s prairie-chicken is one of the most
endangered birds in North America. The persistence of the remaining wild
population relies entirely on a large captive breeding and release program in
Texas. About 200 captive-bred juveniles are released each year, but 79% of them
die within nine months. It is known that outbred individuals have greater
survival, but previous work showed no relationship between genome-wide genetic
diversity and four immunological assays for pathogen resistance. The intense
captive breeding and release program provides an unparalleled opportunity to
study how diversity at immune genes directly influences immune function and
survival. This study will characterize immune gene diversity across a wide array
of immune genes (encompassing both innate and acquired immunity) in prairie-
chickens and correlate it with data on immune function and survival already
obtained from previously released birds. The results from this study will
provide a broader understanding of the links between immune genes and survival,
and, therefore, help managers make informed decisions about which individuals to
pair for breeding or release into the wild.