* 1501159
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A hypothesis test for cryptic northern refugia in bitternut and shagbark hickory, with implications for migration and adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Jordan Bemmels, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,250.00

During the height of the ice age, glaciers covered large portions of North
America. Temperate forests persisted in areas known as glacial refugia, such as
the coastal plains of the southern United States. Some species may also have
existed much farther north than previously thought possible, but evidence for
these cryptic northern refugia is controversial. The proposed research will test
whether two hickory species survived glaciation in cryptic refugia, possibly
located in the southern Appalachians or Ozarks. Genetic variation will be
assessed in populations of the two species from across the eastern United
States, and patterns of variation will be statistically compared to patterns
generated under computer simulations according to a variety of historical
scenarios. For the first time, this will provide a measure of confidence in how
likely it is that cryptic northern refugia existed. This aspect of forest
history is important for understanding how tree populations have migrated and
adapted to climate change in the past. The patterns of genetic variation
detected will have implications for forestry and conservation biology, and as a
resource for future research. The research itself promotes the progress of
science by combining genetic analysis and paleogeographical reconstruction, and
it has implications for national welfare, given the potential impacts a changing
climate; the project also supports education and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The survival of temperate species in southern
refugia during the Last Glacial Maximum (21.5 Ka) is a classic phylogeographic
paradigm, yet this paradigm has been challenged by new but inconclusive evidence
suggesting the additional existence of cryptic northern refugia. Using two
eastern North American hickory species, the research will analyze a large
genetic dataset of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using computer
simulations and Approximate Bayesian Computation to test whether spatially-
explicit demographic models containing both cryptic northern refugia and
southern refugia better explain the data than models containing only traditional
southern refugia. The rangewide SNP dataset will also allow exploratory analysis
of patterns of local adaptation. This project will be the first to assess
statistical support for cryptic northern refugia in any species, and will
establish a genomic resource for future studies. Results will aid in better
understanding past responses to climate change, including historical migration
rates, patterns of adaptation, and geographic distributions of genetic
diversity. The relevance to applied biology will be highlighted in a brochure
distributed to a wide network of foresters and conservation biologists
established through fieldwork. An existing University of Michigan program will
also serve as a platform for discussing the project and its relevance to climate
change with local high school students.