* 1501933
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing the Effects of Stress Physiology on Long-lasting Memory in a Free-living Animal
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Stephan Schoech, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2017
* USD 16,334.00

Glucocorticoids, commonly known as "stress hormones", can affect the formation
of short-term memories (i.e., memories that last from seconds to days), but the
effects of stress hormones on memories that persist for months to years are
unknown. Additionally, many memory studies use laboratory animals, which often
have different behaviors and physiologies than their free-living counterparts.
This research will assess the effects of stress hormones on the long-lasting
memory of free-living Florida scrub-jays, a long lived bird that retains
memories for years. A better understanding of how stress mediates memory may
improve the post-release survival of captive-bred endangered species. Many
conservation programs teach endangered animals the dangers of predators prior to
release into natural habitats, and a strong memory of the identity of potential
predators is essential for an animal's survival. This research may also have
impacts on the study of human disorders that impair long-lasting memory, such as
post-traumatic stress disorder and Alzheimer's disease. In addition, this
research will provide research opportunities for University of Memphis
undergraduates, over 40% of which are from groups underrepresented in science.

Stress can mediate memory function via glucocorticoids (GCs), which are released
at low baseline concentrations, but increase in response to a stressor. For
example, exposure to increased levels of circulating GCs shortly after learning
typically enhances long-term memory formation. Long-term memories last hours to
weeks, whereas memories that persist for months to years are known as long-
lasting memories. Despite the robust knowledge of the effects of GCs on short-
and long-term memory, the understanding of the effects of GCs on long-lasting
memory is essentially nonexistent. The goal of this study is to understand how
circulating glucocorticoids affect the long-lasting memory of an emotionally
arousing event. The researchers will manipulate circulating levels of GCs in
free-living Florida scrub-jays (Aphelocoma coerulescens) during a fear
conditioning protocol wherein subjects will be either conditioned to avoid an
artificial, novel predator or exposed to a non-threatening control. The
researchers will then measure subjects' avoidance of the novel predator 48 hours
and 10 months post-conditioning to assess the role of GCs in consolidation and
retention of the associative memory. All data and analysis from this research
will be made publically and freely available on GitHub, a free, web-based Git
repository hosting service, at https://github.com/Jonesbc.