* 1501535
* Skilled Workers Get Jobs 2.0: Appalachian Impact
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Pamela Silvers, Asheville-Buncombe Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 898,198.00

This project seeks to improve technician education and increase the number of
skilled workers in STEM priority areas. The project will build upon the results
of a pilot effort that evaluated several strategies to retain more female
college students in two-year technician preparation programs. The specific goals
of this scale-up project are to: (1) narrow the gender equity enrollment and
persistence gap among female college students in targeted advanced technology
education priority areas; and (2) improve all students' attainment of college
course learning objectives in targeted advanced technology education priority
areas. These goals will be accomplished through three main activity components:
wider adaptation/implementation across six Partner Colleges in the Southern
Appalachian Region (North Carolina, Virginia, Tennessee); broader
institutionalization at Asheville-Buncombe Technical Community College (A-B
Tech); and execution of a learning community proof of concept effort at A-B
Tech.

The premise of the project is that the unique combination of gender equity
practices, problem-based learning, and a support network are critically
important to recruitment and retention of all students - particularly under-
represented populations, such as female students in technology and engineering
programs. Through this project, a significant benefit to society will be
realized as the STEM "pathway" is expanded. Dissemination of results will take
place through presentations and other sharing activities at the local, regional
and national level. A viable and reproducible model for high school, community
college, and university pathway efforts is being developed, and the model is
expected to address an increasing labor shortage of STEM technicians and
professionals.