* 1501554
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genomic signatures of pathogen-mediated selection in diachronic populations of the House Finch
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* John Wakeley, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2017
* USD 21,940.00

This study will examine how the House Finch has evolved resistance and tolerance
to a novel pathogen. Novel pathogens are a challenge faced by many species, and
understanding how species might respond is integral for informing conservation
efforts to protect global biodiversity. Human-mediated introductions of
pathogens into new environments are common today given the ease of global
travel. In 1994, a species of bacteria, Mycoplamsa gallisepticum, historically
associated with poultry, infected the House Finch and killed an estimated 225
million individuals (60% of the eastern population). This pathogen is the cause
of one of the most significant diseases of the poultry industry, so any genes
identified as targets of evolution in this House Finchmay also be applicable to
improving resistance and tolerance in poultry.

The project will use whole genome resequencing and genotyping of immune genes
such as MHC and TLRs to disentangle the genetic underpinnings of two important
immunological responses, resistance and tolerance. Data collected from wild
populations around the U.S. in multiple time periods before and after exposure
to the pathogen will show how the House Finch has evolved. The researchers will
test whether MHC and TLR intra-individual allelic diversity has increased in
response to strong selection, or if specific alleles confer resistance or
susceptibility to the pathogen by increasing or decreasing in frequency over
time. Genotyping of experimentally infected individuals from a historically
unexposed population will test whether putatively selected alleles are
associated with disease phenotypes such as pathogen load or conjunctival
swelling.