* 1501695
* Center for Aviation and Automotive Technological Education Using Virtual E-School [CA2VES]: A Resource to Meet Technician Workforce Needs
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jeff Hunt, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,557,822.00

South Carolina (SC) is rapidly expanding into aviation, automotive, and advanced
manufacturing, and regional employers are increasingly in need of well-educated
technicians who are familiar with the specialized demands of a new generation of
manufacturing jobs. The Center for Aviation and Automotive Technological
Education Using Virtual E-Schools (CA2VES) and the state's 2-year institutions
are creating opportunities to improve technician and STEM education and increase
workforce preparedness for a large and diverse population of SC students. CA2VES
brings together global and regional industry and educational partners to develop
and disseminate such Digital Learning Tools (DLTs) as digital curricula,
e-learning, simulations and virtual reality (VR) modules. DLTs have already
given students greater academic control over time, place, path and pace, and
provided students with the skills required by the rapidly expanding automotive
and aerospace industries in the region.

The CA2VES team will continue to lead the design and development of DLTs working
with industries and employers, and collaborate with Co-PIs (Florence-Darlington
Technical College, Greenville Technical College, Spartanburg Community College
and the SCATE Center) and additional ATE Centers to evaluate the effectiveness
of DLTs in technician education programs. CA2VES and partners will design and
execute recruitment campaigns to attract and engage underserved populations
(specifically women, minorities and students from rural areas). CA2VES will also
partner with 2-year institutions and high schools to customize and modularize
DLTs, field test new modules and conduct ongoing research evaluating how others
replicate and use CA2VES DLTs. The team will assess the improved pedagogical
effectiveness of its work in the areas of innovations in teaching and learning,
technology integration and workforce development. Additionally, the Center will
provide rigorous evidence-based research in VR development for technician
education and become a sustainable resource.