* 1501183
* Mentor-Connect: Leadership Development and Outreach for ATE-2
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Ellen Hause, Florence-Darlington Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,472,376.00

Advanced technological education programs in community colleges are facing the
same challenges created by retirements and the need for knowledge transfer and
leadership development as their business and industry partners. The Mentor-
Connect project addresses these challenges by having current and experienced
project leaders in the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Program serve as
mentors and develop systematic mentoring services for new and prospective ATE
grantees to develop the next generation of leaders in advanced technological
education and achieve broader impacts for the National Science Foundation (NSF)
ATE program. Ultimately, advanced technological education programs and the
industries they partner with will be impacted and improved across the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florence-Darlington Technical College, in
partnership with the American Association of Community Colleges (AACC), will
create, implement, and evaluate a regenerative mentoring system for leadership
development and knowledge transfer designed to broaden the impact of the ATE
Program. The project will be guided by personnel involved with the award-winning
IBM Corporation Global Mentoring Program, and it will leverage talent within the
ATE project community to meet a common and growing challenge: knowledge transfer
to prepare the next generation of STEM faculty leaders. Additionally, the
project will support: 1) an increase in engagement with and competitive
proposals from colleges and populations underrepresented in the ATE program, 2)
technical assistance and online resources for use both by mentors and
prospective and current Principal Investigators (PIs), 3) expansion and broader
utilization of existing ATE resources, 4) engagement of successful ATE PIs as
mentors, and 5) an 8-year, longitudinal study of this mentoring system. In
addition to serving as a model for leadership development and knowledge transfer
adaptable for use within community colleges and for other NSF programs, the
project will evaluate and disseminate its findings to broad audiences, and in so
doing, provide resources to guide prospective grantees, and effectively engage
two-year colleges and STEM faculty who are underrepresented geographically and
demographically in the ATE Program, as they develop future talent for STEM
technician education across the US.