* 1501651
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing Alternative Hypotheses for the Goal of Orientation by Reef Fish Larvae throughout Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Peter Buston, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 16,355.00

A central question of animal behavior and population ecology research is, how
far do fish offspring disperse from their parents? This is because the dispersal
of fish larvae connects distinct marine populations, thereby influencing the
size and genetic diversity of those populations. In previous studies, marine
ecologists have used two approaches to understand population connectivity:
genetic methods that measure connectivity; and, oceanographic models that
predict connectivity. There is, however, a large gap between the measured and
predicted patterns of connectivity, which may be caused by the behavior of the
fish larvae. Indeed, many reef fish larvae are outstanding swimmers that have
the potential to influence their dispersal, but do they know where they are
going? The objective of this research is to study the orientation abilities of
fish larvae in the wild, throughout development and under a variety of
environmental conditions, to determine whether understanding behavior can bridge
the gap between observations and predictions of population connectivity. The
completion of this research will enable improved predictions of population
connectivity for other species, which will aid in the development of effective
networks of marine reserves. The project will include a mentorship program for
undergraduates in aquaculture and research, outreach to K-12 girls through the
Science Club for Girls internship program and collaboration with local high
school teachers.

A significant gap in our understanding of marine ecology is the extent to which
larval orientation behavior can influence the pattern of dispersal. This project
will bridge this gap by investigating the ontogeny of larval orientation
behavior using one tractable system: the neon goby, Elacatinus lori. The project
has two main objectives: 1) to investigate changes in larval orientation
abilities throughout development; and, 2) to test alternative hypotheses for the
goal of larval orientation behavior, i.e., to determine what larvae are
orienting toward. By deploying lab-reared larvae in a drifting in situ chamber,
the researchers will test for an effect of age on the development of non-random
orientation behavior, the proportion of larvae orienting and the precision of
their orientation. The researchers will also manipulate the location of larval
deployments to test and discriminate between alternative hypotheses for the goal
of larval orientation. Ultimately, understanding the behavioral mechanisms of
larval dispersal will increase our understanding of the causes of population
connectivity and aid in the design of effective networks of marine reserves.
Data will be archived at the National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC) or the
NSF funded Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity (KNB).