* 1501131
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating the genomic structure of speciation: a comparative approach using wagtails (Aves: Motacilla)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Adam Leache, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 11/30/2016
* USD 16,380.00

Investigating geographically variable traits can reveal the processes driving
evolution. Widespread species are useful systems for exploring differences in
physical traits and their underlying genetic basis, because they offer
comparisons among populations at different stages of the speciation continuum.
The identification of common features may provide insight into the fundamental
principles guiding the speciation process, as well as the relationship between
genotype and phenotype. To facilitate this research, the PIs have developed an
international network of collaborators in Sweden, China, Russia, and the USA.
This project also supports outreach and the public communication of science
through Natural History Museums.

In birds, feather color and pattern can play an important role in mating
preference. Because of this, plumage differences can arise rapidly and be
detected before changes to the genome have time to catch up. This project
investigates how plumage diversity emerges using Eurasian wagtails, a group of
birds with large difference in plumage color and pattern, but with very little
genetic differentiation. The drastic color pattern differences in wagtails are
thought to be a result of sexual selection, in which case the differences in
phenotypes could be the result of changes to a small number of genes. This
project will use whole-genome sequencing to identify regions of high genetic
differentiation from throughout the genome. Sequencing these specific regions of
differentiation from wagtails collected across Eurasia will add to the
relatively small body of literature on the genetics of plumage pattern. Beyond
plumage, our data will allow us to investigate the historical events that likely
shaped the evolution of this group in Europe, Asia, and Africa.