* 1501359
* iNoVATE Expansion Project (iNoVATE-X)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* John Vail, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2020
* USD 819,979.00

Data centers are crucial in the modern, Internet-based economy, and information
technology companies need employees who have the skills to run a highly
efficient and modern data center -- expertise in identity management, systems
management, virtualization, storage, and networking. At the same time, there is
a pressing need in the state of Florida to expand access in rural areas to high-
demand occupational training, educational best practices, and state-of-the-art
educational infrastructure. This project will increase the accessibility of
technical education for rural and underserved Florida residents, with a focus on
the skills needed to operate a modern data center. One product will be the
curriculum for a new Network Enterprise Administration technical certificate.
After students have completed this program of study, they will be eligible for a
number of high-skill, high-wage, high-growth jobs, including Computer Network
Architect, Computer Network Support Specialist, Computer Programmer, Computer
Systems Analyst, Computer User Support Specialist, and Network and Computer
Systems Administrator. Partners in this project include Florida State College at
Jacksonville, Daytona State College, Eastern Florida State College, Seminole
State College, Tallahassee Community College, and the National Convergence
Technology Center (an Advanced Technological Education [ATE] national center).
Fourteen business and industry partners will work with the educational
institutions to develop the curriculum, train faculty, and provide opportunities
for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a prior NSF ATE grant
(Award DUE-1104234, "iNoVATE: A Network Virtualization Project"), which resulted
in the creation of a Network Virtualization technical certificate, over 100
community college faculty completing professional development in network
virtualization, and over 100 students enrolled in newly developed network
virtualization courses. The new project will create online curricula for five
courses that align with the Microsoft Certified Solutions Expert (MCSE) server
infrastructure certification, along with two additional courses, "Virtual
Internship" and "Virtual Capstone." Major project activities include (1)
designing, implementing, and disseminating the curriculum for the new Network
Enterprise Administration technical certificate; (2) expanding Network
Enterprise Administration labs, where students can remotely access equipment to
practice server administration skills; (3) developing and offering workshops and
other teaching resources for faculty; and (4) disseminating information about
the Network Enterprise Administration program to rural and underserved areas. As
online education becomes more common, it is imperative that distance learning
students gain remote access to authentic, hands-on learning opportunities.
Therefore, the project will build on prior research to explore the impact of
remote access to virtual lab activities and other authentic, work-based
learning, including student internships and capstone course requirements. The
project team will measure and track student knowledge construction and the
development of discipline-specific problem-solving skills for statistical
comparison and longitudinal analysis, improving project strategies and building
a strong foundation for future research.