* 1501257
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Environmental Quality and the Costs of Reproduction: an Experimental Test in a Cooperatively Breeding Bird
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Dustin Rubenstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,800.00

Organisms are faced with a fundamental decision: to invest valuable resources
and energy in reproduction or in their own survival. As a result, reproduction
may lead to lowered survival, a relationship called the "cost of reproduction."
For some organisms, the cost of reproduction is thought to be so high that
parents cannot reproduce without additional help. Ultimately, this may be why
some species live in complex family groups, or cooperatively breeding societies,
where individuals form social groups to raise others' offspring. Finding food
for the young is difficult, but if individuals come together to find food the
cost of reproduction is lowered. The researchers are studying cooperatively
breeding birds to determine whether the cost of reproduction promotes rearing
young in family groups. This project specifically explores how resources
available during reproduction can increase or decrease the cost of reproduction
and alter group dynamics. This research will also create two positions for local
Kenyan field assistants, and provide mentoring to a female undergraduate student
who will assist with data collection and pursue an independent project. Results
will be shared with US and Kenyan undergraduate students as part of a semester
abroad in Tropical Biology. This research will also be shared with Kenyan
students from rural elementary schools through participation in the grassroots
Laikipia Conservation Clubs.

Researchers will manipulate territory quality through an insect supplementation
at nests of a cooperatively breeding species, the superb starling (Lamprotornis
superbus), to examine whether environmental conditions drive the cost of
reproduction. Birds will be caught both before and during chick rearing to look
at the physiological changes that occur as a result of reproduction. Previous
research in this system has indicated that oxidative stress increases with
greater chick-rearing effort, a strong candidate measure that may link
reproductive effort to reduced survival. The researchers will examine how food
supplementation alters the magnitude of these physiological changes to infer how
resource availability drives the cost of reproduction. Samples and data will be
stored at Columbia and made publically available post publication through Dryad,
a public data repository for evolutionary and ecological data.