* 1501974
* VESTA National Center of Excellence
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Anne Fennell, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 4,118,640.00

Continued growth of the U.S. grape growing and wine production industry (GWI) is
challenged by its need for a knowledgeable and skilled technical workforce. The
Viticulture and Enology Science and Technology Alliance (VESTA), a
collaborative, multi-institution national consortium, is expanding its
capabilities to ensure that this technical workforce has the strong STEM-based
knowledge and skills to take advantage of the latest advances in scientific
practices and emerging technologies. The Alliance works closely with the GWI and
subject matter experts to provide readily accessible learning experiences for
students many of whom live in rural communities. VESTA provides (a) educational
and learning experiences so that students, wine business entrepreneurs and
industry members are able to demonstrate knowledge and skills in scientifically
based practices and technologies making the US GWI globally competitive; (b)
experiences that enable students to apply scientific, mathematical, enological
and viticultural knowledge to resolve real-world challenges in vineyard and
winery operations; and (c) well-defined career paths based on nationally
validated occupational competencies.

The Alliance uses its distance learning format coupled with field experiences in
commercial vineyards and wineries throughout the country. The latter has a dual
purpose of hands-on skill development for the two-year college student and a
risk-free opportunity for the commercial owner/operator to assess the potential
of a future employee. Through an industry-driven curriculum process and
nationally validated occupational competencies, scientific advances and emerging
technologies will be identified and incorporated into VESTA courses and
professional development programs. VESTA will provide just-in-time experiences
wherein students address real world challenges in vineyard and winery operations
through the use of Simulation Instructional Technologies. This virtual reality
learning experiences will enhance all instruction while filling a critical need
when courses are out-of-sync with the seasonal nature of this industry. In
addition, VESTA will continue to demonstrate the impact that distance learning
methodology coupled with hands-on industry-mentored field experiences can have
on meeting the technical workforce needs of 21st century industries.