* 1501905
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploiting Seasonality and Differences in Herbivory to Create a Novel Framework for Testing Optimal Defense Theory
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Ruth Hufbauer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,239.00

Plants form the basis of most terrestrial food webs, and insect pests consume
more plant tissue than all other animals combined. Thus, understanding how
plants defend against insect pests is crucial to maintaining important ecosystem
services and food production. Compared to old leaves, young leaves are often
more valuable to future plant success as well as more nutritious and desirable
to insects, but younger tissue may have more defenses against such attack. The
mechanisms of plant growth alone might explain this pattern, or it could be an
evolutionary adaptation to protect against pests. A series of experiments will
test the alternate explanations of growth physiology alone or with defense
response using populations of plants that have evolved separately under either
low or high levels of insect attack for the last 400 years. The work will
incorporate the contributions of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine a cornerstone of
research on plant-insect interactions, the optimal defense theory, which
predicts that herbivory selects for young tissues to be better defended than old
tissue. However, physiological constraints, as opposed to adaptive responses to
selection imposed by herbivory, could lead to the same patterns. In this
proposal, I aim to advance understanding of what drives young leaves to be so
highly defended by disentangling whether adaptive evolution or physiological
constraints drives differences in allocation in defense. To test the alternate
hypotheses of physiological constraints versus adaptive evolution, a rigorous
new framework of optimal defense will be developed that requires tests of
defense to: (1) include root tissue, (2) directly measure relative tissue
values, and (3) evaluate how these values change through a growing season. The
framework will be tested using an intraspecific comparison between plant
populations that predictably vary in their risk of attack (by using European and
North American maternal lines of Verbascum thapsis) for specific tissues using
pot experiments and measures of tissue value (tissue removal and seed output)
and chemical defense allocations.