* 1501547
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Stochastic modeling approaches to evaluate the evolution of chromosome number and genome size in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Emily Sessa, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,493.00

DNA provides the genetic instructions for life, yet very little is known about
why the amount of DNA in a genome varies tremendously across species. In
flowering plants, the size and composition of genomes can change drastically
through whole genome duplications, which are associated with ecological
adaptation and shifts in species diversification rates. This project takes an
interdisciplinary approach, combining insights and approaches from disparate
fields, such as Botany, Genetics, and Statistics, to examine the role of whole
genome duplication in generating and maintaining variation in genome size and
chromosome number among species. Specifically, this project will develop and
implement new mathematical models to measure the effect of different
evolutionary mechanisms associated with duplications on genome size variation in
flowering plants. The software and methods developed by this project will help
scientists test many questions in genome evolution in a statistically rigorous
manner, and the project also will provide interdisciplinary training to graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whole genome duplication (WGD) is a recurrent
genomic process in angiosperms that has been linked to genetic innovation,
ecological adaptation, and shifts in diversification rates. However, the role of
WGD in generating and maintaining variation in genome size and chromosome number
among species is still largely unknown. The goal of this project is to develop
new stochastic models of chromosome number and genome size change that will
enable scientists to infer the speed of evolutionary mechanisms responsible for
the variation in genome size as well as an inferential procedure that will allow
estimation of the frequency of such evolutionary processes. Specifically, this
project will (1) estimate the relative influence of genome downsizing and
constraints against WGD using a formal simulation approach; (2) propose a new
stochastic model for ploidy change that includes diploidization; and (3) propose
a new stochastic model for genome size change that includes genome downsizing
and selection against WGD for taxa with large genomes. The project will also
provide new methods and open source software for the scientific community and
will provide interdisciplinary training for graduate students.