* 1501749
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Independent evolution and ancestral conditions in the gnathostome axial column
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Michael Coates, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 11/30/2016
* USD 20,265.00

The presence of a backbone, even if only made of cartilage, is the feature that
distinguishes vertebrate animals from their invertebrate relatives. Despite its
central position in the body plans of all jawed vertebrates, the early
evolutionary history and developmental mechanisms that gave rise to the
vertebral column are not well understood. Across different vertebrate groups,
and among fishes in particular, the vertebrae that make up the backbone are
remarkably varied in their shape, composition, and structure. Furthermore, the
early fossil record of the major groups of fishes shows that many evolved
fundamental components of the vertebral column quite independently of others.
The goals of this project are to document vertebral development in poorly
studied groups such as sharks and skates, to determine how much independent
evolution actually occurred in the deep history of vertebrae, and to provide
essential comparisons with the current understanding of vertebral development in
bony fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines ancestral state
reconstructions on gnathostome supertrees with computed tomography, gene
expression, and fate mapping experiments to investigate the macroevolutionary
patterns of vertebral evolution and development in fishes. Chondrichthyans are
the main focus of the proposed research because they occupy a key phylogenetic
position as the most proximate outgroup to the Osteichthyes. Chondrichthyans are
often considered exemplars of ancestral vertebrate conditions in developmental
and functional studies, but the primitive or derived status of much of their
morphology is unclear and the subject of renewed research interest. Identifying
ancestral conditions and homoplasy in the axial column complex is essential for
the informed evaluation of studies and data obtained from alternative vertebrate
model systems. Moreover, sharks as well as fossils are charismatic study
subjects that effectively capture public interest. To help communicate the
nature of this and other related projects to the public, the investigators will
use computed tomographic scans (static and animated), and fossil shark specimens
to educate students at local schools about the importance and relevance of
evolutionary biology.