* 1501851
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The early evolution and adaptive radiation of saurian reptiles
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Alan Turner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2017
* USD 10,326.00

Reptiles form a critical component of the modern ecosystem, with over 20,000
known species. Fossil and molecular evidence shows that all of these living
species belong to a single group, Sauria, which originated over 260 million
years ago, during the Permian Period. Although saurians are rare in the Permian
fossil record, they become common and diverse following a massive extinction
event at the end of the Permian, 252 million years ago. This end-Permian
extinction occurred at the same time as massive volcanic eruptions and
acidification in oceans, wiping out an estimated 95% of species living at the
time. The saurians that appear after the extinction very quickly evolve an
incredible diversity of body sizes, body shapes, and diets, suggesting that they
took advantage of the many gaps in the ecosystem caused by the extinction.
However, the family tree of the oldest Sauria is poorly understood, and critical
questions about the ancestors of all modern reptiles remain unanswered: How does
the diversity of Sauria change over the period of environmental change at the
end of the Permian? How rapidly did the early saurian groups change
anatomically? What did the ancestor of all living reptiles look like, and how
have the lineages we see today changed from that ancestor? Answering these
questions will allow scientists to understand the impact that similar
environmental changes occurring today, could have on living animal species. It
will also provide a baseline for the changes we might expect following more
serious environmental crises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fossils from the Permian and
Triassic periods are far too ancient to preserve DNA, and reconstructing their
evolutionary history must rely on detailed anatomical study. Unfortunately, the
anatomy of most early saurians have not been well described. This dissertation
project has required restudy of dozens of museum collections worldwide, funded
largely by grants from private foundations. These allowed development of the
largest anatomical dataset analyzing this critical problemThese museums preserve
fossils from the Karoo Formation of South Africa, a critical region that
preserves a huge diversity of early diapsids from both the latest Permian and
earliest Triassic,, providing an unprecedented opportunity to sample fossils at
this critical moment. The dataset constructed and the photo records developed
for this project will be made available to the public via NSF-funded databases
(e.g., Morphobank).