* 1501489
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Extinction and Diversification Dynamics of Archosauria Through Early Mesozoic Climate Crises
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Josef Stiegler, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 19,154.00

Two mass extinctions occurred early in the Mesozoic Era shortly after dinosaurs
appeared, and multiple lines of evidence suggest that dramatic global climate
change events were contributing factors. This project will investigate the
response of the extinct relatives of birds and crocodilians (the Archosauria) to
these episodes. The primary objectives of this study are to analyze the
evolutionary relationships of fossil archosaurs, and use these evolutionary
relationships as a framework to investigate how archosaur respiratory anatomy
and body temperature regulation changed after the extinctions at the end of the
Triassic Period and during the Early Jurassic Epoch. The study will test the
hypothesis that global warming events initiated evolutionary changes in
respiratory anatomy and contributed to currently unexplained patterns of
extinction and diversification of extinct archosaurs, including dinosaurs. This
research will provide insight into the ways that vertebrate communities on land
respond to rapid changes in climate, and may help to predict which species will
experience an increased risk of extinction during modern climate change. This
research will provide multiple opportunities for undergraduate training. In
addition, educational materials based on the results will be distributed to
educators at secondary and higher education levels, as well as disseminated in
the form of scientific papers and presentations at professional
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-calibrated phylogenies of Archosauria will
be estimated using both parsimony analyses of morphology and combined-evidence
Bayesian approaches to phylogeny reconstruction incorporating molecular sequence
data from extant archosaurs. Character transformation rates for respiratory-
related characters (e.g. postcranial skeletal pneumaticity) and non-respiratory
characters will be modeled iteratively over a large sample of time-calibrated
trees to account for uncertainty in phylogeny and chronology. Non-parametric
statistics will be used to test for the presence of rate-shifts in respiratory
character evolution surrounding the interval of extinctions and associated
climate changes in the early Mesozoic Era.