* 1501629
* Revolutionary Opportunities for Highly Educated Unmanned Aircraft Systems Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jonathan Beck, Northland Community & Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,929.00

Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) is the most rapidly growing sector of the
aerospace industry fueled with continuous advancements in technology, and the
Federal Aviation Administration is currently working on a plan to integrate UAS
into the national airspace system (NAS) by 2015. This project at Northland
Community and Technical College (NCTC) will bridge the gap between new and
emerging aviation technology and technician education in the area of UAS and
will increase career opportunities through the development of a pipeline for
highly skilled workers to meet industry demands. A study released in 2013 by the
Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI) forecast the
economic impact of the integration of UAS into the NAS to total more than $13.6
billion in the first three years of integration and to grow sustainably for the
foreseeable future, cumulating to more than $82.1 billion between 2015 and 2025.
AUVSI also stated the integration into the NAS will create more than 70,000 new
jobs in the first 3 years. By 2025, total job creation is estimated at 103,776
jobs. The project will initiate, facilitate, and maintain partnerships with
industry leaders, 7-14 schools and higher education institutions to confirm
workforce competencies and curriculum. It will increase educational
opportunities to advance aviation technologies and the impacts regionally and
nationally, helping to position the U.S. as a leader in the global UAS market.
By collaborating with key stakeholders at the UAS test sites, the project will
create models for technician education in UAS maintenance and meet technical
employment needs of UAS and other high-growth industries. With the rapid growth
in these new technologies there is a great opportunity to influence standardized
education for this science, technology, engineering, and technology (STEM)
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address current skill gaps and educational
opportunities, the project will create innovative, industry driven curriculum
for UAS and related disciplines, industry recognized stackable credentials, and
technician career pathways. It will provide professional development for faculty
members to stay current in emerging technologies and learn new teaching methods
that will allow them to incorporate these materials into UAS programs as well as
in existing STEM courses. It will promote and provide educational opportunities
to underrepresented populations and rural areas by leveraging tele-presence
technology to expand geographical reach and serve non-traditional students.
Project personnel will disseminate instructional materials, research
information, and papers for use by educational and industry partners. Workshops
and summer camps will promote awareness to secondary and post-secondary
educators and students interested in STEM. A comprehensive evaluation will
identify best practices in the education of UAS technicians to fill this
emerging national need.