* 1501867
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary Trends Within the Polemoniaceae (Ericales)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Kenneth Sytsma, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2017
* USD 17,060.00

The Polemoniaceae, the phlox family, is a textbook example of an adaptive
radiation and has long been studied by biologists from diverse fields under the
assumption that pollinators have played a key role in the formation of its
species. However, this, hypothesis remains untested. This research explores
evolution in the phlox family, a group of plants with most species found in the
United States to test this this hypotheses from ecological and genetic
perspectives. This research will benefit science and society by developing
identification keys which will allow the public, especially members of native
plant organizations, to identify and therefore have a deeper appreciation for
the biological diversity of phlox. These data will also allow conservationists
to make informed, cost-effective decisions as they seek to preserve endangered
and threatened species at both the State and Federal level, especially in
California, Nevada, Minnesota, and Wisconsin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polemonium
has been the subject of multiple molecular phylogenetic studies yet the
relationships among its species remain undetermined. Species boundaries between
species are also unclear, perhaps as a result of reticulate evolution. This
project will generate a near species-level phylogeny of the Polemoniaceae and
will also use morphometric techniques to generate trait data. This study will be
the first to sample all species and utilize multiple nuclear loci to determine
species relationships. These data will test the hypothesis that floral form has
been selected for by pollinators and the morphometric data will determine the
evolution of leaf form. Collection data from natural history museums will be
used to investigate the biogeographic history of Polemonium. The use of
comparative phylogenetic methods with these data sets provides a unique
opportunity to reconstruct the ancestral character states at various time
periods during phlox evolution. Polemonium occidentale ssp. lacustre is
endangered in both states in which it occurs, but is not yet Federally listed as
endangered. Next-generation sequencing approaches will be used to determine its
taxonomic status and population structure to inform conservation of this rare
taxon.