* 1501690
* Dissertation Research: Molecular mechanisms underlying striking craniofacial variation in New World Leaf-Nosed bats (Phyllostomidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Hopi Hoekstra, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 21,882.00

New-World leaf-nosed bats are one of the most successful and diverse lineages of
mammals. They have evolved many distinct faces and each head shape serves a
different purpose. For example, bats with flat, primate-like faces eat fruit and
disperse seeds. Bats with long and narrow faces consume nectar and pollinate
flowers. The New-World leaf-nosed bats are an ideal group with which to test an
important aspect of mammal evolution: how their heads and faces changed in
appearance over time. The researchers will examine the evolution and development
of uniquely shaped bat faces that allow for distinct feeding strategies in
natural populations of bats by integrating museum collections, fieldwork, gene
expression studies, and experiments in the laboratory. The nature of this
project will foster collaborations, networking, and training among scientists
from different fields of biology across several institutions plus involvement
and mentoring of undergraduates. Phyllostomid bats are fascinating and
charismatic animals and this combined with a close tie to the museums and their
collections and exhibits will likely help the outreach efforts for providing the
broader impact of this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morphological diversity can
be explained by examining evolutionary patterns in related species and
characterizing developmental gene expression leading to the appearance of
fundamental species-specific features. This project will: 1) quantify
morphological transformations in the evolution of unique feeding strategies
among phyllostomid bats, 2) compare embryonic gene expression between bats that
differ in easily quantifiable characteristics, such as shortening and elongation
of the cranium; and 3) evaluate mechanisms for diversification by connecting
developmental change to evolutionary change. Anticipated significant
developmental gene expression differences among bats will provide the foundation
for testing hypotheses about the link between ontogeny and phylogeny.
Specifically, gene expression changes may be experimentally replicated in bat
and/or mouse embryos and the subsequent phenotypes will be examined by
quantitative morphometrics to evaluate if evolutionary patterns are mimicked.
This will indicate a causative connection between morphological and molecular
evolutionary changes. The results of this research allow for a general
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms underlying major diversity patterns
among mammals