* 1501553
* Scaling Implementation of Stem Cell Technical Education: A Collaborative Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert Del Vecchio, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 08/31/2019
* USD 660,980.00

Stem cells and stem cell technology offer tremendous promise to revolutionize
our understanding of how diseases occur, and they can be utilized to lead
researchers to new and effective methods to treat medical disorders from heart
disease, to diabetes, to arthritis and many more. Further, the field of
regenerative medicine has the potential to grow tissue to treat burn victims and
organs for patients in need of transplants. These burgeoning areas of research
and development are creating a demand for well-qualified technical employees
with specialized skills and competencies to advance stem cell technology. This
project, a collaborative endeavor between Madison Area Technical College (MATC)
and the City College of San Francisco (CCSF), will improve and expand technical
education in stem cell technology and regenerative medicine within the broader
context of biotechnology. In addition to collaborating with industry partners to
provide relevant, modern college curricula and programs to educate and prepare
stem cell technology professionals, the project will provide pre-college
educators with engaging materials for science and technology courses to
construct career pathways that lead from secondary education, to higher
education and, ultimately, into the high technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will leverage
successful developments and lessons learned from individual efforts undertaken
at MATC and CCSF with prior NSF support. The current endeavor is strategically
designed to build on the momentum and networks that these earlier projects
generated by (1) refining existing materials for an expanded group of academic
audiences; (2) developing additional instructional modules for college-level
programs; (3) creating and disseminating stem cell biology curriculum for grades
8-12; and (4) providing professional development workshops for educators as an
effective means to disseminate materials so that educators are equipped to adapt
and implement them. As part of the dissemination efforts, the project impact
will be multiplied by fostering a web-enabled learning community of high school,
community college, and university educators who will take ownership of the
products created as part of this initiative and further develop and disseminate
stem cell education throughout the nation. Success of the project and its impact
will be evaluated using surveys and interviews with key participants, including
students, educators and industry partners. Metrics will include numbers of
institutions affected via adoption of curricula, student enrollments, completion
and employment figures and employer approval of curricular content and
satisfaction with program graduates who enter the workforce.