* 1501737
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Buzz about Bee Behavior, Taking an Interdisciplinary Approach to Assess Cognitive Impairments behind Pollinator Declines
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Robert Gegear, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 12/31/2016
* USD 20,410.00

Animal pollinators are declining in abundance, diversity, and geographic range
at an alarming rate worldwide. Given the critical role of pollinators in natural
and agricultural ecosystems, these declines represent a significant threat to
global biodiversity and crop production. However, conservation and restoration
efforts to address this important problem are impeded by a lack of information
on mechanistic links between environmental stressors and population decline. To
address this important knowledge gap, the investigators will examine sub-lethal
effects of chronic exposure to different stressors on brain functions important
for pollinator survival and reproduction. The investigators will develop
quantitative tools to measure physiological and molecular responses to
environmental stressors in pollinators, and then correlate those changes with
changes in their brain functioning and behavior. In addition to elucidating
causal factors in pollinator decline, the research will allow for the
development of ecological tools for monitoring pollinator health in wild
populations, thereby accelerating efforts to identify and protect species
particularly susceptible to decline. The investigators will also engage in
pollinator-focused educational outreach activities for K-12 educators, students,
particularly those from underrepresented groups, and the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes a highly interdisciplinary
approach to characterize mechanisms linking exposure to pesticides and
infectious agents to cognition-based behavioral impairments in bumblebee
pollinators native to North America. Molecular and immunological approaches will
be used to develop methods for the identification and quantification of
compounds produced by the humoral pathway of the bee immune system in response
to infection. Ecotoxicological approaches will be used to develop tools for the
quantification of pesticide and metabolite residues in specific bee tissues
after chronic exposure to neonicotinoid pesticides. Measures of pesticide and
immune responses will be correlated with performance on standard behavioral
assays of cognitive function in order to identify the mechanistic underpinnings
of behavioral alterations observed when bees are exposed to environmental
stressors. All digital data generated from the research will be stored on an EMC
Isilon storage array that is maintained by the local institution's Center for
Academic and Research Computing. All analyzed primary data under this award will
be promptly published to peer-reviewed journal publications. The findings of the
research will also be disseminated at domestic and international professional
conferences.