* 1501494
* Creating Pathways to Electrical Utility Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Amir Niczad, Richmond Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2018
* USD 198,673.00

A 2014 report from Manpower projected that energy jobs will double by 2020, yet
a "double squeeze" of an aging workforce and lack of qualified candidates
contribute to talent shortages for the industry. A large majority of energy
executives agreed that today's energy workforce requires a more complex skill
set than it did five years ago and many indicated that today's workers require
higher levels of technical competency. Richmond Community College (RCC) will
expand its technician education offerings for the electric utility industry to
include additional degree programs and will offer dual enrollment pathways to
begin to meet industry needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing body of
research demonstrating that dual enrollment is correlated with higher graduation
rates, higher college enrollment and higher levels of persistence. This project
is based on the premise that by increasing enrollment of high school students in
dual enrollment pathways, RCC can increase enrollment in engineering
technologies programs, increase the percentage of students entering those
programs academically prepared, increase persistence rates in those programs,
and thereby better meet industry demand for qualified technicians. RCC will
create dual enrollment opportunities for area high school students to accelerate
completion of college certificates, diplomas, and associate degrees that provide
entry-level job skills. The program will strengthen pathways for secondary
school students by providing faculty development and instructional resources to
ensure that education and training focuses on industry-defined competencies and
the latest technology. Project activities include creating two career and
technical pathways focused on the electric utility industry, equipping
classrooms at an area high school with up-to-date equipment, providing training
for RCC faculty who teach relevant career and technical classes at the high
school, and enhancing marketing and recruiting efforts by targeting high school
students and those individuals likely to influence their career choice including
parents, teachers, and counselors.