* 1501785
* An Observational Investigation of Gamma-Ray Bright Blazars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Jedidah Isler, Isler                   Jedidah        C
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2018
* USD 278,000.00

Jedidah Isler is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Vanderbilt
University. This integrated plan of research, education, and career development
is based on two fundamental pillars: a) an investigation of the accretion disk
and jet physics in supermassive, hyperactive black holes called blazars, and b)
the development of a nationally distributed alumni network for Astronomy
students of color. Isler is working to understand the fundamental physical
processes that produce the highly variable and multiwavelength emission detected
in blazars. The outcome of this study will help astrophysicists better
understand the interplay between the infalling accretion material and outflowing
jet material. In this way, one can in principle build up a full geometric
picture of the flow of matter and resulting radiation in these galactic black
hole systems. Isler is equally committed to creating spaces for students of
color to thrive in academic settings in general and STEM disciplines in
particular. Her personal experience informs her passion, as she has been in safe
spaces as well as survived overtly and covertly hostile environments in her
pursuit of scientific excellence. It is her goal to continue that pursuit while
building academic spaces that are welcoming to an ever wider portion of the
population.

The blazar study relies on simultaneous, multiwavelength data obtained from NASA
Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope and the Small and Medium Aperture Research
Telescope System, which provides optical and infrared data. Together, these two
datasets are used to constrain the physical mechanisms responsible for the
highest energy gamma-ray emission we observe. Furthermore, when optical
spectroscopic data are also obtained, the location of the gamma-emitting region
can be better localized. This localization of the high energy emission allows us
to distinguish between competing models for the physical mechanisms that drive
these processes. The national alumni network will begin with the Fisk Vanderbilt
Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program and augment the already active Research Showcase
on campus. This gathering of current students will form the basis of an annual
alumni gathering. Furthermore, state-of-the-art online tools will be used to
build and maintain the virtual community that is critical to cementing
relationships developed during the annual campus visit. Finally, since the
ultimate goal of this portion of the project is to replicate this network on a
national scale, a key deliverable will be a best practices toolkit to be shared
with other Bridge programs across the country.