* 1501000
* Hydrodynamics of Liquid Crystals and Extremum Problems for Eigenvalues
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Fang-Hua Lin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2020
* USD 625,000.00

This proposal is for a deep theoretical study on a class of complex fluids
including both the liquid crystals which have been widely used in display
devices and charged biological fluids which are extremely important in modern
medicine and life sciences. Of particular interests are their intriguing and
complex dynamical phenomena as well as formations of patterns and singularities.
The modeling, analysis and simulations involved in understanding these complex
fluids are theoretically very important and challenging. It needs new ideas and
methods, and hence it would advance our knowledge which would be applicable to
many other scientific problems as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
the proposal consists of two parts. The first part is to study partial
differential equations that describe the hydrodynamics of liquid crystals and
related complex fluid models. The main focus of this part of the research will
be to study global existence of suitable weak solutions of liquid crystal flows
in the Ericksen-Leslie theory; the global existence of solutions of Oldroyd
B-model of incompressible visco-elastic fluids; the inviscid incompressible
magneto-hydrodynamic system and, in general, coupled nonlinear dynamics of
fluids with other geometric objects. The second part is to study a large class
of extremum problems of elliptic eigenvalues. Such problems also arise in
optimal designs, pattern formations and other applications in material sciences
and condense matter physics. The partial differential equations (PDE) that the
PI plans to study involve nonlinear couplings between equations that describe
transport, phase-field, mapping or geometric object's evolutions and that of
Navier Stokes equations. They may be of both parabolic and hyperbolic nature and
possess singularities or multiple scales. The variational problems for
eigenvalues and eigenfunctions that linked with underlying domains are classical
and fundamental. These are fascinating and challenging problems that require new
ideas and methods, which could lead to new directions of research or programs in
the analysis of PDE and calculus of variations. The proposed research activity
is an important and integral part of the PI's training program of under-
graduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students.