* 1501782
* Dissertation Research: Disentangling a Potential Tri-Kingdom Mutualism in the Guiana Shield
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Mary Aime, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,130.00

Very different types of organisms can interact in ways that allow them to
survive together when they would be unable to survive alone. These interactions
can have major impacts on entire ecosystems. This project will test whether
termites, bacteria, and a fungus depend on each other in a tropical rainforest.
Scientists hypothesize that wood-feeding termites disperse the reproductive
structures of a wood-decaying fungus so it can colonize new substrates, that the
fungus houses bacteria beneficial to termites, and that the bacteria receive
shelter inside the fungus. Because this three-way interaction is built on wood-
feeding organisms, results of the study will augment knowledge of how
decomposition, or nutrient recycling, occurs in tropical ecosystems.
Additionally, this project underscores how much remains to be learned about
species interactions, especially in biodiverse
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate a potential tri-
kingdom mutualism in the Guiana Shield. Field observations have led to the
hypothesis that a wood-decay fungus, Guyanagaster necrorhiza, uses wood-feeding
termites as its dispersal agent. Benefits to the termites for consuming G.
necrorhiza remain elusive. Recently, it was discovered G. necrorhiza fruiting
bodies harbor a community of Enterobacteriaceae, which are frequently identified
as important nitrogen-fixing mutualists. This project will test the hypothesis
that G. necrorhiza recruits these bacteria from its local environment as part of
its dispersal strategy. State-of-the-art genetic sequencing technology will be
used to characterize the bacterial communities in G. necrorhiza and substrates
of the local environment to determine if and from where G. necrorhiza is
recruiting bacteria. If G. necorhiza is recruiting specific bacteria, it is
hypothesized that these bacteria fix nitrogen, making the fruiting bodies a rich
source of nitrogen for termites. A series of chemical tests will be performed to
determine if G. necrorhiza fruiting bodies are nitrogen-enriched, and if this
enrichment is due to nitrogen-fixing bacteria that they harbor. If both
hypotheses are supported, the conclusion will be that nitrogen-starved
organisms, such as wood-feeding termites, feed on G. necrorhiza to supplement
their diet and that they subsequently disperse the spores. By using wood-feeding
termites as dispersal agents, G. necrorhiza accomplishes spore dispersal
targeted to its desired substrate, wood.