* 1501589
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The genomic basis of dioecy in Asparagus (Asparagaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* James Leebens-Mack, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2016
* USD 19,300.00

Dioecy -- where plant populations are comprised of separate male and female
individuals -- occurs in an estimated 6% of flowering plant species and has
evolved repeatedly. In at least 39 species and 17 flowering plant families, the
evolution of dioecy is linked to the evolution of specialized chromosomes called
allosomes. However, little is known about the genomic changes that result in the
evolution of allosomes in plants, or the genomic changes that occur after the
formation of these chromosomes. This research will investigate the origin of
allosomes and the subsequent genomic changes during 1-2 million years of
divergence in garden asparagus (Asparagus officinalis). By tracking the
evolution of genes on equivalent chromosomes in related Asparagus species, this
research will elucidate how allosomes have evolved, and how this process may be
contributing to the degeneration of one chromosome within the allosome pair. The
research will result in the training of one graduate student in diverse
systematic methods, and the mentoring of undergraduate students in next-
generation sequencing methods, fluorescent microscopy, and bioinformatics.
Computer code and analysis pipelines resulting from this research will be
disseminated broadly and freely to researchers through open-access websites. The
project will also provide asparagus breeders with molecular markers that could
lead to significant crop improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asparagus
officinalis is an ideal species to investigate factors influencing the evolution
of allosomes from ancestral autosomes. Theory predicts that the origin of
allosomes in plants involves selection for cessation of recombination between at
least two genes: one suppressing the formation of pistils and another promoting
the formation of stamens. This prediction, however, has not yet been empirically
tested. Recent work has identified non-recombining Y-linked regions of the
garden asparagus genome and implicated a single Y-linked gene within this region
as a suppressor of pistil development in male flowers. This research will use
targeted sequence capture to investigate the evolution of this gene across more
than half of Asparagus species, including both hermaphroditic and dioecious
taxa. At the same time, coalescent methods will be employed to reconstruct a
molecular phylogeny for the Asparagus genus using single copy genes. The
resulting phylogeny will provide a historical context for comparative genomic
analyses aimed at reconstructing gene content in the ancestral allosomes and
testing the prediction that mutations in genes promoting stamen development
contributed to the origin of autosomes.