* 1501757
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Making the transition: Comparing avian biogeographic responses to climate change across biomes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Steven Beissinger, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,396.00

This project will examine the impact of warming climate on bird communities in
the Mojave, Sonoran, and Great Basin Deserts. These deserts have different
climates, vegetation, and animal communities, and all have experienced gradually
warmer temperatures over the last fifty years. This study will make use of a
unique resource: systematic counts of desert animals that occurred from 1904 to
1945, before the onset of current warming. These surveys provide an early view
of desert ecosystem health prior to human-caused ecological changes. Re-surveys
at 30 sites across the Great Basin and 69 sites across the Mojave will provide
data on the current abundance of over 100 bird species. This study will evaluate
whether species of the Sonoran and Mojave deserts, which continue to warm, are
expanding into the Great Basin desert, which as warmed less, or whether the area
between the two types of deserts acts as a barrier to expansion of species from
one to the other. This study will also increase knowledge of how the geographic
ranges of individual species respond to climate change by determining if species
shift their ranges independently, resulting in a reshuffling of bird
communities, or if species respond similarly, resulting in entire sets of
species moving their ranges together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a climate change
hotspot (the desert southwest), using a unique historical resource (Grinnell-era
surveys) that allows examination of colonization and extinction processes at a
large spatial scale, this study will quantify how rapid 20th century warming and
drying influence avian biogeographic distributions. Avian re-surveys at 30 sites
in the Great Basin deserts originally visited prior to significant climate
warming will complement re-surveys at 69 desert sites in the Mojave Desert, its
southern transition with the Sonoran, and its northern transition with the Great
Basin desert. This study examines how avian community structure varies over time
and space across warm (Sonoran and Mojave) and cold (Great Basin) deserts, and
how the transition zone between the deserts impacts the biogeographic response
to climate change. Understanding distributional change at the Mojave-Great Basin
transition zone will enable the evaluation of whether species of the warm
deserts are expanding into the cold desert, or whether the transition zone is a
barrier to northward expansion. Barriers to northward expansion for birds could
result in range collapse if the southern limits of warm desert species are also
contracting.