* 1501552
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Apparent competition or anthropogenic over-harvest: hunting in a multi-species context and its impact on species extinctions in Tropical East Asia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* David Wilcove, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,336.00

Tropical forests contain most of the world's bird and mammal species, many of
which are heavily threatened by overhunting. This project seeks to understand
how habitat loss and hunting synergistically affect vertebrate communities.
Doctoral Dissertation Improvement funds will complement ongoing research by
supporting the collection of detailed information on hunter decision-making
behavior, including hunter motivations, their prey preferences, and their
searching strategies. The motivation for hunting - whether for subsistence
livelihood, commercial markets, or recreation - can determine whether or not
excessive hunting is likely to occur. Improved understanding of hunting
behavior, in combination with spatial distribution patterns of different
species, will improve management of hunting throughout the tropics, as well as
in other low-governance areas. Such areas are often committed to the conflicting
goals of biodiversity preservation and access by low-income rural populations to
natural resources. The project will focus on capacity building and knowledge
exchange with local partner institutions, ranging from protected area
administration to research stations with local Chinese and Laotian graduate
students and faculty. It will contribute significantly to training a graduate
student by supporting the integration of social science surveys with existing
field research to address an increasing problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A field
study focusing on hunters and a suite of tropical bird species, ranging from
species that are widely distributed and rarely hunted to those that have been
heavily hunted and occur only in isolated fragments, will be conducted in
Tropical East Asia. The investigators posit that the failure of current models
to manage exploited populations results from the fact that hunting occurs in a
multi-prey context. Common, unprotected prey species can subsidize the
exploitation of rare species, a phenomenon called opportunistic exploitation.
The researchers will adapt multi-species competition and predation models to
include anthropogenic hunting, thereby offering novel predictors for
vulnerability to over-exploitation. Point count transects will describe the
abundance and distribution patterns of avian species within and around protected
areas in Southwest China and Northern Laos. Household interviews of villagers
living within 5km of protected areas will be conducted to assess hunter
behavioral motivations, and hunting techniques and intensity. The field survey
data will inform a mathematical model of multi-species hunting to better
understand how to conserve tropical diversity.