* 1501483
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of nitrogen addition on ectomycorrhizal communities in tropical montane forest
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* James Dalling, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 17,262.00

Tropical forests are renowned for their high biodiversity, with hundreds or even
thousands of tree species living together at a single site. In some tropical
forests, however, a single tree species can outnumber all other species
combined. Recent attempts to explain this one-species dominance have focused on
the role of soil microbes in determining which tree species are common and which
are rare. Attention has been on beneficial associations between trees and fungi
in their roots, called mycorrhizas. A leading idea about why some tropical trees
are so common is that they are uniquely capable of forming associations with
particular types of mycorrhizal fungi that provide access to nitrogen that is
unavailable to less common tree species. Experimental work from a forest in
western Panama is consistent with this hypothesis, leading to the question of
how this plant-mycorrhizal association, and therefore tree community
composition, may be disrupted by increasing rates of nitrogen deposition from
the atmosphere. Will this new and relatively plentiful form of nitrogen make
mycorrhizal fungi unimportant? Effects of nitrogen on the plant-mycorrhizal
association of a dominant tree will be addressed by comparing mycorrhizal fungal
communities in forest plots with and without a treatment of nitrogen
fertilization over the last eight years. This project will also provide training
in fungal genetics and ecology to a graduate student, and research mentoring for
undergraduate students.

The ectomycorrhizal fungal community associated with a dominant canopy tree,
Oreomunnea mexicana, will be characterized in eight forest plots located in
lower montane forest at Fortuna, Panama. Four of the plots have received a
nitrogen addition treatment four times per year since 2008. In each plot, root
samples will be collected from Oreomunnea trees and ectomycorrhizal communities
characterized using Illumina sequencing. It is predicted that nitrogen addition
will reduce the diversity and infection frequency of ectomycorrhizal taxa and
result in a shift in the composition and phylogenetic structure of
ectomycorrhizal communities, favoring lineages known to contain nitrophilic
taxa.