* 1501886
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Delineation of populations, species, and genomic adaptations across a widely distributed venomous snake species complex
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Todd Castoe, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,695.00

Characterizing the diversity and relatedness of life is an important goal of
evolutionary biology, and our understanding of this diversity provides a
framework to address important questions. Many of these questions relate to
adaptations that are evolved over time to better suit organisms to their
environment. In particular, it is little understood whether the same
evolutionary forces and processes may act in a similar manner to produce locally
adapted traits in closely related lineages. Are certain genes or genomic regions
repeatedly targeted by natural selection across species that occupy drastically
different habitats and climates? This research aims to address these questions
using a unique system of North American rattlesnakes, the Crotalus viridis
species complex. Snakes of this group are highly diverse in their coloration,
size, and venom composition, and thrive in diverse ecoregions. This research
program will generate a robust understanding of the evolutionary relationships
among members of this group, which will also provide a contextual framework for
testing hypotheses of how natural selection has driven their diversification.
This research program will then use information collected from throughout the
genomes of these lineages to look for evidence of genes and sets of genes that
are common targets of selection for local
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the systematics of species
complexes can be challenging, but new and robust analytical approaches, together
with large genome-scale datasets from next-generation sequencing technology are
making this challenge increasingly manageable. Despite the difficulties inherent
in studying species complexes, these systems are ideal for linking our
understanding of their biodiversity with the genomic processes that have shaped
their evolution and diversity. This project seeks to make these connections
using a comparative phylogenetic system, the Crotalus viridis species complex.
The research program will generate the first robust species tree for the
complex, which has historically been a problematic group for systematists, using
genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism data. This phylogenetic framework
will then be used as a comparative platform for analyses of genes and genomic
regions under selection within and among lineages. This research will
interrogate the genomes of multiple populations and species to address the
question of whether selection regimes target common loci across such a species
complex, or if genes and functional categories of genes are idiosyncratically
targeted by lineage. Collectively, this research will characterize the
evolutionary history of a diverse and medically relevant venomous snake group
and will add considerably to our knowledge of the roles that adaptation and
convergent evolution play in the generation of biodiversity at multiple scales.