* 1501461
* Algebraic Geometry Approaching Characteristic p
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Bhargav Bhatt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2018
* USD 284,757.00

This research project will contribute to algebraic geometry (the study of
solutions of polynomial equations in several variables). Algebraic geometry is
fundamental to many applications of mathematics -- such as those to physics,
computer science and, more recently, biology -- and was already studied in the
work of the ancient Greeks, if not earlier. However, the subject experienced a
spectacular revival in the recent past, thanks largely to the work of Alexander
Grothendieck and his collaborators. One of the major insights gained from this
work was that the study of "approximate" solutions (in the sense of modular or
"clockwork" arithmetic) to polynomial equations sheds quite a bit of light on
the "true" solutions. In this project, the investigator will expand the
techniques available to study "approximate" solutions, and contribute to
bridging the gap between "approximate" and "true" solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study algebraic geometry in
the positive characteristic and p-adic settings. First, with Morrow and Scholze,
the PI intends to give an algebro-geometric construction of Breuil-Kisin modules
(or p-adic shtukas) associated to p-adic manifolds; this may be viewed as a
p-adic analogue of the association of a Hodge structure to a complex manifold,
and would have new consequences for the cohomology of algebraic varieties.
Secondly, with Scholze, the PI plans to study algebraic geometry over perfect
schemes, and its relation to the h-topology; the sought-for descent result for
vector bundles would be used to construct determinant line bundles for certain
complexes of sheaves that are not linear over the structure sheaf, which will
give a new source of algebraic cycles. Finally, with Esnault and Kindler, the PI
will work on extensions of Gieseker conjecture (relating fundamental groups to
D-modules in characteristic p) and the Grothendieck conjecture (relating
stratifying cohomology with the perfection of coherent cohomology). The central
theme running through all these projects is the systematic use of "large"
objects (such as the pro-etale and h- topologies, perfect and derived schemes)
to study "small" objects (such as torsion in cohomology, or line bundles on
Grassmanians).