* 1501144
* Structure of crossed products by amenable groups and classification of group actions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2018
* N. Christopher Phillips, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 09/30/2018
* USD 180,000.00

The main focus of this project is on dynamical systems. Probably the most
important example is the time evolution of a physical system. Given complete
information about its state at a particular time, one should be able to predict
the state at any later time. If the dynamics is "reversible" (such as in
Newtonian mechanics), one can also determine the state at any previous time. If
there are no outside influences on the system, the new state depends only on the
beginning state and how long the system was allowed to run, not on the
particular time at which it started. (If you plant a seed in the fall, the
result six months later will be different from the result if you plant it in the
spring. However, if the climate were the same year round, the result six months
later would be the same regardless of when you plant.) This setup is an example
of an action of the group of real numbers: the set of possible lengths of time
the system is allowed to run. Actions of other groups are also important. The
group of integers corresponds to taking time in discrete steps, which is
sometimes appropriate and is mathematically simpler. Other groups arise from
symmetry in a system or from entirely different considerations. One main goal of
this project is to better understand certain kinds of dynamical systems, at this
stage primarily discrete ones but for which the groups can be otherwise
complicated. One direction is to understand the relation between the system and
a particular algebraic object, the so-called crossed product, constructed from
the system. Another direction is the complete description in a special case (in
which the collection of objects of the system is very complicated but the group
is actually finite) of all possible systems.

The largest component of this project involves relating the properties of a
minimal and essentially free action of a countable amenable group on a compact
metric space to the structure of its crossed product. The plan is to push
forward the boundaries of our knowledge in two two particular directions: (1)
relating the mean dimension of a minimal homeomorphism to the radius of
comparison of the crossed product (simplest group, namely, the integers, and
most complicated space) and (2) proving regularity properties when the group is
arbitrary but the space is the Cantor set (simplest space, most complicated
group). It is also hoped that related methods will help with actions on simple
C*-algebras when the action has the tracial Rokhlin property. The next component
is the classification of pointwise outer actions of finite groups on purely
infinite simple separable nuclear C*-algebras, a much larger class of actions
than the ones already classified (those with the Rokhlin property). The third
component is the study of operator algebras on Lebesgue spaces with exponent
different from two. This is a new field which turns out to be unexpectedly rich.