* 1501693
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing adaptative capacity in response to climate change: terrestrial salamanders in an urban heat island mesocosm
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Brenna Forester, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,648.00

This research will provide insights into the capacity of species to adapt to
fragmented and warming habitats, and so inform actions that will be most
effective in conserving biodiversity under climate change. Faced with changing
climate, organisms either adapt in place or move to track conditions that they
are adapted to. In the absence of these responses, they may go locally extinct.
Relative to movement, adaptation in response to environmental change remains
poorly understood in wild populations. Fortunately the recent development of
genetic techniques for detecting adaptation in nature has made it easier to
evaluate this response. Collaborations established under this project include
educational outreach through the Duke Forest Office, North Carolina Central
University, and the Scientific Research and Education
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the capacity of a
terrestrial salamander (Plethodon cinereus) to respond to local variability in
temperature via adaptation. In the Piedmont of North Carolina, local heat
islands resulting from development provide habitats that are substantially
warmer than natural forests. This history of development has resulted in local
warming over timescales ranging from &lt;10 to &gt;100 years, providing a quasi-
experimental gradient in exposure time to elevated temperatures. Genetic
variation within and among salamander populations will be assessed at a genome-
wide scale using reduced representation, next-generation genomic sequencing
methods. In combination with environmental covariates, novel genotype-
environment outlier detection analyses will be used to partition genomic data
into neutral and potentially adaptive variation; these data sets allow for the
measurement of gene flow within and between populations and local adaptation,
respectively. Integration of these data uses a Bayesian approach for modeling
the covariance in neutral or adaptive allele frequencies as functions of
geographic and environmental distances. Gene flow is assessed via covariance of
neutral genetic markers on graph-theoretic estimates of geographic separation;
local adaptation is measured in terms of covariance of genetic markers under
selection on environmental dissimilarity. Relative effect sizes will identify
instances of dispersal subsidy or isolation of better-adapted genotypes, as
represented by locations where landscape configuration or the pace of
development interferes with the ability of the resident salamanders to track
local climate.