* 1501134
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Comparative Phylogeography and Thermal Ecology of Puerto Rican Anoles
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Adam Leache, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2017
* USD 16,380.00

This research project investigates the phylogeography of thermal adaptation in
Anolis lizards from Puerto Rico. On Puerto Rico, sister-species are
morphologically similar but they are divergent in thermal biology, indicating
that thermal adaptation has been important for their evolution. Recent models
predict that some tropical ectotherms will be unable to adapt fast enough during
climate change and therefore they face extinction. This research investigates
the processes that lead to local adaptation and provides an important genetic
baseline for future studies investigating changes in population genetics,
migration, and selection due to anthropogenic climate change. By combining
research with training of undergraduates at the University of Washington and the
University of Puerto Rico, this proposal provides opportunities for future
scientists to learn techniques in field biology and molecular genetics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining physiological experiments and genomic
techniques, this research aims to understand the relationship between thermal
adaptation and lineage divergence. The goals of this study are: (1) determine
how multiple physiologically divergent sister-species evolved, (2) illuminate
the phylogeographic and gene flow patterns of species that span thermal
gradients, and (3) investigate the relationship between thermoregulation and
natural selection. The project uses a multi-species comparative framework to
understand the common demographic processes, such as rates of gene flow,
geographic isolation, and divergent selection, that generate and maintain local
thermally-adapted populations. This research will advance the fields of
statistical phylogeography and ecophysiology by utilizing next-generation
sequencing and novel analytical methods to test complex models of population
divergence and local adaptation. By investigating thermal adaptation in nascent
lineages, the results will add the growing literature on the potential for
thermal adaptation in tropical ectotherms.