* 1501892
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Consequences of Food Assessment and Cache Placement on Social Competition and Cache Pilfering in a Scatter-hoarding Tree Squirrel
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Lucia Jacobs, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,390.00

Many animals hoard their food, hiding food items in various locations in order
to retrieve them at a later date, for example, when resources are scarce.
Scatter-hoarding animals store each food item in a different location and often
engage in protective behaviors that may prevent their food stores (caches) from
being stolen. These behaviors include handling food items extensively before
burying them, travelling away from competitors to bury food, and carefully
covering caches. Scatter-hoarding fox squirrels (Sciurus niger) perform unique
behaviors (head flicks, paw manipulations) that allow them to determine the
weight and value of individual food items and protect their caches accordingly.
By using Global Positioning System (GPS) and tracking technology, behavioral
observations, and DNA testing, the researchers will explore how these food
protection behaviors contribute to successful cache retrieval or prevent theft
of caches by other squirrels. This study also will explore whether individuals
are more or less likely to steal from their relatives. The proposed research
will fill a gap in the animal behavior literature by advancing our understanding
of how animals recover food they have buried, and illuminating whether scatter-
hoarding animals provide for their offspring or close relatives by allowing
theft of their caches.

Studies of scatter-hoarding animals have yet to address key questions: do cache
protection strategies deter theft by pilferers and help scatter-hoarding animals
recover their caches? Fox squirrels (Sciurus niger) perform unique assessment
behaviors (head flicks, paw manipulations) that allow them to adjust investments
in caches. The proposed studies will determine how a squirrel's assessment of
food is related to its investment in a cache, and whether these behaviors reduce
pilferage. This study will use GPS data and radio-telemetry/passive transponders
to measure caching and pilfering behavior. They will also amplify and sequence
established microsatellite loci to estimate genetic relatedness and incorporate
relatedness into models of cache retrieval and pilferage. Food-storing animals
engage in cache protection behaviors because theft is common. Previous studies
have failed to examine the complex relationship between food assessment, cache
protection, social context and the long-term fate of caches. Moreover, most
studies utilize artificial caches made by humans or laboratory animals. This
field study will use an innovative, interdisciplinary approach to examine the
pilferage of caches made by free-ranging squirrels. This study also will examine
the relationship between kin selection and pilferage tolerance, support for
which would have major implications for our understanding of scatter-hoarding
and social behavior. All data and analyses will be made available via published
manuscripts, conference presentations, reports to the NSF and otherwise as
suggested by NSF guidelines.