* 1501133
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effects of changing rainfall patterns on nitrogen cycling and leaching losses in agroecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Pamela Matson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,536.00

Rainfall patterns are currently changing in the midwestern U.S., with an
increasing proportion of rain falling in very heavy rain events. This
intensification of rainfall patterns may have important consequences for rain-
fed agriculture. In particular, intensification of rainfall may alter the
availability and losses of soil nitrogen. Nitrogen is an essential crop
nutrient, but it is also very mobile. Only about half the nitrogen added to soil
in fertilizer is taken up by crops, with much of the remainder lost to the
environment. Leaching is one of the most important pathways through which
nitrogen is lost, with possible negative consequences including groundwater
contamination and algae blooms and dead zones in rivers, lakes, and the coastal
ocean. This research explores how more intense rainfall patterns may affect
nitrogen leaching from Midwestern agricultural ecosystems. The project also
seeks to identify management practices which may mitigate enhanced nitrogen
leaching in the face of climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
be conducted using an ecosystem-scale rainfall manipulation experiment at the
Kellogg Biological Station Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site in
southwest Michigan. Agricultural fields under conventional and no-till
management are exposed to ambient rainfall as well as rainfall patterns with
extended dry periods and large, simulated rainfall events. Leaching will be
estimated with tension lysimeters to measure soil water nitrogen concentrations,
and a model to estimate soil water flux. Deep soil sampling to 1.2m will trace
the movement of nitrate down the soil profile over the course of a year and in
response to individual rainfall events. The results will be shared with
extension specialists, policymakers, and other local stakeholders and will
provide opportunities for mentoring undergraduates.