* 1501680
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Male fitness in a single cell: The evolutionary significance of male reproductive cell morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Ariel Kahrl, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,475.00

The goals of this project are to understand how natural selection acts on male
reproductive cell characteristics both within and among species. A central aim
of evolutionary biology is describing the sources of diversity in traits within
and among species. Traits that confer an advantage in securing a mate are often
highly diverse. Though historically research has focused on extravagant traits,
such as plumage or horn size, relatively little research has focused on such
traits directly involved in fertilization. The male reproductive cell is the
most diverse cell type among animals, ranging from a few micrometers in some
species to 6 cm in length in others, and is central to male reproductive
success. Because males of all animal species produce such cells, studying them
provides a unique model for exploring how selection shapes the evolution a trait
critical for fertilization across the animal kingdom. The project goals will be
achieved through a combination of field work, microscopy, and new genomic
methods for identifying paternity in a population of nearly two thousand
lizards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;My proposed studies will test the hypothesis that
the strength and direction of selection on traits within a species will be
mirrored in patterns of evolution among species. This project is broken into
three aims: 1) testing for correlated evolutionary changes between male
reproductive cell morphology and proxies for both pre and post-copulatory
selection, 2) measuring phenotypic plasticity and fitness consequences of
morphology within a species and 3) measuring selection on morphology, quantity
and quality in a wild population. The proposed improvement (aim 3), will allow
for the measurement of selection on these traits in a wild population of brown
anole lizards using recently developed genomic methods for constructing
pedigrees. Together, these projects will integrate microevolutionary processes
with macroevolutionary patterns to better understand the evolution of the male
gamete.