* 1501799
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Examining conflicting selection pressures on floral morphology of Silene stellata by the pollinating seed predator Hadena ectypa
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Charles Fenster, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 19,365.00

Animal pollinators are thought to produce conflicting selective pressures on
different structures within the flowers they pollinate. This study will
investigate the differing selection pressures on stamens and pistils within
flowers of Silene stellata, a native perennial herb, by Hadena ectypa, a
nocturnal moth that acts as a pollinator as well as a seed predator of Silene.
This is a pioneering study into the largely unexplored area of conflicting
selective pressures on different aspects of floral morphology within a
hermaphroditic plant species and will provide valuable insights into the
evolution of floral diversity. In addition, this project will test and optimize
the application of a genetic technique to estimate reproductive success of the
pollen donor. The project provides excellent training opportunities for the
graduate student and will also involve several undergraduate research assistants
and high school interns in all of molecular biology and genetic
aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will build on two successive years
of field experiments to investigate phenotypic selection on stamens and pistils
in flowers of Silene stellata, This project will develop and employ 24 highly
variable microsatellite genetic markers to assess reproductive success of the
pollen donor within 2138 seedlings germinated from a population of 231 tagged
adult individuals. Success of the pollen donor will then be estimated by
determining the multi-locus genotypes of the seedlings and the adult plants. The
high resolution genotyping required to determine the identity of the pollen
donor within a tetraploid such as Silene stellata necessitates the development
of additional genetic markers. These new markers will facilitate future genetic
studies of Silene stellata and will provide a model approach for other
researchers investigating the genetics of poorly known, polyploidy species.