* 1501164
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Metabolic Resource Partitioning: Scaling Microbial Physiology from Individual Activity to Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Jay Lennon, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,004.00

Human impacts have altered the movement of resources within and across
landscapes. Resources drive population dynamics, mediate ecological
interactions, and are the currency governing elemental cycles such as the carbon
cycle. For the most part, these cycles are controlled by microorgranisms. This
project focuses on the physiology and diversity of aquatic microorganisms that
use terrestrially-derived dissolved organic carbon, which over the past 30 years
has been increasing in concentration in lakes and streams, causing them to turn
brown. Not only is this "browning" unpleasant to look at, it represents a major
change in the function of critically important earth
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this research project
are to link the diversity, physiology, and metabolic capacity of microorganisms
to resource transformations in the environment. These goals will be addressed by
focusing on resource specialization within communities, the abundance and
activity of microbial specialists, and how they affect ecosystem functions. The
proposed research project will achieve these goals by linking the diversity and
physiology of specialized microorganisms to ecosystem functioning, specifically
the carbon cycle. To accomplish this, the project will address the following
questions: 1) How does variation in microbial metabolic activity influence the
transformation rate and the fate of resources? 2) Do microbial diversity and
metabolic activity provide insight into resource specialization and the
transformation of resources? The project will use a combination of isotope-
labeled resource tracking and single-cell approaches to understanding microbial
metabolic activity and diversity. These techniques provide increased ability to
track resources, such as terrestrially dissolved organic carbon, and to
understand the physiology and diversity of specialized microorganisms. As such,
the proposed project addresses how microbial activity, physiology, and diversity
relate to ecosystem functions and the fate of resources.