* 1501803
* Dissertation Research: The evolutionary significance of autopolyploidy in Tolmiea (Saxifragaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Clayton Visger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,353.00

This research will investigate the evolutionary consequences of whole-genome
duplication in the flowering plant genus Tolmiea. Duplication occurs when an
offspring ends up with two copies of all of the chromosomes of its parents.
Genome duplications have occurred frequently within the flowering plants
(300,000+ species), and likely contributed to their success. Most agricultural
crops are the result of one or more recent duplication events, including wheat,
cotton, corn, potato, and sugarcane. Thus, the research will be of broad
importance in agriculture as well as the study of
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tolmiea (Saxifragaceae) contains one
polyploid, T. menziesii that arose directly from the single diploid in the
genus, T. diplomenziesii. Ongoing work found divergence both in abiotic niche
preference and physiological water stress responses between diploid and
autotetraploid Tolmiea. In concert with other ecophysiological investigations,
this research will characterize the role autopolyploidy has played in the
divergence of gene expression patterns using a common garden experiment
consisting of multiple populations and multiple water-stress treatments. This
study will: 1) provide insights into genome-wide patterns of gene expression in
a natural autopolyploid compared to its diploid parent, 2) evaluate the
variation and responsiveness of gene expression levels to the presence and
absence of water-stress, and 3) use synthetic polyploid lines to determine
whether these changes are the immediate effect of polyploidy or the result of
subsequent evolution. This study will increase our understanding of gene
expression changes resulting from autopolyploidy, and will provide valuable
information for future breeding management and improvement of autopolyploid
crops.