* 1501041
* Research in Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Mehmet Burak Erdogan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

The principal investigator will undertake research in harmonic analysis and in
the analysis of partial differential equations (PDE). Harmonic analysis has
played major roles in the pure and applied sciences since Fourier's seminal work
on the theory of heat diffusion, continuing on with Schrodinger's equation in
quantum mechanics. It underlies a diverse array of tools widely used in science
and engineering, and it offers the promise of further applications in the
future. The proposed research deals with foundational issues that may help to
underpin future applications. In PDE, the project will study the long-time
dynamical properties of several fundamental equations describing diverse
physical phenomenon. In particular, the nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLS)
models the transmission of data in fiber optic communication systems, and the
Korteweg-de Vries equation (KdV) models surface water waves as well as ion-
acoustic waves in a cold plasma. The so-called fractional NLS is used as a model
describing charge transport in bio polymers like DNA. Proposed problems on near-
linear behavior and smoothing are directly motivated by real world engineering
problems in fiber optic communication systems, and the methods used are likely
to be useful in a range of applications.

In harmonic analysis this project focuses on problems in Euclidean spaces
centered around Lebesgue norm inequalities. One subject of on-going research is
the Fourier restriction phenomenon and its applications to problems in PDE and
geometric measure theory. In the PDE component of the project, the focus is on
the dynamical properties of linear and nonlinear dispersive equations. Subjects
of interest here are dispersive decay and smoothing estimates for Schrodinger
and wave equations, and their applications to the stability problem for their
nonlinear counterparts. Another topic is the regularity properties of the
solutions of nonlinear dispersive PDE such as the KdV equation, the Zakharov
system, and the fractional NLS. The principal investigator will continue to
explore the smoothing effect of the dispersive linear group on bounded domains,
and he will study applications to the regularity properties and long-time
dynamics of the nonlinear solutions. Proposed applications are on the existence
and regularity of global attractors, dispersive quantization/Talbot effect,
bounds for higher order Sobolev norms, and controllability.