* 1501655
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Reproductive Consequences of Cooperation in a Polygynous Ant
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Brian Haney, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2017
* USD 17,689.00

Social groups are built around cooperation, in which individuals work together
to benefit the group. Human success as a social species is built around this
mutual benefit, but we know little about its evolution and maintenance.
Cooperative groups risk being vulnerable to cheating, if a group member takes
advantage of the effort of others to secure a disproportionate amount of
resources. In groups of relatives, these effects can be offset by kinship.
However, the costs and benefits of cooperation among non-relatives are more
difficult to assess and explain. The California harvester ant provides a rare
opportunity to examine the costs and benefits of cooperation among non-
relatives. In this species, some queens practice primary polygyny, in which
unrelated queens cooperatively build a new nest and rear offspring together,
forming what is essentially a multi-family colony. The proposed work will
investigate what ecological conditions favor the evolution of cooperation in
this species, and how these cooperative societies deal with the possibility of
cheating by some group members. The proposed research will be combined with
undergraduate training, in which students participate in field and laboratory
research. This builds on a record of mentoring excellence by the principal
investigator and graduate student. The researchers will also work in conjunction
with the local parks department to provide educational materials highlighting
this unusual ant population. This research is fundamental to our understanding
of social evolution, and may provide insight into the issues of cooperation and
conflict in human societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work has shown that
colonies in the polygynous population have lower reproductive output than those
in a nearby population without polygyny. This suggests polygyny may be a
functional response to local environmental constraints. Polygynous colonies also
face issues of cheating, if reproduction is non-equitably distributed among
queens. Interpretation of these findings is limited, because the polygynous and
single-queen populations investigated so far are in different environments. The
researchers will quantify the reproductive output of single- versus multi-queen
colonies within a single population, to determine whether variation in
reproduction is environmentally driven, or an intrinsic colony attribute. This
analysis will be combined with a food supplement experiment, to determine
whether reproduction in polygynous colonies is resource limited. Finally,
relative queen contributions to reproduction versus worker production within
polygynous colonies will be analyzed via microsatellites, to determine whether
queens share in reproduction equitably. If not, this suggests that subtle
cheating may be taking place within these cooperative associations. Data will be
stored locally and on ASU server space for a minimum of 5 years, with the
expectation of permanently archiving them. Data will be indexed and made
available to an open source data depository after publication.