* 1501208
* Supermassive Star Collapse: Probing a Pathway to Supermassive Black Hole Formation
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Christine Moran, Moran                   Christine      C
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 01/31/2018
* USD 165,895.00

Christine Corbett Moran is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics
Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the
California Institute of Technology. Upcoming space missions will enable
astronomers to observationally test theoretical models for supermassive black
hole (SMBH) growth for the first time. How SMBHs formed so quickly, during the
first billion years of the Universe, remains a central puzzle of cosmology and
galaxy evolution. One candidate formation pathway is through supermassive stars
(SMSs) that could have formed in the direct collapse of primordial gas clouds.
At the end of their lifetimes, the collapse of SMSs may result in black holes
with seed masses large enough to be the progenitors of SMBHs; powerful
thermonuclear explosions with no remnants; or black hole-explosion combinations.
Yet our understanding of SMS collapse, its set of outcomes, and their signatures
is in its infancy. Moran's research program will comprehensively address SMS
evolution, producing predictions that can be tested by upcoming missions to help
untangle the formation channel of SMBHs. Moran's program also includes a
significant educational component, which will give a computing school, the
Summer Space Programming Challenge to Pasadena area high school students and
teachers.

Much theoretical work is still needed to understand SMS collapse/explosion
dynamics and to predict their observational multimessenger (electromagnetic,
gravitational wave, neutrino, nucleosynthetic) signatures in preparation and
support of upcoming space missions such as the NASA James Webb Space Telescope,
the NASA Wide-Field Infrared Survey Telescope, and the ESA Euclid mission. SMS
collapse is a promising pathway to SMBH formation, yet its simulation with the
necessary microphysics (stellar equation of state, nuclear reactions) and
approximate or full general relativity has thus far been limited to spherical or
axial symmetry, completely ignoring magnetic fields and 3D dynamics. Lightcurve
and spectral modeling has only been performed for a single SMS explosion model.
Moran's research program will comprehensively address SMS evolution through
collapse and potential explosion in 3D general relativistic magnetohydrodynamic
simulations with detailed microphysics, producing observables across the SMS
parameter space spanned by mass, metallicity, rotation, and magnetization.
Necessary code development in support of the program will be released as open
source. The broader impact of the program includes the Summer Space Programming
Challenge, in which students and teachers will gain further interest in space
research, concrete computational skills, a project portfolio, and open source
curriculum materials.