* 1501266
* Dissertation Research: Plant Ecology in Changing Climate, Patterns of species loss and spring phenology in Acadia National Park, Maine
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Richard Primack, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 12,818.00

This project seeks to understand how plant species in Acadia National Park,
Maine are responding to climate change. Research in southern New England has
found a connection between phenology - the timing of biological events - and
species loss in plant communities. Plants with flexible flowering phenology
(i.e. blooming earlier in warmer years, and later in cooler years) are less
likely to decline in abundance or disappear from the landscape. In Acadia, the
researchers used historical data from the late 19th century to record patterns
in species loss over the past 120 years. This project will monitor leaf out and
flowering phenology in Acadia to record how plants are responding to changing
temperatures and explore connections between phenology and species loss. The
researchers will work with undergraduates from Maine colleges and universities
to monitor leaf out and flowering phenology for thirty plant species on three
observational transects that traverse three peaks within the National Park, as
well as three experimental transplant gardens along an elevational gradient
along one peak. In addition, the researchers will develop a citizen science
opportunity for hikers to participate in this research on the three peaks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a demonstrated connection between advancing
spring plant phenology and warming temperatures in temperate northeast North
America. However, plants display differential phenological responses to warming
depending on taxa, population, habitat, elevation, and/or geographic location.
Phenology is a key plant trait included in many climate vulnerability assessment
methods, but its use in these assessments has not been rigorously evaluated, in
part because researchers need a better understanding of the environmental
controls on phenology at a species level. Here this is achieved through an
interdisciplinary approach merging historical ecology, observational and
experimental fieldwork, and citizen science in Acadia National Park. In this
project, observational monitoring on transects will quantify the relationship
between spring temperatures and shifts in phenology at the species level for a
community of thirty common plant species in Acadia. Researchers will use these
results to facilitate a regional comparison of phenology and species loss for
conspecific populations in Acadia versus Concord, Massachusetts. Three
reciprocal transplant gardens at three elevations on one peak will test the
relative effects of environmental cues and genetic differences at the population
level on spring phenology for three understory plant species in Acadia. This
project will further our understanding of the ecological effects of climate
change, educate visitors about climate change research, and inform resource
management in Acadia National Park.