* 1501826
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Diversity and Functions of Interactions between the Liverwort Marchantia polymorpha and its Fungal Endophytes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jessica Nelson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,658.00

Plants are defining components of natural ecosystems where they provide habitats
for other organisms and influence the composition of soils and the atmosphere.
Fungi, though less conspicuous, significantly affect the success of living
plants in addition to breaking down dead matter. Fungi that live inside healthy
plants, called fungal endophytes (hereafter simply endophytes), can benefit
plants in many ways, including promoting growth, enhancing disease resistance,
and increasing resilience to extreme conditions such as drought. Therefore,
understanding how endophytes interact with their host plants is critical for
managing wild ecosystems as well as increasing productivity in forestry and
agriculture as plants respond to extreme weather in a changing climate.
Endophytes have been found in nearly all plants sampled to date but there are
few direct studies of the mechanisms behind their functions. This project
investigates the diversity and functions of endophytes in a liverwort. This
project will sample the diversity of endophytes in a model liverwort, Marchantia
polymorpha, and investigate what factors influence this diversity. M. polymorpha
grows well in the laboratory, so this project will directly test the effects of
individual endophytes. Using genetic methods, the researcher will identify
possible mechanisms behind the observed interactions. In addition, the study
system developed in this project will provide many future opportunities for
plant-endophyte interaction research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
collect Marchantia polymorpha plants from ten populations across the USA and
characterize the diversity of the liverworts and their endophytes. Liverwort
genotypes will be assessed using Restriction-site Associated DNA sequencing
(RAD-seq) to sample sites throughout the genome. Internal fungal diversity will
be sampled by surface sterilizing whole M. polymorpha plants, extracting total
DNA, then amplifying and sequencing a fungal barcoding gene region. The
researchers will test for correlations between fungal community diversity and
composition, host genotypes, and population locations. These data will provide
an ecological context for previous experiments testing the effects of cultured
endophytes on M. polymorpha in laboratory growth assays. To investigate the
mechanisms behind the liverwort-endophyte interactions observed in the
laboratory, the researchers will sequence the transcriptomes of the plant and
selected fungi when grown alone and together. Four fungi will be used: a growth-
enhancing fungus, a detrimental fungus, and close relatives of each which show a
neutral interaction. Comparing the levels of gene expression between the
treatments and controls will allow the researcher to form hypotheses about which
cellular systems may be important in controlling the observed interactions.