* 1501938
* Collaborative Research: Providing an Adaptive Learning Environment for the Acquisition of High Value Manufacturing Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Norma Perez, Houston Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 349,999.00

This project is developing an adaptive learning environment for a wide range of
students to attain skills necessary to work in high value manufacturing (HVM)
aimed at the energy industry. Houston Community College's (HCC) Petroleum and
Manufacturing Engineering Technology programs and Texas A&amp;M University's
Department of Engineering Technology and Industrial Distribution are working to
create a sustainable certificate program in HVM that provides multiple pathways
for community college students while meeting the critical workforce needs of a
vital industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative pedagogical methods, such as i)
competency-based learning and ii) skills needs assessment and provision through
online learning modules, allow students an adaptive and personalized education.
By incorporating the new Engineering Academy paradigm, as opposed to traditional
articulation agreements, this project provides a novel pathway for community
college students to transition to a four-year degree program. It also
incorporates a new method for trying to ensure that HCC students who matriculate
to TAMU receive reverse transfer credit for their associate degrees at HCC. HVM
modules are being developed for high school students that are aligned with the
Next Generation Science Standards as part of a summer program for teachers. HCC
is an open-access institution where over 70% of the students belong to under-
represented minority groups and over half of students receive Pell grants.
Offering the HVM certificate program at HCC allows underrepresented students a
pathway to these high demand STEM careers.