* 1501823
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Bats in the agricultural matrix: impacts on diversity, distribution and ecosystem services
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Elissa Olimpi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,054.00

Agricultural land use change transforms landscapes from complex, natural habitat
to simple, agricultural systems. These landscape changes negatively affect bats,
and may result in the loss of agricultural pest suppression by insectivorous
bats. In California's Central Coast, the fertile soil and temperate climate are
ideal for growing high-value crops, such as fruits and vegetables, but the
region is also important habitat for wildlife, including 16 species of bats.
Bats are voracious insect predators and protecting bats in agricultural areas
can help to control pests and reduce the need for pesticides. This research
investigates which farm management practices are bat-friendly and could promote
bat-mediated pest suppression, and which practices may deter bats from visiting
certain farms.

The researchers will use meta-analysis, observational and experimental field
methods, and new lab technologies to examine the multi-scalar effects of
agricultural intensification on insectivorous bats and bat-insect interactions.
Ultrasonic recorders will be used to reveal patterns of bat diversity, and a
novel technique (removal of tethered moths) will be tested and described to
document bat removal of pests in the field. Bats will be tracked using radio
telemetry to map home ranges and understand foraging ecology. Fecal DNA analysis
will be used to characterize bat diets and identify trophic linkages between
bats and agriculturally important insect pests. Understanding spillover effects
between natural and managed systems is relevant to conservation biologists,
agroecologists, and land managers. This research will allow for relative
valuation of entire bat communities, and the knowledge generated will promote
conservation of these charismatic organisms. Research findings will be shared
with scientists and the public through scientific journals, conferences, and
outreach to local farming communities about bat conservation. In addition, the
research will incorporate individual mentoring of women and minority students,
and high-school curriculum development for students in a migrant, Latino
community. Undergraduate assistants from UC Santa Cruz's diverse student body
will be encouraged to develop synergies between this research and potential
thesis projects.