* 1501024
* Function theory in CR geometry and partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Yuan Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2020
* USD 118,348.00

Function theory in complex analysis has important applications to other branches
of mathematics including algebraic geometry, applied mathematics, as well as to
other disciplines, such as physics and engineering. For instance, in problems
arising from electric fields, various geometric conditions can always be
expressed in terms of functions of complex variables. By employing appropriate
conformal maps, many inconvenient geometric configurations can be transformed to
rather easy formats and hence be completely solved. Some other types of real-
world phenomena are modeled as solutions to certain partial differential
equations. Methods developed in complex analysis, such as Fourier analysis, have
played fundamental roles in solving those equations and giving interpretations
for solutions. The current project will address related problems in holomorphic
function theory. Progress of the project will help us understand more precisely
properties of conformal maps in higher dimensions and explore new methods that
can be applied into other fields.

The PI proposes to study a variety of problems in several complex variables and
the corresponding partial differential equations, together with her
collaborators. More specifically, the PI will investigate rigidity and
classification problems of CR embeddings between some special types of CR
manifolds, such as (generalized) Heisenberg hypersurfaces. Since transversality
property of CR mappings is closely related to CR embeddability, she also plans
to continue the work on CR transversality along the line of the conjecture of
Baouendi-Huang for Levi non-degenerate hypersurfaces of higher codimension. On
the aspect of partial differential equations, the PI will work on regularity of
solutions to Cauchy-Riemann equations over pseudoconvex domains through the
method of integral representation theory. The method will involve strong
correlation between holomorphic function theory and the geometry of the domains.
The PI is also interested in the regularity problem for solutions to some
Beltrami equations, as well as solvability and regularity to some general types
of nonlinear elliptic complex partial differential equations on Heisenberg
hypersurfaces.