* 1501422
* Mapping the Primordial Universe in Unprecedented Detail with POLARBEAR
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Darcy Barron, Barron                  Darcy
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2018
* USD 278,000.00

Darcy Barron is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
California, Berkeley. Barron will work on the expansion of the NSF-funded
POLARBEAR project, which is mapping the cosmic microwave background (CMB) from
its site in the Atacama desert in Chile. The CMB is the first light from our
primordial universe, generated by the thermal glow from the Big Bang.
Measurements of the CMB have been essential to our current understanding of the
universe's formation, but there is still more to discover with detailed
measurements of its polarization properties. The CMB field has reached an
important milestone with several experiments, including POLARBEAR, making
detections of a unique polarization pattern resulting from gravitational
distortions. This signal is so faint that these detections required years-long
"exposures" of a small patch of sky. Making detailed maps of this signal across
the sky will enable significant advances in our understanding of the structure
of our universe and its origins. Alongside this work, Barron will run an
outreach program focused on cultivating basic research skills and interest in
STEM with high school and community college students.

The POLARBEAR project is expanding from one telescope observing at a single
wavelength, to an array of three 3.5 meter telescopes with larger, broader
bandwidth cameras. This expansion will enable a detailed survey of microwave
polarization across 65% of the sky, at three different wavelengths. Barron will
focus on development and observations with the new camera that will be sensitive
to both the peak CMB wavelength and a shorter wavelength where Galactic emission
can overwhelm the CMB signal. These simultaneous measurements will be used to
monitor the Galactic contamination in the survey areas, so that the underlying
primordial CMB polarization signal can be extracted. This camera will be
developed and characterized at UC Berkeley before being deployed to the Chilean
site. The cameras for these microwave telescopes involve complex cryogenic and
electronic systems, reading out large numbers of sensitive superconducting
detectors, kept at a temperature of 0.25 Kelvin. Students in the outreach
program will get hands-on experience with software and hardware development
through self-directed radio astronomy projects, applying the same fundamentals
that go into the development of the POLARBEAR cameras.