* 1501788
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The fitness landscape of a yeast tRNA gene
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Chuan Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2017
* USD 19,571.00

Mutation provides the raw material for all genetic variation and evolution. How
those mutations affect the fitness of an individual and the distribution of
those fitness effects, known as the fitness landscape, is of fundamental
importance for understanding almost all evolutionary processes. This project
will explore the fitness landscapes of a yeast gene. The data will offer
unprecedented details of the fitness effects of mutations, including properties
of genetic interaction among mutations, and provide an invaluable opportunity to
test many theoretical models. These models are applied to many important
phenomena such as the basis of genetic diseases, the origins of multidrug
resistance in pathogens, and the domestication of animals and plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the fitness landscape of the tRNA-
ARG gene in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and studies epistasis between
point mutations in the gene. The study will generate approximately 100,000 yeast
strains, each carrying, at its native genomic location, a variant of the tRNA
gene that has on average two single nucleotide changes compared to the wild-
type. The fitness values of approximately 20,000 genotypes will be measured en
masse by a sensitive high-throughput method, and epistasis will be estimated for
a large number of mutation pairs. This study offers a rare opportunity to
understand the biophysical basis of epistasis and fitness effects of mutations,
because tRNA function is largely determined by its secondary structure, which
can be computationally predicted with high accuracy. Further, fitness landscapes
and epistasis will be quantified under multiple conditions to understand
genotype by environment interactions. In addition, the expressions of different
tRNA variants will be probed to better understand how the internal promoter of
the tRNA works and how fitness is affected by the expression level of the tRNA.