* 1501177
* University of Tulsa Cyber Corps Initiative -- Training the Next Generation of MacGyvers
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2024
* Sujeet Shenoi, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 7,077,302.00

The University of Tulsa proposes to add four new cohorts of undergraduate and
graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program in cybersecurity with a strong background in computer science,
engineering, business and law. The program integrates rigorous, hands-on
learning with research, professional development and outreach activities. The
students will serve as summer interns to gain practical experience and will join
federal agencies or other eligible entities upon graduation. The Tulsa Program
offers multiple technical and interdisciplinary tracks, each characterized by a
focused, yet flexible, program of study. The intense "MacGyver Track" imparts
reverse engineering and cyber operations skills geared for the intelligence
community. Other tracks prepare students for research, operations and project
management. The interdisciplinary M.B.A. and Law Tracks combine business and law
classes, respectively, with six cyber security and systems courses. The common
thread is the "Teaching Hospital Model" -- hands-on courses involving real-world
projects with law enforcement, the intelligence community and critical
infrastructure owners and operators, and strong collaboration with embedded
government personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program components are designed
to have a broad and lasting impact. Existing efforts to engage members of
underrepresented groups and non-traditional students will be intensified, and
arrangements to accept community college graduates will be expanded.
CyberCorps(R) students will collaborate on real-world projects with federal
agency personnel to gain practical experience and enhance internship and job
placement prospects. Other innovative aspects of the proposal are (1) diverse
studies, ranging from computer science and chemical engineering to business and
law, all built around a strong cybersecurity core; (2) flexible program
components that prepare students for careers in intelligence, research,
operations, project management, enterprise security, and law and policy; and (3)
integration of traditional, non-traditional and underrepresented students in an
inclusive and collaborative learning culture. The project will also offer
sustained mentoring and student involvement in community service and outreach
activities.