* 1501814
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Do trait correlations and demographic stochasticity alter the dynamics of evolutionarily-accelerated invasions?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Thomas Miller, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 17,458.00

The speed at which species spread across a landscape is often under-predicted
because researchers do not acknowledge that dispersal and reproductive rates can
respond due to natural selection. When the expansion of a harmful invasive
species or a rare re-introduced species is under-predicted, societal
implications can be significant. This project will correct chronic under-
prediction of species' spread by measuring genetic correlations between
dispersal and fecundity. Accounting for the effects of natural selection on
range expansion will significantly improve management of invasive species by
providing accurate estimates of their spread. The project will improve the
research and training of a promising young investigator. Two undergraduate
students will be trained in experimental, computational, and mathematical
ecology. The researchers will develop lessons for Texas middle-school students
from minority and economically-disadvantaged backgrounds to teach the causes and
consequences of biological invasions, highlighting the importance of rapid
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During range expansion, individuals become
spatially sorted by dispersal ability. Populations at the leading edge are
dominated by highly dispersive individuals that mate assortatively. Spatial
sorting will increase dispersal in leading edge populations over generations
when dispersal is heritable, resulting in evolutionarily-accelerated invasions.
Edge populations also occur at low conspecific densities, gaining a reproductive
advantage. The theory of spatial selection is based almost entirely on models.
This project examines the importance of spatial selection in ecologically
realistic contexts, using laboratory-based experiments and computer simulation
models to understand when spatial selection is likely to play an important role
in range expansion, and when, or if, it is likely to have negligible effects. It
will examine how genetic correlations between dispersal and fecundity modify
expectations for spatial selection, using simulation models parameterized with
data from a common beetle. The researchers hypothesize that negative genetic
correlations between dispersal and fecundity will mitigate the effects of
spatial selection, while a positive genetic correlation will amplify the
effects. The second study will examine how stochasticity interacts with spatial
selection to affect invasion speed. Demographic stochasticity may slow invasions
by reducing the number of individuals at the leading edge of the invasion or by
weakening the signal of spatial sorting and reducing reproductive potential at
the invasion edge. This signal should be further reduced as dispersal
heritability decreases. The researchers will integrate these two studies to
elucidate conditions under which spatial selection is more or less important as
a driver of invasion dynamics.