* 1501408
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating Costs of Investment in Parental Care from Telomeres to Hormones
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Medhavi Ambardar, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 01/31/2017
* USD 18,750.00

Animals can benefit by having many offspring that survive and reproduce. To
increase offspring survival, parents may provide extensive parental care and
exhibit aggression towards predators or intruders. However, raising and
defending a large family can increase stress on parents. Additionally, hormones
often regulate expression of behaviors. For example, testosterone is associated
with reduced parental care and increased aggression in many birds. High levels
of testosterone have been linked to reduced survival in birds, but the
mechanisms underlying this link are unknown. One hypothesis is that testosterone
shortens telomeres. Telomeres are short sequences of DNA that protect the ends
of chromosomes and can affect survival. Stress can also shorten telomere
lengths, and shorter telomeres have been associated with reduced lifespan. The
researchers have manipulated brood sizes of eastern bluebirds to alter parental
care, aggression, and stress, which can all interact with testosterone levels.
They will determine how family size, behavior, and hormones affect telomere
lengths to impact longevity and survival. The researchers will also develop
education programs for local high school students to learn fundamental concepts
in the fields of behavioral ecology and physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers have found that bluebirds have considerable individual variation in
testosterone production. Testosterone is implicated in important, fitness-
related behaviors. The costs of elevating testosterone are also well-documented.
Although much has been done to elucidate relationships between behaviors and the
hormonal mechanisms that regulate them, there is currently very little
information about how behavioral and physiological links might be tied to
mechanisms that affect survival (i.e., telomere lengths and telomere loss). The
researchers will analyze previously collected blood samples to measure
testosterone, corticosterone, and telomere lengths. They will relate these
physiological measurements to previously recorded behavioral data. By linking
costly behaviors mediated by testosterone to telomere lengths, this study will
take an integrative approach to answering questions that span the fields of
behavioral ecology, endocrinology, and evolution. Data will archived at Oklahoma
State University and requests for data will be fulfilled upon approval of the
researchers.