* 1501907
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Inter-strain variation and evolution of resistance to phytochemicals in the bumblebee trypanosome parasite, Crithidia bombi
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Lynn Adler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,735.00

Animal pollination maintains ecosystem biodiversity and is valued at $215B/year
to world agriculture. Bumblebees and other wild pollinators enable reproduction
of wild plant species and contribute $3B/year to US food production; bumblebees
may increase in importance if honeybee populations continue to collapse.
However, parasites have contributed to US bumblebee population decreases of up
to 96%. Plants produce an arsenal of chemicals, termed 'phytochemicals', that
confer protection against herbivores and pathogens. These chemicals can be
potent antimicrobials; they are used in traditional and modern medicines and
confer herbs and spices with gustatory and food-preserving properties.
Antimicrobial nectar chemicals consumed by bees could reduce pollinator
infection, but might also select for bee parasites that are resistant to common
chemicals, which would then lose medicinal value. This project will enhance
understanding of how floral landscapes affect and could be manipulated to reduce
pollinator disease.

This work will use a bumblebee parasite, Crithidia bombi, to determine how
phytochemicals affect parasite growth and evolution, specifically: (1) Do
strains vary in phytochemical resistance? Laboratory data suggest that effects
of phytochemical ingestion depend on the parasite strain with which bees are
infected. Such variation may reflect or allow differential strain fitness in
response to common floral chemotypes. The proposed experiments will test the
effects of 8 nectar phytochemicals on 4 C. bombi strains. (2) Can strains evolve
resistance to individual phytochemicals? Chronic phytochemical exposure could
select for tolerant genotypes, thereby reducing medicinal effects realized by
pollinators. Experiments will evaluate whether growth-inhibiting effects of
phytochemicals decrease over 4 weeks of phytochemical exposure. (3) Do
phytochemical blends slow the evolution of resistance? In nature, pollinators
encounter phytochemicals in blends rather than single compounds. In agricultural
and clinical studies, evolution of resistance is delayed when parasites are
simultaneously exposed to multiple chemicals, as would occur when bees forage in
diverse landscapes. This project will test whether phytochemical resistance in
C. bombi is retarded when the parasite is exposed to phytochemical blends rather
than single compounds. Results will generate hypotheses about how plant
interactions with animal pathogens influence pollinator health; and suggest
strategies for using phytochemicals to mitigate pollinator decline.