* 1501471
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular mechanisms underlying rapid adaptive divergence in the Swamp Sparrow
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Richard Harrison, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,150.00

Populations of a single species that live in different geographic regions often
diverge as natural selection drives adaptation to the local environment.
Understanding the processes of divergence and local adaptation is of particular
importance in this contemporary era of rapidly changing environments. The
coastal salt marshes of North America provide excellent systems in which to
study rapid adaptive divergence, given that these habitats have formed within
the last 15,000 years and represent novel selective environments for their
inhabitants. Within many independent lineages of birds, there is a strong
pattern of evolving larger bills and darker plumage after colonizing coastal
salt marshes, suggesting that these traits offer a selective advantage. This
project will allow identification of the genetic basis of divergence in these
traits, and provide a window into the evolutionary mechanisms underlying local
adaptation. This project will also provide hands-on training for graduate and
undergraduate students, and will provide useful information for the conservation
of coastal bird populations.

Two locally adapted subspecies of the Swamp Sparrow exist in the northeastern
US: A brown inland form with a small bill, and a dark grey coastal form with a
large bill. Preliminary DNA sequence (ddRAD) data reveal that the two forms are
very similar, but several regions of the genome are highly differentiated
between them. The natural history of coastal Swamp Sparrows suggests that strong
directional selection may have influenced sequence variation in these highly
differentiated regions. To test this hypothesis, patterns of genome-wide
divergence will be surveyed by generating additional DNA sequence data for each
differentiated region; these will be statistically examined for molecular
signatures of selective sweeps. This project provides an important test of this
emerging statistical methodology.