* 1501704
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Probing the Social Interactome: How Social Network Position Affects Physiology and Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Johann 'Hans' Hofmann, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2016
* USD 20,116.00

Social animals, including humans, interact frequently and can affect each other
in numerous ways. For example, long-term studies have found that measures of
human health such as obesity, smoking cessation, and depression can in part be
predicted by social relationships. In order to understand how these peer effects
spread through a social network, the researchers will use a highly social fish
that is strongly affected by social environment and the behavior of social
partners as model system. This research project will closely monitor social
groups and manipulate one individual within each group to determine how changes
in the behavior of one individual affect the behavior, hormones, and
neuromolecular responses of the other group members. The results will provide a
better understanding of the mechanistic basis of these social network effects
that can be harnessed to improve the health of social groups. This work will
also provide outstanding opportunities for middle school students through class
room visits, high school seniors who are interns in the laboratory, and
undergraduate students who desire to become involved in the molecular and
behavioral research. These students will be primarily recruited from programs
that encourage the participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences.
Finally, results of this project will be communicated through media interviews
and public presentations and in an on-going children's summer science program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The African cichlid fish, Astatotilapia burtoni, offers a
uniquely tractable system for investigating the effects that individuals have on
each other's physiology, neurogenomic state and behavior within naturalistic
social communities. The researchers have developed a descriptive statistical
framework for studying community dynamics in this system. The aggression of one
male in each group will be experimentally increased using an estrogen receptor
agonist which has been previously shown to cause an approximately two-fold
increase in aggression. These manipulated communities will be observed and
compared to control treatments to determine how the change in behavior of one
male cascades throughout the social network to affect the behavior of the other
group members. Blood and brain samples will be collected to determine how these
social network perturbations affect sex steroid hormone levels and sensitivity
to those hormones in key areas of the brain of members of the social group.
These experiments will give causal insights into the physiological,
neuroendocrine and behavioral mechanisms underlying social network effects.