* 1501433
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolvability and diversification: testing macroevolutionary predictions in cone snails.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Michael Alfaro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,006.00

Understanding why some groups of organisms are more diverse than others is a
central goal in evolutionary biology. Evolvability, or the intrinsic capacity of
a lineage for evolutionary change, is thought to influence disparities in
diversity across the tree of life. Over long evolutionary time scales, groups of
organisms that have higher evolvability should (a) have higher species richness
and (b) display greater morphological diversity. Carnivorous species within the
cone snail genus Conus offer a unique opportunity to test the hypothesis of
evolvability because they use prey-specific venom to capture prey and exhibit
extensive diversity in radular morphology. Using the diversity of venom genes
and differences in radular morphology, this research will document how
evolvability may shape biodiversity in the genus. One graduate student will be
trained and results from the research will be broadly disseminated through the
'Exploring Your Universe' public science event at UCLA. International research
infrastructure with the Republic of Indonesia will also be enhanced through
collaboration with the Indonesian Biodiversity Research Center in Bali. In
addition, data generated from this research project will also lead to the rapid
discovery of novel venom proteins, greatly increasing the number of these
natural products that could be developed for the treatment of chronic pain,
epilepsy and other neurological diseases. Venom diversity in cone snails is
extensive, with much of this diversity having arisen through gene duplication.
Theory predicts that higher gene diversity confers a greater potential to
generate novel traits for specialization and adaptation. Therefore, if venom
gene diversity in Conus gives rise to varying levels of evolvability, then
evolvability will be positively correlated with (a) speciation rates, (b)
structural diversity of venom proteins, and (c) evolutionary rates of radular
morphology. Researchers will use next-generation sequencing to generate data
that will be used to reconstruct a molecular phylogeny of Conus, in addition to
species-level data on venom gene diversity within the lineage. The researchers
will also quantify radular morphology using images generated from scanning
electron microscopy. With these data, the researchers will use comparative
phylogenetic methods to test the influence of evolvability on long-term
diversification within cone snails.