* 1501398
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genetic Basis of Cytoplasmic Incompatibility
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Daniel LePage, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,410.00

Symbiotic bacteria are extremely widespread in nature and interest in the way
that they manipulate animal evolution has risen rapidly in recent years.
Discoveries have ranged from bacteria that affect nutrition, immunity, and
reproduction to bacteria that cause the splitting of one species into two. An
evolutionary enigma surrounds these adaptations - how do bacteria evolve to
contribute to these complex animal processes? One of the preeminent bacteria
involved in these interactions, Wolbachia pipientis, occurs worldwide in ~40% of
all insect species and other invertebrates. Previous work has shown that
Wolbachia's ability to alter animal reproduction affects animal populations by
spurring the evolution of new insect species, reproductive strategies, and
offspring production. Despite these evolutionary outcomes of animal-Wolbachia
symbioses, we do not yet know the Wolbachia genes that evolved to control their
animal hosts. This study begins the first in-depth analysis of two Wolbachia
genes that are likely involved in the
symbiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI) is Wolbachia's
main alteration of host sex ratios. CI drastically decreases fertility of
uninfected females in crosses to Wolbachia-infected males and gives infected
females a distinct advantage within the population. Preliminary work discovered
two Wolbachia genes, with conserved protein and DNA binding domains, putatively
involved in CI. To study their interactions, tagged versions of each gene will
be expressed in Wolbachia-free Drosophila melanogaster. Immunofluorescent
microscopy will then be utilized to determine whether expression of these genes
in uninfected males crossed with uninfected females causes explicit CI defects
in developing embryos. Next, after dissecting the larval testes,
immunoprecipitation of the tagged proteins using commercially available
antibodies will be used to isolate any bound host factors. Samples will be
prepared for mass spectrometry to determine what host proteins may be bound.
Additional samples using chromatin immunoprecipitation, coupled with next
generation sequencing, will determine what regions of host DNA are targeted.
Finally, candidate Drosophila pathways will be verified for their role in CI
through a combination of genetic mutants and RNAi knockdown.