* 1501293
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics, diversification, and functional maintenance of trophic mode in Russula (Russulales)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Patrick Matheny, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,630.00

Comparative genomic sequence data from fungal species are beginning to provide
insights into the crucial ecological roles fungi serve in nature. Recent studies
suggest a major class of fungi that associate with plants as root symbionts,
called ectomycorrhizal fungi, likely influence the cycling of organic carbon in
nature. This research seeks to investigate the evolution of the ability to
decompose organic compounds in the diverse fungal family, Russulaceae. The
project will produce genome sequence data from species across the family to test
how species and groups within the Russulaceae are related to each other, the
ecological roles these fungi serve in nature, and how the traits that govern
these ecological roles have evolved. One graduate student will be trained and a
series of workshops will train undergraduates in new molecular methods and
genome analysis techniques. This research will also promote interdisciplinary
collaboration through established international networks between scientists in
Europe, Canada, Asia, and the U.S. Genomic data from this study has the
potential to lead to advances in biofuel production within fungi.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a new molecular systematic
framework for Russula, Russulaceae, and Russulales through the application of
phylogenetic and phylogenomic methods, which will enable the classification of
novel diversity for additional systematic studies. This study will also identify
genes within the genomes of the Russulales that encode oxidoreductases and are
capable of breaking down cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, and other structural
plant molecules. Genomic sequence data from representative species across the
Russulaceae will be generated by the Joint Genome Institute and will be
assembled through the MycoCosm pipeline. Functional gene prediction will be
informed by previous studies on degradative gene composition of known
saprotrophs, with particular focus on those members from Russulales. Researchers
will investigate functional variation throughout the lineage, emphasizing the
diversity of class II peroxidases, CAZymes, and/or laccases. Evolution of
functional genes will be inferred using gene family phylogenies and ancestral
state reconstruction methods.