* 1501012
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effects of multi-species interactions on the community structure of parasites
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Andrea Graham, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,293.00

Research on infectious diseases typically focuses on single-parasite infections.
However, most individuals are co-infected with multiple parasite species, and
parasites interact with one another within hosts. These interactions may
profoundly impact the outcome of parasite infections. For example, parasites
that directly compete with one another for the same resource may inhibit each
other's persistence. This project will examine the direct and indirect
interactions of multiple intestinal parasites in school children in southern
Vietnam. The prevalence of parasites will be quantified and interactions
examined through immunological assays. This research will expand from the idea
that hosts harbor only one infection at a time and will provide a better
understanding of the patterns and processes shaping within-host parasite
communities. Ultimately, by considering hosts infected with multiple parasite
species, this research may reshape the design and implementation of global
health interventions against intestinal parasites; in the short term it will aid
in local public health efforts in Vietnam. The project will also advance the
field of disease ecology by the study of population-level processes. It will
support the training of a graduate student while increasing international
colloboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to single-parasite infections,
multi-species infection interactions can profoundly impact host fitness,
parasite transmission, and disease dynamics in unexpected ways. This project
will investigate the effects of parasitic helminth infections on subsequent
colonization by diarrheal pathogens. The first step will determine the
composition of parasite communities using PCR on stool samples. The second step
will use sequence the 16S rRNA gene to generate data on the taxonomy of the gut
microbiota, and blood and stool samples will be analyzed for immune markers. As
helminth infections occur in over 2 billion people worldwide, understanding
diarrheal diseases in the context of helminth co-infections may help explain the
heterogeneity in parasite burden and disease severity found amongst individual
hosts and shape patterns of disease dynamics at the population level. Knowledge
about such within-host parasite interactions will also have important
implications for studies in disease ecology and will be important for effective
management of human and animal diseases in co-infected populations. This project
will foster collaborations between U.S., U.K., and Vietnamese universities and
will train students in parasitological, immunological, and ecological methods.
The overall study findings will be published in both English and Vietnamese and
will also be conveyed to the Vietnamese community and public health system
through outreach programs.