* 1501328
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of Alternative Mating Tactics in the Yellow Dung Fly
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Scott Pitnick, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,050.00

The process of evolution is expected to favor the single most successful
behavioral tactic in a population and eliminate less successful options.
Nevertheless, in some species, males adopt different behavioral tactics for
acquiring mates, and it is unclear how males decide which tactic to adopt or
what the reproductive consequences of this decision might be. In the yellow dung
fly, some males compete with one another over access to females at breeding
sites, whereas others search for feeding females in non-competitive
environments. This study aims to understand the environmental and genetic
factors that influence the choice of reproductive tactic in yellow dung fly
males and how these alternative tactics are maintained within the same species.
These results will help explain the wide diversity of animal traits observed
within species throughout nature. Additionally, opportunities will be provided
for high school and undergraduate students interested in biology to gain hands-
on research experience by participating in data collection and analysis
associated with this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-occurrence of status-
dependent alternative mating tactics is an example of extreme phenotypic
variation persisting within a population. In addition to differences in mate
securing behaviors and morphology, males of alternative tactics are also
expected to differ in reproductive investment strategies due to tactic-specific
variation in the degree of gametic competition that males face. The appropriate
genetic model for understanding the evolution, maintenance, and expression of
such phenotypic variation has long been the subject of intense debate. The
"environmentally-cued threshold" model has recently emerged as a powerful
quantitative genetics-based approach for investigating these long-standing
questions. However, the difficulty of accurately quantifying lifetime fitness
associated with each tactic has restricted its use in empirical studies. This
research will overcome these obstacles by using large, experimental enclosures
that simulate field conditions, as well as molecular analyses for paternity
assignment, to assess lifespan and reproductive success associated with the
size-dependent expression of alternative mating tactics in the yellow dung fly,
Scathophaga stercoraria, which is a model system for behavioral ecology. All
behavioral, morphological, and genetic data obtained from this research will be
deposited into a public repository such as Dryad.