* 1501663
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Characterizing the evolution of bacterial resource use of competing protists
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Thomas Miller, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,752.00

Explaining the biodiversity on Earth is a puzzle that engages a broad spectrum
of disciplines. The heart of the puzzle rests with evolutionary biologists, who
investigate the origins of diversity, and ecologists, who ask how diversity is
maintained. The goal of this project is to understand how ecology and evolution
interact to allow species to coexist over time. It will provide the
investigators with access to new research skills and methods, resulting in
exciting experimental evidence of how competitors evolve. By participating in
this research, undergraduate students will learn how to develop their own
research questions, design appropriate experiments, and complete data analyses.
This training will extend to high school students through a program that allows
students to design and perform experiments under the guidance of an online
mentor. The investigators will develop curriculum resources that meet Florida's
high school standards, particularly those that address evolution and
evolutionary principles. Through these contributions, the project will stimulate
students to think critically about evolution in an exploratory manner that they
find both fun and interesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use high-
throughput next-generation sequencing of bacteria to characterize shifts in
resource use as a consequence of evolution in competing protists. Bacterial
stock cultures will initially be grown with and without protists to determine
which bacterial taxa are most affected by each species. These bacterial
communities are expected to contain hundreds of species; non-metric
multidimensional scaling analysis will be used to visualize the resource niche
of each protist species. Subsequent to two weeks, or about 50 generations of
evolution, the resource niche of each species will be characterized again to
demonstrate shifts in diet as a result of evolution. The researchers predict
that protists will evolve to diverge in consumption of bacterial resources
unless they are constrained from doing so by alternate selection pressures, in
which case the researchers predict species will converge in resource use. This
work will demonstrate how ecological and evolutionary forces interact among
species competing for resources.