* 1501341
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Disentangling the influence of functional similarity on patterns of species abundance in tree communities
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Maria Umana, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,775.00

Tropical forests harbor a remarkable level of biodiversity characterized by an
exceptional number of rare species and few dominant species. Human and natural
disturbances are increasingly threatening the condition of these forests and
with it, their benefits to human well-being. Disentangling the causes of species
relative abundance constitutes a critical step in order to protect, maintain and
predict the fate of biodiversity. By studying within-species trait variation and
individual growth of 650 individual trees from six species broadly distributed
throughout Puerto Rico, this project will determine how functional traits
influence tree species diversity. The resulting insights from this research will
help to foster decisions devoted to preventing biodiversity loss in tropical
forests. Further, this project will support training for science students as
well as outreach efforts via public talks encouraging young people to pursue
career in tropical ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the ecological
forces that underlie species relative abundances has been a lingering
challenging in ecology. One potential explanation for this pattern is based on
the idea that species have differential abilities to exploit resources
heterogeneously distributed in the space and time. This ability is expected to
be strongly associated with different attributes that affect the performance of
individuals and ultimately their distribution and abundance. This study focuses
on understanding how organismal traits influence patterns of species relative
abundance. The relationship between organismal function and performance will be
evaluated using in a spatially explicit context. Methods will include measuring
the growth and traits of individual trees for six species distributed along an
altitudinal gradient in Puerto Rico. The proposed research will expand our
knowledge of the ecological mechanisms underlying patterns of species relative
abundance by considering not only species identities but also trait information.
Results from this project will have direct implications for natural resource
management.