* 1501385
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of integration in driving the morphological diversity of mammalian jaws
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Elizabeth Dumont, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,131.00

Mammals are warm-blooded and so need to eat relatively large quantities of food
to maintain their high metabolic rate. Teeth and jaws are the first point of
contact with food, and different types of teeth and jaws are specialized for
eating different kinds of foods. This relationship has led to a wide range of
jaw shapes. For example nectar-eating bats have long and slender jaws for
reaching into flowers, whereas spotted hyenas have short and sturdy jaws for
crushing bones. Other factors unrelated to feeding can also influence the shape
of the jaw, such as the need to make sounds for communication, and digging
burrows. Despite these various roles, the shape of mammal jaws is limited by a
number of things. Specialised diets (such as bone-crushing or feeding on nectar)
often require very specific jaw shapes. Jaw shape is also determined by the
genes available to control the way jaws grow. Both of these factors narrow the
range of possible jaws shapes that mammals can have. This project investigates
how jaw shapes are related to diet and how those shapes have evolved over time.
Through this research we will learn how and why jaw shape is very diverse in
some groups of mammals and very limited in others. This research will provide
STEM training opportunities to undergraduate and high-school students, including
women and under-represented minorities, and support science outreach programs in
the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mammalian jaw can be thought of as
a functional tool for performing tasks related to feeding, communication, and
competition. Developmental evidence suggests that there are two primary regions
that can evolve independently, or modules, present in the mammalian jaw: the
ramus and corpus. The ramus is the back portion of the jaw and serves as the
site of muscle attachments. The corpus is the front portion of the jaw and
houses the teeth. As modules become more independent of one another there is
greater scope for increasing morphological diversity. However, the extent of co-
variation among modules can differ both within and between species. These
differences arise due to a variety of genetic and functional constraints. This
study uses a combination of morphometric and phylogenetic comparative methods to
investigate how modularity has influenced the range of jaw morphologies
exhibited by mammals. This project will test two primary hypotheses: 1) the
evolution of mammal jaws is characterized by repeated instances of convergence
as a result of similarity in diets (i.e., functional demands) among different
groups of species, and 2) mammalian jaw diversity is facilitated by reducing the
level of co-variation among different modules within the jaw. By addressing
these two hypotheses, this study aims to understand how constraints have
influenced jaw diversity and how this diversity is distributed within the mammal
clade