* 1501479
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Intra-annual Dynamics in the Gut Microbiota of Migratory Shorebirds
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Ari Jumpponen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2016
* USD 18,030.00

Gut microbiota plays a vital role in organism health through facilitating
nutrient uptake, detoxification and interactions with the immune system. Whereas
the mammalian microbiota is predominantly shaped by underlying genetics, factors
affecting the avian gut microbiota remain largely unknown. Migratory shorebirds
are sensitive to environmental change as a result of their use of geographically
wide-spread habitats throughout their annual cycle. The local environment thus
has the potential to alter avian gut microbiota. This research will investigate
environmental factors influencing gut microbiota of migratory shorebirds as
their long-distance movement and intercontinental migration annually expose them
to a wide range of microorganisms and potential pathogens. The overarching
objective of this study is to evaluate the importance of the local environment
in determining gut microbiota composition in migratory shorebirds, by assessing
presence and causes of intra-annual variation in gut microbiota in relation to
breeding, staging and wintering environments. Migratory shorebirds have the
potential to act as disease vectors that spread pathogens over long distances,
and investigation of gut microbiota diversity and function is an essential first
step towards identifying current and future disease threats to both avian and
human populations.

The overall objective of this research will be addressed by testing three
hypotheses related to different aspects of environment-gut microbiota
interactions: site characteristics, duration of stay, and interactions among
migratory populations. The researchers predict that the local environment
largely determines gut microbial composition, and that within this environment
the effect of latitude and flock composition on gut microbiota composition will
be detectable. Shorebird gut microbial composition will be analyzed from fecal
samples collected from key shorebird staging and wintering sites throughout the
Western Hemisphere. Bacterial communities will be sequenced using genetic
techniques and microbial communities will be analyzed by using advanced
bioinformatics and a Bayesian statistical framework. This research combines the
fields of migration ecology, microbiology and computational biology.