* 1501335
* University, Community College and Industry Partnership: Revamping Robotics Education to Meet 21st Century Workforce  Needs
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Abdulnasser Alaraje, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 702,324.00

This proposal led by Michigan Technological University in cooperation with Bay
de noc Community College intends to improve STEM education by capitalizing on
the appeal of robotics. It also supports industry demand for well-trained
specialists capable of programming, maintaining, and troubleshooting modern
robots. Development of an advanced, industry-driven, hands-on educational
curriculum in robotic automation will improve the quality of STEM education for
electrical engineering technology students at two- and four-year institutions.
The software that is being developed will be freely available for adaptation,
which will allow robotics to be taught even when the purchase of industrial
robots is not feasible. Faculty development will include extensive training and
industrial certification in robotics and automation. Partnership with a leading
robotics manufacturer creates an important ongoing link between academia and
industry ensuring the curriculum is regularly updated to meet emerging needs.
K-12 teacher seminars will introduce advances in technology to those who play a
pivotal role in inspiring future generations of engineering technologists. New
robotics courses and equipment obtained in the project will attract interest of
K-12 teachers and students, while simultaneously advancing undergraduate
learning. As a result of the project, engineering technologists will enter the
workforce prepared to adapt to the complex and changing demands of a high-tech
workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotics is a valuable learning tool that can
enhance overall STEM comprehension and critical thinking. The interdisciplinary
construction of robots makes it a useful pedagogical tool for all STEM areas.
The novelty of robotics is instrumental in attracting and recruiting diverse
STEM students. In the classroom, a robotics platform advances students'
understanding of both scientific and mathematical principles, develops and
enhances problem-solving techniques, and promotes cooperative learning. There is
also a strong need for industrial certification programs in robotics automation.
The curriculum includes courses developed with the goal of providing students
the occasion to configure and execute real-life, industry comparable, robotic
scenarios with opportunity for certification. An external evaluator will contact
industrial partners to verify that the curriculum effectively addresses industry
needs. Student learning is being assessed using pre-test/post-test embedded
testing methods. Evaluation methods focus on determining the effectiveness of
course materials and instructional methods for the different student populations
involved. Formative evaluation occurring during the course development and pilot
stages is anticipated to inform adjustments for subsequent course offerings.
Summative evaluation is anticipated to help determine how the project meets its
objectives and document results for dissemination. The outreach portion of the
project also entails evaluation when K-12 teachers, student camp participants
and those involved at participating schools are surveyed to gauge impact.
Project dissemination plans include a 2-day workshop for up to 12 faculty
members. The goal of the workshop is to take the knowledge gained from
curriculum development and the technical information gained from lab
development, and combine it with robotics training to produce practical
curriculum planning and strategies for developing courses similar to those
piloted in this project.