* 1501594
* Massachusetts Credentials and Careers in Aviation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Michael Wahlers, Cape Cod Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 897,935.00

Cape Cod Community College (CCCC) is developing a one-year accelerated program
to train Aviation Maintenance Technicians. The program is being developed with
partnerships with regional employers, community partners, industry and other
entities to design and implement accelerated pathways for jobs requiring a
Federal Aviation Administration Airframe &amp; Powerplant (FAA A&amp;P)
certificate as well as other aviation and avionics occupations. With
implementation, CCCC will be one of only six community colleges in the United
States to offer FAA A&amp;P certification training in an accelerated format, and
will be the only public institution of higher education offering the accelerated
certificate in eastern New England. The program responds to a documented
regional and national need for a stronger workforce in aviation and avionics.
The proposed curriculum and training addresses industry needs and creates a
model accelerated program. The program is recruiting underrepresented groups
including first generation, low income students and veterans. CCCC is
collaborating with K-12 partners within the region, generating a pipeline of
students able to fulfill regional labor market needs, including a dual
enrollment pathway which increases opportunities for students to enter a high
demand, well-paid career field. The accelerated structure of the program allows
participants to reach their professional goals faster, and meet the employer
demand. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is structured around three goals: 1)
Developing a set of stackable certificates and associate degree program informed
by industry that prepares aviation maintenance technicians, 2) creating a
viable, cost efficient and guided pathway for high school students who wish to
obtain a certificate or associate degree in Aviation Maintenance utilizing a
dual enrollment path, and 3) creating an online pathway for workers with
experience in the field who wish to prepare for the FAA A&amp;P certification
exam. The program builds upon best practices and utilizes open-source materials
and evidence-based strategies, including NSF-funded curriculum materials
developed by the South Texas Aviation Maintenance Partnership (STAMP). Five
project activities are involved: 1) developing an innovative online curriculum
in aviation maintenance for general portions of the program that can be
disseminated to other institutions, 2) establishing articulation agreements with
Bridgewater State University in Aviation Management, 3) training two initial
cohorts of students during the project and grow program enrollment to over 100
students, 4) providing professional development opportunities for aviation
program faculty, and 5) continuing to develop relationships with industry
partners. Program evaluation includes both formative evaluation for refinement
of project activities and summative evaluation to establish outcomes that will
influence the scaling up of efforts beyond the planning phase. Plans include
dissemination of program outcomes at regional, state and national conferences,
leveraging the impact of the program, and the dissemination of online
modules/courses and teaching materials developed.