* 1501840
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Are ectomycorrhizal fungi acquiring resources made available by the activity of extracellular enzymes secreted by saprotrophs?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Chris Blackwood, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,333.00

It has become increasingly evident that the health of plants, like that of
humans, depends largely on their close interaction with microbes. This hidden
world of microbes influences processes critical to the storage of carbon in the
soil, which in turn stabilizes the soil to prevent erosion, and provides a
source of nutrients and water to support plant growth. Many plant species form
associations with certain types of fungi that grow around their roots. These
fungi, known as ectomycorrhizal fungi (EMF), engage in a symbiosis, exchanging
nutrients for sugars, thereby promoting belowground storage of soil carbon.
Using carbon from the host plant as fuel, EMF branch out from the root surface
to form networks and improve surface area for nutrient uptake. However, when the
carbon supply from the plant is limited, EMF may compete with free-living (non-
symbiotic) microbes for both nutrients and carbon. Alternatively, instead of
direct competition, EMF could also "cheat" or capture the degraded products
generated by the action of other microbes in the community. This project
supports ongoing dissertation research to establish whether EMF might use plant
degradation products released by another organism (i.e. "cheat"). Results of
this research will contribute to a better understanding of the role of fungi in
plant litter degradation. The results will also improve predictions about the
effects of climate change on decomposition. The broader impacts of this study
include the training a doctoral student as well as opportunities for training of
several undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial species vary in
their ability to break down recalcitrant plant polymers, such as cellulose and
lignin, into easily metabolized monomers. The diversity of gene combinations for
extracellular enzymes (ECE) seen in microbial genomes points to a differential
ability to degrade these polymers. The preliminary tests of this project
leveraged model organisms grown in controlled microcosms, thereby profiting from
a controlled experimental setting and sequence data available for well-studied
species. These tests demonstrated that polymer-degrading enzyme activity in EMF
is not directly reflective of the presence of enzyme-degrading genes. The
current project will bolster the initial results via metatranscriptomic
analyses, shed light on competitive interactions between EMF and free-living
saprotrophs at the gene expression level, and show how EMF optimize their
success in a particular environment. The researchers will be comparing mRNA
sequences to full genome sequences, using standard methods to map each sequence
read to a corresponding genome. This will allow for quantification of expressed
ECE genes in EMF in competition with other microorganisms and without a carbon
supply from a host plant. Shifts in expression of these genes, coupled with
physiological data, will allow the researchers to verify whether those organisms
that consume polymer degradation products are also expressing ECE genes (i.e.,
whether they are cheating). The knowledge gained from this research will enhance
our understanding of the role of EMF in decomposition and to incorporate their
activities in carbon cycling models.