* 1501877
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Alcohol dehydrogenase in Drosophila: Functional characterization of adaptive genetic variation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Joseph Thornton, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,262.00

How organisms adapt to environments is a fundamental question in biology, and
exploring this process can enrich our understanding of factors that shape the
evolution of forms, functions, and species. A precise way to study adaptive
traits is by experimentally characterizing the mechanisms through which genes
drive evolution. This approach can reveal general principles about how changes
at the DNA level affect function over time. Here, this framework is used to
rigorously characterize alcohol tolerance in fruit flies, a classic model of
adaptive evolution. The researchers will investigate a long-standing hypothesis
about adaptation to ethanol and the relationship of variation at genetic,
biochemical, and physiological levels. This work will demonstrate how
biochemical methods can be deployed in evolutionary contexts to yield novel
insights. Broader impacts of this project include training of a graduate student
in the emerging discipline of evolutionary biochemistry as well as collaboration
with local high school teachers to design, present, and publicly distribute an
educational module emphasizing the interface of biochemistry and evolutionary
genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) in
Drosophila melanogaster is an iconic example of adaptation: inter- and
intraspecific variations in ADH harbor signatures of positive and balancing
selection, respectively, and past works have hypothesized the responsible
selective forces. The signature of positive selection on ADH is thought to
reflect protein evolution in response to expansion and adaptation to ethanol-
rich environments by D. melanogaster. This research utilizes ancestral sequence
reconstruction of proteins, biochemical characterization, and physiological
assays of transgenic organisms to test if functional changes occurred in ADH as
predicted. The signature of balancing selection - supported by recurrent and
dynamic allele frequency clines across continents - is thought to be due to
allele-by-temperature interactions. This project investigates the role of
temperature interactions as a mechanism. It will test a hypothesis about how
temperature might shape patterns of genetic variance by characterizing the
propensity of natural alleles to misfold at environmentally realistic
temperatures. These experiments will have broad significance as methodological
exemplars of utilizing detailed, mechanistic studies in evolutionary contexts to
elucidate general insights pertaining to the functional determinants of
adaptation.