* 1501105
* Supply Chain Management and Manufacturing Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ruben Johnson, Dallas County Community College Dist Cedar Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,992.00

The U.S. Department of Labor reports that within the next ten years, the number
of logistics technician jobs will double, requiring even more sophisticated
technical training and experience. Recent development of the International
Inland Port of Dallas has created a critical local need that mirrors the
national demand for skilled technicians in all areas of supply chain
manufacturing. The rapidly growing regional companies, including FedEx, Wal-
Mart, BMW Distribution, Kohls, LOreal, CVS, and others, have dramatically
changed production methods by implementing the newest technology, thus creating
new jobs and careers for the communities in southern Dallas County. To address
this critical demand for highly trained technicians in emerging supply chain
logistics technologies who have industry recognized certifications and college
degrees, Cedar Valley College, of the Dallas County Community College District,
will develop and implement a Supply Chain Management/Manufacturing Program that
is designed to produce technicians for the emerging high-tech manufacturing
industries. The program will provide a coherent sequence of courses that lead to
multiple recognized logistics certificates, culminating in an associate degree
in Manufacturing/Logistics that will prepare individuals for employment in the
new logistics technology industries and/or transfer to a four year college or
university. This project will impact the economy of southern Dallas County,
formerly an area of slow economic growth through development of a much needed
highly skilled technical workforce that will help alleviate the local and
national shortage of logistics technicians. By pursuing a curriculum that leads
to high tech careers with a living wage, southern Dallas residents will improve
their standard of living, and the college will help advance economic
development. The project will foster diversity in the workplaces as it targets
community college students and dual credit high school students, with a focus on
minorities, women, and veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the movement to
higher technology will continue to decrease opportunities for unskilled workers
while simultaneously creating a demand for trained workers with skills in modern
technology, this new manufacturing logistics technician program will prepare
workers to enter careers in modern supply chain industries. It will provide
curriculum that leads to Level 1 and Level 2 industry recognized certificates
and ultimately to an associate degree. Students will gain advanced critical
thinking and problem solving skills, high level communication ability, and
applied mathematics expertise gained through college participation. Project
activities will include the development of curriculum and course content, along
with marketing, faculty development, and partnerships. The college will also
strengthen partnerships with existing nationally recognized educational
programs, which will enhance the reputation of the college as a hub for
technological learning. This project will offer dual credit college courses to
high school juniors and seniors and recruit these and other students to the
Supply Chain Management/Manufacturing Program at Cedar Valley College. Strong
partnerships with area companies will provide industry internships and potential
employment upon completion. A comprehensive evaluation will identify best
practices in logistics education and the impact of this project on providing
highly educated technicians to employers and increasing the diversity of the
workforce.