* 1501686
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does grazing stimulate root exudation and accumulation of soil carbon in perennial grasslands?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Stephen Flory, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2017
* USD 19,017.00

The goal of this project is to identify factors that regulate the uptake and
storage of carbon within soils of cattle pastures in the southeastern United
States. Carbon molecules that have been isotopically labeled will be tracked and
used to answer questions about how and where carbon is sequestered by plant
roots and soil microbes. The two main questions that will be addressed are: how
plants transfer internal carbon from roots to the soil, and how microbes in the
soil determine whether that carbon is quickly released back to the atmosphere
through respiration or stabilized and stored for long periods of time? Carbon
stored in soils for long periods of time is critical for the functioning of
healthy ecosystems, in this case important agricultural systems in the US, but
is also of interest for managers and policy makers because it represents the
strength of the ecosystem for storing carbon from the atmosphere.

One promising strategy to at least help offset carbon emissions from human
activities is to strengthen the uptake and storage capacity for carbon in the
soils of grasslands, since they are globally extensive and also vital for
agricultural production. This project will advance technical understanding of
the processes that regulate grassland soil carbon storage. Additional outcomes
include graduate student training, opportunities for collaboration across
scientific disciplines, mentoring and education of undergraduate students, and
the extension of results to help farm managers understand and increase their
abilities to store carbon on-farm while also improving pasture sustainability.