* 1501355
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Quantitative test of evolutionary bet-hedging theory in a mirobial model system
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Daniel Weinreich, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2017
* USD 21,125.00

This project will provide understanding of the fundamental principles that
influence adaptation in changing environments. Evolutionary theory predicts that
natural selection in changing environments will favor traits so long as they
confer a net benefit over time. This context of adaptation in changing
environments is central to understanding many traits, such as the ability to
sense and respond to the environment, and drug resistance of pathogenic
microorganisms. This research will therefore help to elucidate the evolutionary
processes underlying medically important traits. The researchers will also
develop and distribute a lesson plan aimed at teaching the basic tenets of
adaptation in changing environments to high school students, thus helping to
raise public awareness about a biologically relevant problem.

Biological traits such as phenotypic plasticity and bet-hedging are presumed to
evolve by increasing the long-term geometric mean fitness of a lineage. This
framework serves as a useful description of the average selective advantage of
traits in a variable environment. However, there are known theoretical
limitations with this approach since it fails to explicitly capture evolutionary
dynamics of evolving populations and thus does not provide a mechanistic
description of the evolutionary origin and maintenance of traits such as bet-
hedging. Using laboratory yeast populations adapted to rapid periods of
environmental stress, the researchers will experimentally measure evolutionary
dynamics of competing bet-hedging strategies in a variable environment. The
researchers will use a combination of genome sequencing and reverse genetics to
construct a panel of fluorescently labeled yeast strains that express differing
bet-hedging strategies. By carefully tracking the abundance of competing strains
during the course of competition experiments in variable environments, the
researchers will directly compare evolutionary changes in the laboratory to the
predictions of computational models of adaptation in varying environments. In
doing so, the research will generate data necessary to directly test of the
geometric mean fitness concept and will experimentally determine the extent of
its limitations for describing adaptation to varying environments.