* 1501463
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Ecological Role of Fluorescence in a Reef-building Coral
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Marie Strader, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,124.00

Reef-building corals are declining worldwide, largely due to negative
anthropogenic effects on their habitats. Efforts to mitigate the loss of this
economically and ecologically critical group of organisms is hindered by our
lack of understanding of their basic biological processes, including the
function of specific genes. In typical model organisms such as fruit fly or
mouse, the function of a gene is tested by investigating the consequence of its
artificial silencing, a process termed "knockdown". The authors propose to
develop knockdown methods for studying functions of coral genes, starting with
the genes encoding fluorescent proteins. These proteins are natural visible
markers of gene activity, making it straightforward to confirm the efficiency of
their knockdown. In addition, the authors plan to verify a hypothesis that these
proteins play a specific role in facilitating larval dispersal, a trait that may
allow coral populations to recover rapidly after disturbances. The PIs will also
engage in teaching coral biology to high school students from underrepresented
groups, and in other community outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific gene knockdown is a technical
challenge that has not yet been met in corals. The project will test several
alternative methods of gene silencing and assess the direct effect of these
procedures on the quantity of fluorescent proteins as well as their effects on
physiological parameters associated with larval dispersal. In addition to
addressing this specific improvement on this Dissertation, the availability of
coral gene knockdown method will open up rich opportunities for in-depth
analysis of gene function in the context of animal development, adaptation, and
evolution.