* 1501900
* CAREER: Sparse-sampling inference for functional proteomics, metabolomics and ionomics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/27/2014,03/31/2017
* Olga Vitek, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 03/31/2017
* USD 194,620.00

Northeastern University is awarded a grant by the NSF Faculty Early
Career&lt;br/&gt;Development (CAREER) Program to develop statistical and
computational&lt;br/&gt;tools for functional proteomics, metabolomics and
ionomics. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will address three inter-related aims:
(1) Accurate&lt;br/&gt;identifications and quantifications of proteins,
metabolites and ions&lt;br/&gt;from high-throughput experiments, which generate
sparse data in form&lt;br/&gt;of mass and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra;
(2) Joint&lt;br/&gt;interpretation and integration of these sparse heterogeneous
datasets;&lt;br/&gt;and (3) Optimal design of global and targeted follow-up
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program is innovative in that it closely
accounts for the&lt;br/&gt;biological and technological characteristics of
proteomics,&lt;br/&gt;metabolomics and ionomics. As the result, it will increase
the&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity, accuracy, and scope of interpretation of
the&lt;br/&gt;investigations. The utility of the developed methods of
statistical&lt;br/&gt;inference, and of the associated open-source software,
will be&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated on functional screens of S. cerevisiae, which
integrate&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic and
ionomic&lt;br/&gt;datasets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will
contribute to bridging the communication gap&lt;br/&gt;between biologists,
chemists and statisticians. The project will promote the&lt;br/&gt;computational
thinking, and the appropriate use of statistical&lt;br/&gt;methodology, by
making available case studies that are relevant to the&lt;br/&gt;user community,
by offering interdisciplinary tutorials and short&lt;br/&gt;courses at
scientific meetings and interdisciplinary courses at&lt;br/&gt;Purdue, and by
providing mentoring for graduate and undergraduate students
across&lt;br/&gt;departments.