* 1501449
* The SMART Center:  Creating the Next Generation of Credentialed, Skilled Technicians for the Maritime and Transportation Industry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Sarah Janes, Tidewater Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,987,753.00

The Southeast Maritime and Transportation (SMART) Center stands well-poised to
increase the pipeline of educated, credentialed technicians working in our
country's vitally important maritime and transportation industry. The SMART
Center will build on work to change students' and educators' perception of the
maritime and transportation industry and the educational pathway leading to
highly-paid, highly-skilled careers. Increasing industry leaders' awareness of
the potential to build a more highly-qualified and credentialed workforce will
catalyze partnerships between employers and colleges. Increasing the number of
veterans, women, first-generation college students and under-represented
minorities is the first goal of the proposed work. Connecting educators to
employers through the SMART Institutes will increase the number of students
enrolling in and completing academic programs to become credentialed
technicians.

The SMART Center's four high-level goals are: Goal 1: Career Awareness --
Increase career awareness by replicating and teaching career pathways to produce
a greater number of increasingly diverse students entering the maritime and
transportation industry pipeline and exiting with academic and industry-valued
credentials. Goal 2: Identifying Industry Standards for Curriculum -- Expand the
SMART Center digital repository of industry competencies linked to courses and
credentials embedded in registered apprenticeship and building related pathways
in maritime logistics and emerging maritime-dependent offshore industries. Goal
3: Professional Development -- Deliver scalable models of industry-validated
professional development built on existing partnerships, including expansion of
the SMART Institute model, to create a network of SMART educator-ambassadors.
Goal 4: Partnerships -- Model effective industry and educator partnerships to
maintain national focus on maritime and transportation industry workforce needs
and to influence formation of federal, regional and state policies and pathways
to meet those needs.

The SMART Center will scale the SMART Maritime Technologies pathway built on the
registered apprenticeship model which incorporates in-demand industry
certifications and academic courses that confer college credit toward degrees.
Work will include adaptation of successful SMART Center career pathway tools to
each of the four maritime transportation industry sectors: (1) shipbuilding and
ship repair, (2) seagoing/vessel operations, (3) marine logistics/port services,
and (4) emerging maritime-dependent offshore industries. The SMART Center will
build a replicable education model for the emerging maritime-dependent offshore
wind energy industry by identifying competencies needed for academic and
industry credentials and creating relevant courses.