* 1501148
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The molecular basis of convergent innovations: co-option or independent origin of regulatory modules?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Artyom Kopp, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,337.00

Although the diversity of traits observed in nature can seem infinite, it still
represents only a subset of possible traits. Furthermore, some traits have
evolved repeatedly in distantly related species. Does repeated origin of certain
traits reflect shared genetic constraints? The structure of gene networks that
control development could favor the evolution of some traits while making the
origin of other traits less likely. In order to determine the role of gene
networks in shaping biological diversity, this study will identify and compare
the molecular mechanisms that led to the independent origin of similar traits in
two distantly related species. This research provides important insights into
the translation of genotype to phenotype. The PIs propose novel mentoring in
molecular techniques to high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups.

The proposed study investigates distantly related groups of fruit fly species,
which have independently gained similar male-specific morphological structures.
Previous work has shown that the gene doublesex (dsx) is important in the
formation of these traits in both groups, and that specific changes in the DNA
sequence of dsx correlate with the origin of one of these structures. This
research will test whether evolutionary changes in the same or different DNA
sequences are associated with the origin of the convergent structure in the
other group. Answering this question will help determine the role of the genetic
network encompassing dsx in the independent origin of similar traits in these
two groups of species.