* 1501001
* Questions on Algebraic Operads and Related Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 07/31/2018
* USD 166,241.00

Operads and their generalizations are used to describe a large class of
algebraic structures. They play an important role in the study of various
geometric objects, in tackling foundational questions of quantum mechanics, and
in addressing certain questions in number theory. This research project aims to
resolve important open questions in this area. In addition to pursuing the
research project, the investigator will advise graduate student research
projects and expects to supervise undergraduate research projects as well.
Jointly with coauthors, the investigator is writing a graduate level textbook on
deformation quantization of symplectic manifolds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator is tackling the Deligne-Drinfeld conjecture on the
Grothendieck-Teichmueller Lie algebra using the deformation complex of the
operad governing Gerstenhaber algebras and Kontsevich's graph complex related to
deformation quantization. The PI is working on a circle of problems related to
the modular operad which is obtained by applying the Feynman transform to the
operad governing commutative algebras. The PI also works on the problem of
deformation quantization over a graded base and studies a higher categorical
structure on homotopy algebras. The study of the Grothendieck-Teichmueller Lie
algebra is motivated by its links to deformation quantization, the absolute
Galois group of rational numbers and the theory of motives. Questions about the
Feynman transform of the operad governing commutative algebras are motivated by
the study of spaces of long knots.