* 1501583
* Arithmetic of Shimura Varieties and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Benjamin Howard, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2019
* USD 209,946.00

This project concerns investigations in the theory of numbers and arithmetic
geometry. This is an area of research that has applications to cyber security,
through cryptography, and to some aspects of coding theory. Shimura varieties
are particular kinds of higher-dimensional surfaces, and their rich geometry and
arithmetic puts them among the central objects of study in modern mathematics.
They play an essential role in the Langlands program, which is of increasing
interest in theoretical physics, and are important tools for understanding
elliptic curves and abelian varieties, which now play a major role in
cryptography. The primary goal of the Principal Investigator's research on
Shimura varieties is to prove new formulas for Faltings heights, which are a way
of measuring the complexity of elliptic curves and abelian
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will study the
arithmetic of special cycles on integral models of unitary and orthogonal
Shimura varieties. There are four distinct, but interrelated, parts of the
project. The first part is to extend to integral models a theorem of Borcherds
on the modularity of a generating series of divisors on an unitary Shimura
variety. The main application of this extension will be to prove new cases of
Colmez's conjectural relation between Faltings heights of CM abelian varieties
and derivatives of Artin L-functions. The second part is similar to the first,
but on orthogonal Shimura varieties. This will yield still more cases of
Colmez's conjecture. The third part of the project is a generalization of the
Gross-Kohnen-Zagier theorem to unitary and orthogonal Shimura varieties, which
is expected to yield new cases of the Beilison-Bloch conjecture relating
dimensions of Chow groups to orders of vanishing of L-functions. The fourth
project involves the explicit description of mod p reductions of orthogonal
Shimura varieties, and is necessary for the third project.