* 1501176
* Working Partners: Documenting the Impact of Industry Collaboration within the ATE Community
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Rachael Bower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2021
* USD 896,925.00

Recognizing the significant role of industry in the education and training of
the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) technician
workforce, the "Working Partners: Documenting the Impact of Industry
Collaboration within the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Community"
project investigates and identifies indicators and features of effective models
of industry/community college partnerships and collaborations. Research findings
and the Working Partners Toolkit will enhance and provide know-how on creating
and sustaining effective industry partnerships and collaborations with STEM
technician oriented programs at two-year institutions and with secondary
education programs in Career and Technical Education. The participatory nature
of the research and user oriented dissemination activities are designed to meet
the information needs of a diverse body of constituents. Project deliverables
will engage policy makers and practitioners in strengthening existing
partnership and collaborations and developing new types of industry/higher
education partnerships and collaborations to further the global competitiveness
of the STEM technician workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope and goals of
the project are to (1) identify, investigate, and document the models of
partnerships and collaboration that exist between the ATE community and
industry; (2) investigate and articulate implementations, challenges, and impact
of the partnership models; (3) explore and document conditions that sustain and
support productive industry relationships; and (4) chronicle meaningful
experiences and student academic and career pathways that arise from ATE
community partnerships with industry. The systems-based theoretical approach
seeks to understand and articulate the various interdependencies and connections
between people and objects in a system composed of tools, rules, overarching
community expectations, and divisions of labor. The mixed methods research
design aligns the theoretical approach of the research project to the ATE
program theory; couples the research questions to the research methods;
structures data collection (surveys, interviews, document analysis, focus
groups) and data analyses (descriptive analyses comparing emergent themes and
correlations to expected patterns and correlations); and provides a conceptual
framework for validating ATE/industry partnership models.