* 1501914
* The Origins And Impact Of Modern Human Diets
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Curtis Marean, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 34,269.00

This research focuses on the origins and development of coastal foraging and the
impact that these foods may have had on human cognitive and behavioral evolution
during the time of the origins of the modern human lineage. The project is
inherently interdisciplinary, combining research in archaeological,
paleobotanical, paleoecological, geochronological, and geological sciences. It
is of scientific importance because coastal foods, like shellfish, are an
important source of daily nutrients for people today that promotes and maintains
prenatal health and juvenile and adult cognitive development and maintenance.
The Cape coast of South Africa is also one of the hypothesized origin locations
of the modern human lineage and researchers have hypothesized if the influx of
nutrient-rich foods into early modern human diets there was linked to their
burgeoning cognitive evolution or if the consumption of these foods influenced
their cognitive development directly? This project is the first to specifically
explore the long-term effects of eating sea foods by studying archaeological
sites and paleoenvironments in Pondoland (Eastern Cape Province), South Africa,
a unique area where the coastline is hypothesized to have remained the same
throughout the last 400,000 years. The researchers will use state-of-the-art
methods to excavate archaeological sites in coastal zones and analyze their
stratigraphy, marine and terrestrial animal remains, plant remains, and
geochronological dating. These interdisciplinary records will be used to test
long-standing questions about when, where, and how coastal foraging developed
within the local paleoenvironmental context to better understand the broader
impact that coastal foods had on modern human origins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has numerous broader impacts. It will provide a long-term evolutionary
perspective on the consumption of foods with high concentrations of brain-
specific nutrients. These foods, which include shellfish, may be linked to human
cognitive and behavioral evolution, but they are also promoted today to ensure
the health and wellbeing of contemporary people. In this way, the research will
also contribute towards current debates within dietary theory about proper
nutrition and lean-protein foods rich in Omega-3 fatty acids. The research will
also contribute towards a broader understanding of paleoenvironments across the
South African Cape coast and the human response to climatic change during
glacial and interglacial periods. Besides coastal resources, Pondoland's
indigenous vegetation is also ancient, highly productive, and tightly packed
into a narrow coastal zone. Each vegetation type hosts diverse plant and animal
species that would have contributed to the daily survival of early modern humans
and this research will contribute towards a wider understanding of the
ecological and environmental history of tropical areas. This project also brings
together a diverse team of researchers from South Africa, Germany, Spain,
Australia and the United States. It draws upon each individuals wider network of
professional collaborations, linking numerous other nationalities and research
specializations to promote a robust multidisciplinary and international research
collaboration between US researchers and students and numerous other
international research centers.