* 1501356
* CAREER: Biosensing in thermal space
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2016
* Ming Su, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 165,533.00

1055599 Su

CAREER: Biosensing in thermal space

Although numerous biomarkers with certain specificity to cancers have been
identified, it is clear that no single biomarker is ideal to distinguish lethal
cancers from indolent ones due to lack of tumor specificity. Parallel to efforts
of finding more specific biomarkers, a feasible way of providing better
predictive value is to detect multiple biomarkers. However, existing techniques
cannot be used to detect a large number of biomarkers due to peak overlapping,
lack of probe-specific property or complexity of readout systems.

This CAREER project will study a new biosensing method, i.e., thermal
biosensing, in which a series of composition-encoded nanoparticles of solid-
liquid phase change materials (metals and eutectic alloys) that have sharp and
discrete melting peaks will be designed, produced, modified with a series of
ligands, and used for in vitro detection of multiple biomarkers. A one-to-one
correspondence will be established between one type of biomarker and one type of
nanoparticles. The presence and concentration of each biomarker will be derived
from the melting peak and fusion enthalpy of according nanoparticle. The
multiple results will be used to distinguish lethal cancers at early stages
using pattern recognition method.

Intellectual Merit: Thermal biosensing uses a well-known, but unexplored thermal
phenomenon of solids: the temperature of a solid will not rise above its melting
point until the entire solid is molten, and the fact that metal or eutectic
alloy has composition-dependent melting point and sharp melting peak during
linear thermal scan. By uniquely combining phase diagram knowledge gained in the
past with size advantage of nanoparticles, thermal biosensing has distinct
features for biomarker detection. By filling knowledge gap among biosensing,
metallurgy and nanotechnology, thermal biosensing using phase change
nanoparticles represents a paradigm shift from existing electric, electronic,
magnetic, mechanical or photonic systems.

Broader Impact: Thermal biosensing could lead to technological breakthroughs in
detection and treatment of lethal cancers. The early detections of lethal
cancers will enhance survivability of patients, reduce costs of diagnosis and
treatment, and improve quality of life by curing cancer and reducing anxiety
associated with cancer. Thermal biosensing can also be extended to a variety of
applications including biomedicine, food production and processing, and rapid
detections of multiple bacteria, viruses, and biotoxins for bio-safety, bio-
warfare defense and environmental applications. The educational plan is targeted
to attract students into Bio-Nano engineering, and will generate lasting impacts
on students by enlightening young minds, and to society by maintaining high-
quality workforces.