* 1501658
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Nitrous Oxide and Dinitrogen Production from Tropical Forest Soils Under Ambient and Fertilized Conditions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Stephen Porder, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,345.00

Nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas that is emitted from soils where nitrogen is
abundant. In human dominated landscapes, fertilized farm fields are the most
important source, and in natural landscapes, intact lowland tropical forests,
which are often very nitrogen rich, are the greatest source. This research aims
to measure emissions of nitrous oxide in tropical forests, where it is not clear
if nitrogen pollution is emitted as nitrous oxide or as nitrogen gas (which is
inert and already makes up 78% of the atmosphere). While nitrous oxide emissions
are relatively easy to measure, nitrogen gas emissions are notoriously difficult
to measure. To overcome this problem, the researchers will use a newly developed
technique to directly measure nitrogen gas and nitrous oxide production from
soils. By comparing fertilized and unfertilized soils in an intact tropical
forest in Luquillo, Puerto Rico, they will provide information on nitrous oxide
emissions, and the impact of nitrogen pollution on tropical forests. The
researchers will share their findings with the general audience through an
education website that they have established, and with other academics.

The researchers will use the Nitrogen Free Air Recirculation Method (N-FARM) to
quantify dinitrogen (N2) and nitrous oxide (N2O) production from intact soil
cores taken from soils with different native oxygen status (ridges, slopes and
valleys) under ambient and N enriched conditions. Because N-FARM allows gas
fluxes to be measured under different atmospheric oxygen conditions, coupling
these measurements with field-based continuous measurements of soil oxygen will
allow results to be scaled to generate annual landscape scale estimates of N2
and N2O production. Specifically, the researchers will test two hypotheses: H1:
a) lower soil oxygen in valleys will result in higher total N gas loss than on
more upland portions of the landscape and b) N gas losses will have a lower
N2O:N2 ratio in valleys, since lower soil oxygen favors reduction of nitrate to
N2, rather than N2O. H2: Nitrogen fertilization will a) induce greater nitrogen
gas loss, via both nitrification and denitrification, and b) gas losses will
have a higher N2O:N2 ratio since nitrification does not produce N2. To test
these hypotheses, the researchers will examine replicated fertilized plots on
ridge/slope/valley transects in the Luquillo Mountains. They will collect soil
cores from beneath control and fertilized plots and run them on the NFARM
apparatus within a week of collection. These data will provide the first direct
N2 emissions measurements from tropical soils, and will add much needed
understanding to the way N losses occur from tropical forest today, and
potentially in the future.