* 1501758
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding the Role of Chromosomal Inversions in Life History Divergence and Local Adaptation in Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jennifer Coughlan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2018
* USD 20,660.00

The goal of this project is to gain a better understanding of the role of gene
arrangements on chromosomes in maintaining genetic diversity, which is
fundamental to the process of evolution. Beyond adding to basic knowledge of
evolution, these results have important implications for crop breeding,
especially when crops occur in the presence of closely related non-crop species.
The study will focus on monkeyflower, Mimulus guttatus, an herbaceous wildflower
that is distributed predominantly in the Pacific Northwest. It occurs both as
perennial and annual forms, which are distinct and locally adapted to their
respective habitats. Through the use of genetic tools, the researchers will
discover the bases of the differences between those forms and test hypotheses
about how gene arrangements control evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will use genetic tools to dissect a chromosomal inversion which
varies between annual and perennial ecotypes of Mimulus guttatus. This inversion
is strongly associated with life history expression, and has been shown to
influence performance in nature significantly. Previous QTLs mapping has found
that a large proportion of the genetic variance associated with life history
maps to a large pericentric chromosomal inversion that separates the two
ecotypes. However, since recombination is suppressed between inverted and
collinear portions of a chromosome when found in a heterozygote, mapping within
the inversion is impossible in this species pair. Using classical QTLs mapping,
as well as NIL lines, the researchers will: (1) create a genome-wide map of life
history divergence under multiple conditions, (2) test how the inversion
contributes to life history divergence in the field, and (3) examine how
selection acts on alleles within the inversion. The researchers will test
whether the inversion has captured standing genetic variation for life history
traits, and thus has potentially swept to fixation by indirect selection due to
its recombination suppression properties. This work will help elucidate the
mechanism by which inversions contribute to local adaptation, and ultimately,
how inversions can maintain genetic diversity despite maladaptive gene flow.