* 1501560
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Forging a Context for Female Mate Choice for Carotenoid Ornaments
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Geoffrey Hill, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,240.00

The overarching goal of this research project is to advance understanding of the
evolution of animal ornamentation. Birds feature some of the most elaborate
songs, dances, and colors of the animal kingdom, and such displays are generally
accepted to have evolved in response to female preferences during mate choice.
However, the specific processes that have shaped the ornamental traits remain
contentious. In particular, current theory proposes that the yellow-to-red
coloration in the ornaments of many bird species is an honest signal of quality,
but the mechanisms linking ornament expression to quality, and hence the
information content that ornaments present to choosing females, remain unclear.
This research project will provide critical tests of how colorful pigments
relate to the quality of both colored ornaments and physiological condition in a
songbird species, the domestic canary (Serinus canaria). An additional set of
experiments will then investigate how the two conspicuous signals of the male
canary--brilliant coloration and complex song--interact to shape female mate
choice. Using a species that is well-adjusted to captivity enables particularly
fine control over experimental variables without subjecting the birds to cage
stress, and further allows for a suite of outreach activities using live
canaries as "science ambassadors" both to hobbyist canary breeders nationwide
and young students across the state of Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many
behavioral studies have examined sexual selection for carotenoid-based
coloration, there is no consensus for how carotenoid pigments link to signal
honesty and how condition-dependent signals shape female preferences. This
research project comprises two complementary sets of experiments assessing both
the mechanistic basis of signal honesty and the ultimate function of color
signals. The research will address these questions with tight experimental
control using the highly amenable captive system of the domestic canary (Serinus
canaria). Initial experiments will examine the mechanistic basis for condition-
dependence in carotenoid-based ornaments by testing fundamental assumptions
about the role of allocation tradeoffs in maintaining signal honesty.
Specifically, the researchers will use canaries with knockout mutations that
eliminate carotenoid absorption or allocation to examine the benefit of
circulating carotenoids and the potential cost of their allocation to plumage in
a controlled manner that is not possible in other systems. While these
experiments will yield information about the proximate mechanisms that maintain
signal honesty, bridging the gap between mechanism and function will greatly
advance the importance of this core research to understanding animal behavior.
Therefore, the second set of experiments will use a novel mate-choice
experimental design with tight control over male display phenotype to examine
whether the condition-dependent expression of carotenoid coloration is the
target of female preference. These tests will establish the ultimate behavioral
context for the mechanism studied in the first experiments by assessing how
carotenoid-based plumage coloration impacts mate choice as a component of the
overall multimodal songbird display.