* 1501927
* Creating Pathways for Big Data Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Suzzane Smith, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 950,721.00

The quantity of digital data created globally is growing exponentially, and
workers in many professions need skills to organize and analyze the deluge of
data that confronts them. To address the urgent need for workers who have "big
data" skills, the Oceans of Data Institute (ODI) of the Education Development
Center will work with four community colleges that are leaders in the area of
big data, data science, and data analytics to create a career pathway model for
big data careers, with special attention to the "middle skill" jobs that can be
filled by graduates of community college programs. Subject matter experts
representing a variety of professional fields will identify the entry-level,
middle-level, and high-level big data skills, knowledge, and behaviors that are
needed in the workplace, and these skills, knowledge, and behaviors will then be
organized and aligned with big data jobs. ODI and partners Bunker Hill Community
College (Massachusetts), Normandale Community College (Minnesota), Johnson
County Community College (Kansas), and Sinclair Community College (Ohio) will
work together to design the big data career pathway model. They will document
pathways to these careers via a system of stackable credentials that identify
associate degrees, certificates, and four-year programs leading to employment.
Each college will adapt the pathway model to fit the big data labor demand in
its geographic region. To build the capacity of faculty to teach big data
skills, Bunker Hill Community College will leverage its relationship with the
Broadening Advanced Technological Education Connections (BATEC) center to
deliver appropriate professional development for faculty. ODI and the partner
colleges will disseminate the project's products to a national audience of
community colleges (including minority serving institutions and tribal colleges)
and business/industry representatives hiring for big data
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology that the project team will use
to define the "Middle-Skill Big Data-Enabled Specialist" (MSBDES) has been used
successfully to define other emerging occupations, has been widely validated,
and has been used internationally to identify the skills needed by front-line
workers. The project's products will include an occupational profile of the
MSBDES, which will articulate the big data skills, knowledge, and behaviors
expected by industry. The profile will be paired with rubrics that describe
proficient performance of the big data middle skills. The profile and
performance rubrics will provide an assessment framework that will assist
community college faculty in evaluating student proficiency. These materials,
along with the stackable credentials, will guide other community colleges
seeking to develop big data courses and programs.