* 1501336
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Hormonal Regulation of Avian Biparental Care
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Kristina Smiley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2017
* USD 19,318.00

Parental care is an important component of reproduction that is observed in a
diverse range of animals and is especially common in birds. The neural and
hormonal basis of avian parental care is not well understood, especially in the
many birds where young are raised by both mothers and fathers working together.
The hormone prolactin has a well-established role in maternal care in mammals,
and so prolactin and its brain receptors are a promising candidate mechanism of
parental care to investigate in birds. The goal of this research is to
experimentally test for a causal role of prolactin in promoting the onset of
parental behavior in a biparental songbird, the zebra finch. This research will
provide new insight into the mechanisms of avian parental care, allowing the
integration of this important group into the comparative framework that will
provide the predictive power for understanding how these mechanisms may function
and evolve in other animals, including humans. The project will contribute to
the scientific training of undergraduates, including women and underrepresented
minorities. Additionally, the results will be promptly published in journals
accessed by a broad audience of researchers, presented at national meetings, and
disseminated to the public through a website and outreach programs for middle
school girls. The researchers determined that circulating prolactin (PRL) is
significantly higher in zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) during late
incubation and early post-hatching care compared to other times in the breeding
cycle. To test the hypothesis that PRL plays a causal role in promoting the
onset of parental behavior, they will perform two experiments testing the effect
of suppressing the normal peak in PRL during late stage incubation in breeding
birds, and experimentally increasing PRL in paired, but non-breeding, birds
given foster chicks. Parental behavior will be recorded in the nests with small
video cameras. To confirm that the treatments have the predicted effect on PRL
concentrations, plasma will be assayed before and after treatment using a
validated ELISA. On the last day of treatment brains will be collected to
determine the effect on central PRL-mediated cell signaling via the PRL receptor
using immunohistochemistry. All recordings and data in digital form will be
archived at Cornell University to allow public access using the archiving
services of the CU Library.