* 1501440
* An Unexpected Planet Population: How Did Super-Earths Acquire Their Currently Observed Properties?
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Angie Wolfgang, Wolfgang                Angie
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2018
* USD 278,000.00

Angie Wolfgang is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at The Pennsylvania
State University. She will be studying extrasolar planets that are up to four
times larger than Earth and that orbit their stars faster than Mercury orbits
the Sun. No such planets exist in our Solar System, yet they are extremely
common, so it is not well understood how they formed. Thankfully, the Kepler
Mission provides thousands of such planets to analyze. Wolfgang aims to better
understand the characteristics and possible histories of these planets by
adopting a big-picture approach which incorporates the available yet incomplete
information about each. In particular, she will combine physical models of
different evolutionary processes with a sophisticated population-wide
statistical framework to identify the most probable ways that these planets came
to have their current compositions and orbits. For her education efforts,
Wolfgang will develop and implement interactive, hands-on activities for a
multicultural community of Penn State freshmen who are interested in pursuing
careers in science and engineering. Because these activities more genuinely
reflect the process of scientific inquiry and discovery than most college
laboratory assignments and coursework, these students will gain valuable
experience with the skills needed to do cutting-edge research and will begin to
develop confidence and an identity as a scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Kepler Mission has demonstrated that sub-Neptune-sized planets are ubiquitous in
our Galaxy, yet it is a challenge to understand their compositional structure
and to explain their close-in orbits. Progress on these and other topics in
planet formation and evolution theory has been challenged by large measurement
uncertainties as well as significant detection biases and selection effects in
the detected Kepler population. Wolfgang will meet this need for a more data-
driven approach by coupling a sophisticated hierarchical Bayesian framework to
physical models and theoretical simulations of important evolutionary processes.
In particular, she will investigate the compositional and orbital evolution of
super-Earths and sub-Neptunes, quantifying the degree to which photoevaporation
and Kozai-Lidov oscillations have affected these planets' properties since the
dispersal of their protoplanetary disks. In doing so, Wolfgang will be able to
supply robust end conditions to planet formation theory and accelerate
theoretical understanding of the dominant processes during planet formation.
Wolfgang will mentor female astrophysics undergraduate and graduate students,
advise undergraduate research projects, serve as an instructor for the Penn
State Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers, and implement inquiry-based
activities to encourage the students in these programs - who often are members
of minority groups underrepresented in the sciences - to develop scientific
thinking skills and an identity as a scientist.