* 1501711
* Dissertation Research: Endogenic Microbial Community Structure and its Influence on Community Assembly and Speciation in Squamate Reptiles
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Colin Jackson, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,419.00

The goal of the project is to understand how communities of species are
structured and whether bacterial communities living inside vertebrates might
influence how new vertebrate species evolve. The project employs a novel
approach to investigating these questions by exploring the evolutionary
histories of both the bacteria found in the gut of reptiles and the evolutionary
history of the reptile hosts. By utilizing novel technologies the project will
reveal the extent to which bacterial communities living inside vertebrates are
structured by the ecology of the host (e.g. what the host eats, where they live)
or the evolutionary histories of the host (e.g. how they are related to other
species). Additionally, this project will test whether the presence of certain
bacterial groups helps drive diversification/speciation by creating greater
opportunity for the host (e.g. help with digesting new foods, live in new
areas). Data will be collected from a wide range of reptiles spanning five
countries and three continents. Bacteria are some of the oldest forms of life
and have interacted with multicellular life for nearly a billion years. This
will be the first study to characterize the gut bacterial communities of such a
diverse vertebrate group, and provide a synthetic test of evolution in
vertebrate hosts and the bacterial communities existing inside them. The study
will incorporate volunteers and students from Mississippi and the developing
nations of Brazil, Ethiopia, Guyana and Mexico. Undergraduate students and high
school teachers in Mississippi will get hands-on research experience and
instruction on identifying local amphibians and reptiles. Local scouts and
undergraduates in Ethiopia will gain valuable training that will advance their
education and provide them with marketable skills they can then apply to their
careers as field biologists.

This study aims to explore how the vertebrate endogenic microbiome (EM)
influences the process of diversification and to what extent these microbial
communities affect assembly of host communities. Squamate reptiles (snakes,
lizards) present an ideal system for such study as they are well sampled
phylogenetically, possess a wide range of ecological traits, and show less
dispersal and fragmentation than other vertebrate groups. Using high-throughput
next generation sequencing, endogenic bacterial communities (EBCs) for all major
lineages of Squamata in addition to outgroup reptilian lineages will be
characterized (alpha and beta diversity) to obtain fundamental information on
the EM of Reptilia. Key predictions include: (i) EBCs are phylogenetically
conserved within Squamata, (ii) only lineages that possess the appropriate EBC
will be able to exploit certain niches, (iii) certain EBCs facilitate
accelerated speciation rates of the host, (iv) EBCs are ecological traits that
can be used to characterize host ecology and directly influence the host
assembly process by limiting exploitable niche space.