* 1501880
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating Fossils and Molecules to Trace Ecological Divergence and Convergence in Marine Bivalves
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* David Jablonski, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2018
* USD 10,810.00

Closely related biological species are thought to exclude one another from a
particular habitat because they compete for similar food and habitat resources.
Yet, many closely related species inhabit the same geographic space. This
research dissects the tension between 1) the ecological pressure on closely
related, co-occurring species to use different resources, and 2) the
evolutionary tendency for closely related species to play similar ecological
roles. By studying ecologically important traits in pairs of closely related
species in the fossil record, the researchers will study the ecology of each
species when it is, first, isolated from, and then co-occurs with its near
relative, giving a direct window into the nature of evolutionary divergence or
convergence of those species as they interact. Thus, the balance of pressures
pushing species closer in form (as they enter the same environment) and pushing
them apart (as they come into ecological competition) can be assessed directly.
This research will collaborate with members of the ongoing Bivalve Tree of Life
effort and give one of the first examples of ecological evolution over time
among closely related bivalve species. Finally, this project will train one
graduate student and contribute course material to the researchers? interactive
Science Caf√© on the role of ecology in evolution for middle school students at
the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will investigate two prominent ecological hypotheses that suggest co-occurring,
closely related species should differ in their ecological traits to ease direct
competition for resources. ?Character displacement? predicts that competition
between species after they co-occur drives their ecological divergence whereas
?species sorting? involves the co-occurrence of species that already differed
ecologically before coming into sympatry. Character displacement and species
sorting will be tracked in pairs of related species by using the fossil record
to trace shifts from allopatry to sympatry and any corresponding change in
ecological traits through time. This project will construct a molecular
phylogeny for a genus of marine bivalves along the American coasts, Chione (9
extant species plus 3 extinct species fitted into the molecular tree via
analysis of character matrices), which coupled with spatially explicit fossil
data will provide unique access to the relation between character displacement,
species sorting, and phylogenetic relatedness. Given the tendency for ecological
similarity to correlate with relatedness, the researchers expect character
displacement and species sorting to operate along a continuum, where character
displacement predominates between more closely related species and species
sorting predominates between more distantly related species. However, ecological
selection imposed by the environment may trump selection mediated by
competition. In that case, species will express similar ecological traits where
they co-occur.