* 1501447
* InnovATE
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Ira Amado Rosenthal, Palm Beach State College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 868,105.00

The "InnovATE" project is increasing graduates in STEM disciplines, particularly
underrepresented minorities and women, in response to demand for local, highly-
skilled workforce needs in the power, aerospace, and manufacturing industries.
Synergistic programs are increasing awareness of STEM in middle through high
schools, strengthening math skills, and developing a pathway for pursuit of
associate and baccalaureate high-tech degrees. These programs include: a STEM
outreach program impacting 1680 middle and secondary students; a summer program
for incoming students to complete the Production Technician Certification
earning 15 college credit-hours; a contextualized Intermediate Algebra gateway
course to improve math skills proficiency; intensive academic support through
math/science Supplemental Instruction; and articulation agreements to
baccalaureate degrees.

Intellectual merit drivers of InnovATE are aligned with rigorous assessments to
advance understanding of which tools and strategies aid successful completion of
associate degrees in Electrical Power and Engineering Technologies. This
includes developing assessment tools and activities for identifying key factors
influencing enrollment in STEM programs, establishing instructional supports
needed in Mathematics, studying the influence of mentors and industry partners
have on students to induce willingness to succeed, and evaluating learning
strategies to advance discovery of how STEM technicians learn, study, and train.
InnovATE will address the need to diversify the STEM workforce by targeting
Title I schools as the primary pipeline for students from underrepresented
groups enrolling in the college to advance desired economic and societal
outcomes. In addition, InnovATE's broader impacts will provide a transferable
model to increase students pursuing degrees to join a highly-qualified STEM
workforce.