* 1501514
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The relative contribution of pollen vs. seed dispersal to gene flow in a fragmented Neotropical landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Jordan Karubian, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2017
* USD 18,025.00

Deforestation is one of the leading threats to biodiversity around the world.
When large areas of forests are cut down, often to accommodate humans, the
chance of extinction increases for plants and animals that remain in isolated
fragments. For plants, the movement of pollen and seeds has the potential to
connect these pieces of forest and increase long-term population health. This
project will examine how pollen and seed movement among forest fragments
influences genetic connectivity and diversity, thereby minimizing risk of
extinction. This study is located in a rapidly developing region in northwest
Ecuador where the local communities live alongside a high diversity of plants
and animals. The results of this study will be shared directly with local owners
of forest fragments, local schools and communities, as well as regional
government agencies in charge of managing forests in the area. As part of this
project, workshops will be given to local communities describing the biology and
importance of forest fragments. US undergraduate volunteers will be recruited to
participate in the proposed research and will receive training in field and
laboratory techniques. This project will support the research and training of a
doctoral student.

The Neotropical palm Oenocarpus bataua is unusual in that seeds stay attached to
established seedlings for several years. This characteristic affords the
investigators the ability to separate the genetic contributions of pollen and
seed dispersal within the same individuals by genotyping both seeds and leaves.
Established seedlings throughout 5 additional forest fragments will be sampled
for seed and leaf tissue. These samples will be combined with tissue samples
already collected from 12 fragments. Microsatellite markers will be used to
genotype these tissues and results will be used to estimate whether pollen or
seed dispersal is contributing more to effective genetic diversity and genetic
structure. The same data will be used to identify pollen and seed sources within
and across fragments, as well as to compare genetic structure between fragments
and continuous forest. The research will improve upon current approaches for
studying gene flow of fragmented plant populations by unambiguously determining
the separate and joint contributions of pollen and seed dispersal to realized
patterns of genetic variation. This research is complemented by a simulation
model that generates predictions of how restricting either or both pollen and
seed dispersal will affect levels of genetic diversity and structure among
forest fragments.