* 1501031
* Boundary Problems in the Boltzmann theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Chanwoo Kim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 177,992.00

The kinetic theory and its models such as the Boltzmann equation and Vlasov
equations have played an important role in the understanding of problems in gas
dynamics, plasma physics, and fluid equations. In many physical situations, the
particles in various models interact with boundaries, and this interaction
creates several interesting phenomena such as the formation of singularities. In
general, boundary effects may not stay only near the boundary but also impact on
the whole interior dynamics. Therefore the boundary effects are important and
have rich application in many cases. However, boundary problems in kinetic
models are mathematically challenging due to their singular nature. This project
aims to develop new mathematical tools to handle these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project studies several important
boundary problems arising in kinetic models and fluid equations. The first topic
regards optimal regularity of Boltzmann solutions in bounded domains with
several physical boundary conditions for both dynamical and stationary problems.
The second topic concerns the boundary-field interaction in kinetic models such
as Vlasov-Poisson-Boltzmann systems. The third topic is to understand the
relation between steady Boltzmann solutions and the incompressible Navier-
Stokes-Fourier systems in the presence of a boundary when the mean free path is
sufficiently small. The last topic concerns fluid-material interaction such as
surfactant dynamics on viscous surface waves. Results of the project are
expected to improve modeling capabilities for a wide range of problems of
interest to other scientists and engineers.