* 1501301
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Riverscape genetics: testing the role of river properties with population-genetic models in Neotropical freshwater fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Andrea Thomaz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,179.00

Genetic data can provide a window in the factors that structure and drive
divergence among populations. In this study, we will use such data to reveal how
current and past landscapes features determine population structure. Such
inferences, however, are challenging without methodologies to predict the
genetic signature under such conditions. The proposed work will be a step
towards addressing this knowledge gap with an application to a freshwater fish
biodiversity hotspot, the Atlantic Coastal Rainforest of Brazil. The proposed
work will provide critical knowledge about freshwater fishes in this particular
ecosystem, as well as be broadly applicable to riverine environments in other
world regions. The project provide insights into the properties of rivers that
make them critical to conservation efforts because of their impact in population
persistence and movement patterns of organisms living in the rivers. The PIs
will also collaborate with Brazilian students on this project, promoting
international scientific engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
use computer simulations to generate expected patterns of genetic variation so
the impact of specific river properties (e.g., the length of river segments, the
number of connecting tributaries, and the flow regime) on movement patterns of
an endemic tetra can be discerned. Such a mechanistic understanding will be
instrumental to interpreting past studies that have documented differences in
genetic variation between different regions. The tests developed here will allow
re-evaluation of those prior studies to determine what processes structuring
biodiversity might differ among regions. As such, the work will provide a
general tool that can advance our understanding of the processes generating
biodiversity patterns.