* 1501370
* Combinatorial and Real Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Frank Sottile, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 05/31/2019
* USD 347,630.00

Algebraic geometry, which is the mathematical study of solutions to systems of
polynomial equations, is a core mathematical discipline noted for its
theoretical depth and its interactions with other areas of mathematics.
Algebraic geometry is also a tool for applications, since physical objects can
be described by polynomial equations, and relations between concepts in science
and engineering may be modeled by polynomials. Whatever their source, once
polynomials enter the picture, the theoretical base, trove of classical
examples, and modern computational tools of algebraic geometry may be brought to
bear on the problem at hand. This research project aims to strengthen the role
of algebraic geometry as a tool for applications, in two ways. First, a major
focus will be on developing the interface between algebraic geometry and
applications. Second is work on combinatorial aspects of algebraic geometry, for
this develops tools and ideas to better understand objects in algebraic geometry
with special structure, and these highly structured objects are those that
appear most commonly in the interactions between algebraic geometry and other
fields, both within mathematics and in the applied sciences. This project will
also involve training of students and postdocs, the investigator's outreach
activities at the local level through a mathematics circle, and his continued
interaction with mathematics in Nigeria.

Oftentimes, objects from algebraic geometry that arise in other parts of
mathematics or science have strong combinatorial structures (e.g., toric
varieties or Grassmannians) or else the application demands real solutions.
Consequently, the research in areas of combinatorial and real algebraic geometry
in this project will serve both to advance our basic understanding of these
topics and to help build a foundation for applications. This project involves
research in three topics within algebraic geometry: real toric varieties,
tropical geometry, and Schubert calculus. In each of these areas the
investigator will work with collaborators and students on projects ranging from
developing foundations to understanding key examples to work inspired by
problems from applications. Of particular note are the goals of developing a
rich and robust theory of irrational toric varieties, understanding the geometry
and topology of complements of tropical objects, establishing positivity in type
C Schubert calculus via a useful theory of shifted dual equivalence, and
understanding Galois groups in the Schubert calculus.

This award is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory and Combinatorics
programs.