* 1501566
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effects of pollinator diversity loss on plant-pollinator interaction networks and native plant reproduction in scrub ecosystems of Southern California
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* David Holway, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,092.00

Human development often causes declines in the diversity of pollinators, but
little is known about how such declines impact pollination ecosystem services in
natural (e.g., non-agricultural) ecosystems. For a series of scrub habitat field
in large natural reserves and in small patches of natural scrub habitat embedded
in urban landscapes sites in Southern California. The research will examine how
declines in pollinator diversity impact interactions between pollinators and
native plants and the reproduction of a native plant species. The findings of
this project will be relevant to the conservation, management, and restoration
of plant-pollinator interactions in natural ecosystems. Additionally, at least
six undergraduate students will receive training in a diversity of laboratory
and field techniques as well as mentorship regarding careers in science.
Additional broader impacts of this project include engaging high school students
in hands-on scientific research and contributing data on the diversity and
distribution of Southern California native pollinators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will evaluate the causal link between pollinator diversity and the
structure and function of plant-pollinator interaction networks. Pollination
networks will be constructed using empirical floral visitation observations
study sites located in natural reserves and scrub habitat fragments in Southern
California. A native plant species will also be experimentally introduced into
study sites to evaluate how the restructuring of pollination networks may
potentially impact plant pollination and reproduction. Two hypotheses will be
tested: (1) pollinator diversity loss yields networks with higher modularity and
fewer links than expected based on the number of extant pollinator taxa, and (2)
changes in network architecture associated with pollinator diversity loss
negatively affect floral visitation, pollen deposition, and overall reproductive
fitness of a focal native plant species.