* 1502571
* Three-Dimensional Teaching and Learning: Rebuilding and Researching an Online Middle School Curriculum
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Pamela Van Scotter, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,999,916.00

This project was funded by the Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) program that
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. The project, in collaboration with Oregon
Public Broadcasting, will develop an online curriculum-based supported by a
teacher professional development (PD) program by rebuilding an existing life
science unit of Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS) Middle School
Science. The materials will include strategically integrated multimedia elements
including animations, interactive learning experiences, and enhanced readings
for students, as well as classroom videos for teachers that will help all users
gain a deeper understanding of three-dimensional learning. The project is
designed to be an exemplar of fully digital Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) aligned resources for teachers and students, creating an NGSS-aligned
learning environment combining disciplinary core ideas with science and
engineering practices and cross-cutting concepts. Using the powerful affordances
of a digital environment, the project will invigorate and inspire learners and
support teachers as only a media-rich environment can
do.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and research the project
innovation, the combination of digital instructional materials for students and
online teacher PD using a proven lesson-analysis framework. Although prior
research has demonstrated the efficacy of the lesson analysis PD and curriculum
elements independently, there has been little investigation of their joint
ability to transform teaching and learning. The project will merge research and
development in this project by incorporating a complex array of multi-component
assessment activities, including classroom-based assessments, in a quasi-
experimental study. Assessment activities will be designed using an evidence-
centered design process that will involve the careful selection and development
of assessment tasks, scoring rubrics, and criteria for scoring based on the
performance expectations (PEs) and the best ways to elicit evidence about
student proficiency with those PEs. The research, carried out by SRI
International, will use multi-component tasks that will support inferences about
student learning and advance understanding of how to assess NGSS learning.
Project research and resources, which will include a digital, middle school life
sciences unit, teacher PD and online digital resources, and related assessment
tools, which will be widely disseminated to policy makers, researchers, and
practitioners.