* 1502853
* US-URUGUAY-BRAZIL Collaborative IRES: Ampullariidae Model using Phylogeography, Laboratory Integration with Field Investigations into Ecology and Diversity (AMPLIFIED)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/30/2014,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Hayes, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 40,928.00

This collaborative International Research Experience for Students (IRES) award
will support 15 U.S. undergraduate students and one graduate student, under the
direction of Drs. Romi Burks from Southwestern University and Kenneth Hayes from
University of Hawaii, to carry out collaborative research in Brazil and Uruguay
for three years. The program is co-organized by Dr. Silvano Thiengo from the
Instituto Oswaldo Cruz in Brazil and Dr. Mariana Meerhoff from the Universidad
de la Republica in Uruguay. The goal of the project is to create an
Ampullariidae model for a group of aquatic snails commonly called apple snails
using phylogeography, laboratory integration, and field inquiry. Brazil harbors
the greatest number of ampullariid species and genera and provides the largest
latitudinal span (~37º) of any country in South America. Additionally, the
original Guaraní, word "Uruguay" translated into Spanish as "river of the
snails." Study of the phylogeny of these snails can be used to investigate
important evolutionary processes, particularly those associated with major
habitat transitions (e.g. marine to freshwater to terrestrial). Students'
research will focus on quantifying genetic variation in this understudied group
of aquatic snails, identifying patterns of speciation, investigating traits that
promote invasiveness, and determining reproductive potential.&lt;br/&gt;This
IRES award brings together a diverse community of researchers and students from
the United States, Brazil, and Uruguay. In addition to working directly with the
host scientists, U.S. students will blog about their international research
experience and work closely with other undergraduate and graduate students from
the host country. Participating students will also develop educational materials
that can be used locally in their host countries. Upon return to their home
institution, students will disseminate their results through professional
meetings, scientific publications, and social media networks. The research also
has important societal benefits as apple snails are highly invasive species and
vectors of parasitic nematodes that can cause illness in mammals, including
humans. Insights into how the trophic roles that these snails inhabit in native
habitats may lend insight into how to deal with their presence in invaded
wetland ecosystems such as the Florida Everglades.