* 1502763
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative: The Microfungi Collections Consortium: A Networked Approach to Digitizing Small Fungi with Large Impacts on the Function and Health of Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Matthew Smith, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 201,681.00

Microscopic fungi (microfungi) represent a diverse assemblage that is
distributed worldwide and includes bread molds, plant pathogens, powdery
mildews, rusts, slime molds, and water molds. A large percentage of these
organisms are harmless or even beneficial, but some cause disease and death in
animals, plants, and other fungi resulting in major economic loss and serious
negative implications for human and ecosystem health. Despite their importance,
little is known about their distribution, diversity, ecology, or host
associations. This project is a collaborative effort involving 38 institutions
in 31 states and aims to consolidate data from specimens housed in biodiversity
collections for 2.3 million microfungi specimens and make these data available
through online resources. The consolidation and increased accessibility of these
data is critical to inform and promote new and innovative research, education
and community engagement around this little-known but important group of
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specimen data generated by this project will be
used to assess natural and human-induced environmental changes on microfungi
distributions, and evaluate the impact of these changes on the function and
health of ecosystems. This project fills a critical gap in the national
digitization effort by contributing images, digitizing specimen label data, and
linking associated ancillary data for over 1.2 million North American specimens
of microfungi. Additionally, nomenclature and taxonomic information will be
updated to reflect the newest practices as dictated by the International Codes
for Nomenclature. These data will provide a foundation for making informed
decisions by agribusinesses, educators, forest managers, government agencies,
horticulturalists, policy makers, researchers, and the general public. The
broader education goals of this project will be facilitated through the
development and implementation of a teaching module for high school biology on
the economic importance of microfungi. This award is made as part of the
National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting
from this award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).