* 1502046
* Marine Advanced Technology Education Support Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Jill Zande, Monterey Peninsula College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,710,540.00

Marine technology is vital to many aspects of our national economy. This project
characterizes and researches trends in the ocean workforce, identifies the
knowledge and skills this workforce needs, places this information in the hands
of educational institutions at all levels, and works to ensure that curricula
and programs are appropriately preparing students for the workplace. MATE's
programs represent unique approaches to engaging students in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) learning experiences and developing the
capacity for increasing the nation's technological workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a Support Center for marine technology education, the
MATE Center will: &lt;br/&gt;1. Expand and strengthen partnerships with academic
institutions, employers, and professional societies to better prepare students
for the ocean workforce. &lt;br/&gt;2. Develop an international remotely
operated vehicle (ROV) technician competency and assessment program endorsed by
industry. &lt;br/&gt;3. Continue to improve student learning in STEM through
activities such as regional and international underwater robotics (ROV)
competitions that simulate the high performance workplace and build academic and
industry partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;4. Offer faculty professional development
institutes that focus on marine technology, create an awareness of ocean-related
careers, and empower instructors to deliver interdisciplinary, technology-rich
learning experiences to their students. &lt;br/&gt;5. Continue the MATE at-sea
technical internship program and increase the numbers of underrepresented
students participating in the program. &lt;br/&gt;6. Disseminate MATE products,
including curricula, textbooks, occupational guidelines, competencies, and
procedural guides, in both traditional formats and electronically through the
Center's web sites www.marinetech.org and www.OceanCareers.com.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The MATE Center's breadth of academic, industry, and professional
society partnerships support the development, testing, and widespread
implementation of exceptional marine technical education programs, instructional
materials, activities, and the dissemination of these innovative resources.
This, in turn, strengthens linkages between educational programs; catalyzes
other activities that provide students with additional educational opportunities
and pathways to careers; and helps to address both regional and national marine
technical workforce needs. These efforts will prepare a diverse workforce that
will help ensure U.S. competitiveness in a global economy that is currently, and
increasingly, dependent on ocean activities.