* 1502934
* GEM: Subauroral Polarization Streams (SAPS): Stormtime Empirical Modeling, Database Generation and Comparison with Rice Convection Model-Equilibrium (RCM-E)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Phillip Anderson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 270,440.00

During space storms, electric fields and particle precipitation expand into mid-
latitudes equatorward of the auroral oval. Electric fields, produced by the
interaction of the magnetosphere with the onrushing solar wind ultimately are
responsible for the auroral oval but they also cause high-energy electrons and
ions to drift deep into the inner magnetosphere. The inner magnetosphere maps
along magnetic field lines into the midlatitude ionosphere causing disturbances
there. On the dusk side of the inner magnetosphere, the ions penetrate closer to
the Earth (and thus to lower latitudes) than the electrons. The weak magnetic
field-aligned currents associated with ion pressure gradients at high altitude
in space surrounding the Earth close through the low-density sub-auroral
ionosphere on the dusk side and in the process produce strong westward electric
fields that set the subauroral ionospheric plasma in motion. The electric fields
and the drifts they produce in the ionosphere are called subauroral polarization
streams (SAPS). The resulting strong ionospheric electric fields map back out
along magnetic field lines producing effects in the magnetosphere. This coupling
is important in producing space weather disturbances. The proposal will develop
an empirical model based on a suite of low-earth orbiting satellites that
describes the global distribution of SAPS fields in the ionosphere as a function
of solar and geophysical conditions. An important aspect of this work is an
investigation of the feedback between the electrical conductance of the
ionosphere and the SAPS evolution. The results will contribute to our ability to
understand and predict the temporal evolution of space weather disturbances and
their impacts on vulnerable technologies. Of particular importance, SAPS draw
dense plasma from the dayside ionosphere in plumes up over the polar cap, which
can disrupt GPS signals resulting in large errors in global positioning. A
graduate student will be trained on the project at the University of
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposers will use 80 years of ionospheric
observations covering different local time sectors taken by satellites in the
Defense Meteorological Satellite, Dynamics Explorer, and Atmosphere Explorer
Programs. These will be sorted by solar activity and geophysical parameters to
construct the first empirical model of subauroral electric fields. The data will
also be used in a superposed epoch analysis of magnetic storms to understand the
evolution of the SAPS electric fields during different stages of the storm. The
RCM-E model, which combines the Rice Convection Model (RCM) with an equilibrium
(self-consistent) magnetic field model (E), is a physics-based model that will
be used to explore the evolution of the SAPS and test how ionospheric
conductance affects this evolution. Given the plasma distribution for each
species along with the magnetic field and electric potential at the outer
boundary of the inner magnetosphere at high altitude, and the electric
conductance pattern in the ionosphere, RCM solves for the electrodynamics of the
coupled magnetosphere-ionosphere system. An important new aspect of this work is
the focus on the effects of ion-neutral coupling through the changes it produces
in the imposed ionospheric conductance pattern (i.e., progressive decrease in
subauroral density as the storm progresses).