* 1502176
* SCH: EXP: Old is Gold - Co-Production of Healthy Living for the Elderly Through Time Banking
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* John Carroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 669,090.00

This project is funded under a joint solicitation between the National Science
Foundation and the National Institutes of Health, named "Smart and Connected
Health" (SCH), which aims to accelerate the development and use of innovative
approaches that would support the much needed transformation of healthcare
across the entire population. The elderly represent a growing segment of the
total population due to the mutually reinforcing effects of declining birth
rates and increasing longevity. The prospect of caring for this elderly
population by scaling current custodial approaches is not feasible: There are
not enough younger people in the population. But beyond numbers, it is not clear
that simply scaling up custodial approaches is even desirable. Elderly people
comprise social assets to many kinds of organizations including corporations and
local communities. Moreover, engaging in personally meaningful activity directly
contributes to enjoying longer and healthier lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates timebank interactions as a socio-technical intervention to
expand and extend opportunities for elderly people to live independently and
productively, and more specifically, to cooperate with others to be more active
and engaged. People use timebanks to exchange services valued by the time
required to perform the services. Many timebank interactions are co-productions,
services that reciprocally benefit both parties. These types of exchanges can be
particularly powerful in helping both giver and receiver become more active and
engaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project analyzes the co-production of healthy
living, in which people provide and receive social services and support. For
example, when two people take a walk or play cards together, they are providing
mutual care; each is helping the other to be more active and engaged. The study
is a partnership with an aging-in-place organization and a retirement community,
in order to investigate different living arrangements among the elderly. The
study first analyzes current practices for healthy living among the elderly, and
identify opportunities for timebanking support of these practices. Guided by
this, timebanking tools and infrastructure to enhance co-production of health in
communities of elderly people are designed, deployed, and evaluated.