* 1502892
* PlantingScience: Digging Deeper Together - A Model for Collaborative Teacher/Scientist Professional Development
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Joseph Taylor, Botanical Society of America
* Continuing Grant
* Gavin Fulmer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,884,859.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project will design, develop, and test a new professional
development (PD) model for high school biology teachers that focuses on plant
biology, an area of biology that teachers feel less prepared to teach. The new
PD model will bring teachers and scientists together, in-person and online, to
guide students in conducting authentic science investigations and to reflect on
instructional practices and student learning. The project will also develop and
test the outcomes of a summer institute for teachers and a website that will
support the online mentoring of students and the professional development of
teachers. Outcomes of the project will include the development of a facilitation
guide for the teacher professional development model, a website to support
student mentoring and teacher professional development, a series of resources
for teachers and scientists to use in working with students, and empirical
evidence of the success of the new professional development
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This full research and development project will
employ a pre-test/post-test control group design to test the efficacy of a
professional development model for high school biology teachers. The
professional development model is grounded in a theory of action based on the
premise that when teachers are engaged with scientists and students in a
technology-enabled learning community, students will demonstrate higher levels
of achievement than those using more traditional instructional materials and
methodologies. The means of post-intervention outcome measures will be compared
across treatment and comparison groups in a cluster-randomized trial where
teachers will be randomly assigned to treatment groups. The study will recruit a
nation-wide sample to ensure that participants represent a wide array of
geographic and demographic contexts, with preference given to Title 1 schools.
The research questions are: a) To what extent does participation in the Digging
Deeper community of teachers and scientists affect teacher knowledge and
practices? b) To what extent does participation in the Digging Deeper community
of teachers and scientists affect scientists? quality of mentorship and
teaching? And c) To what extent does student use of the online program and
participation in the learning community with scientist mentors affect student
learning? Instruments will be developed or adapted to measure relevant student
and teacher knowledge, student motivation, and teacher practices. Computer-
mediated discourse analysis will be used over the course of the study to track
online interactions among students, teachers, and science mentors.