* 1502436
* Collaborative Research:  GEM: System Study of the Plasmasphere in Solar Wind-Magnetosphere Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Brian Walsh, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 02/29/2020
* USD 124,062.00

The Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) Program is a broad-based, community-
initiated research program on the physics of the Earth's magnetosphere and the
coupling of the magnetosphere to the atmosphere and to the solar wind. The work
of GEM is accomplished in a series of campaigns and focus groups that solve
specific problems leading to the construction of a global Geospace General
Circulation Model (GGCM) with predictive capability. This project will
contribute essential results to this goal pertaining to understanding the role
of the magnetospheric plasma distribution and density in determining the
efficiency of the solar wind-magnetosphere coupling. In addition, the project
supports the development of independent research careers for two early-career
space physics scientist. It also will offer educational opportunities for
undergraduate students both at University of California Berkeley and University
of Michigan Ann Arbor. The ultimate goal of this project is the development and
validation of a global model capable of reproducing accurate plasmasphere
dynamics and the self-consistent effects of the plasmasphere on the dayside
reconnection rate and overall magnetopause dynamics. Utilizing existing state-
of-the-art models, two different approaches for incorporating the plasmasphere
in a global MHD model will be developed and evaluated using multipoint
spacecraft measurements from the THEMIS, Van Allen Belts Probes, and LANL
satellites missions. The best, and fully validated, approach will then be used
to model three different storm events and measure the reconnection rates in a
variety of ways with and without inclusion of the plasmasphere.