* 1502461
* GRC/GRS: Nanomaterials for Applications in Energy Technology: Energy Conversion, Storage, and Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2015
* Uwe Kortshagen, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 07/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

Principal Investigator: Uwe R Kortshagen&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Gordon Research
Conferences&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1502461&lt;br/&gt;Title: GRC/GRS:
Nanomaterials for Applications in Energy Technology:
Energy&lt;br/&gt;Conversion, Storage, and
Transport&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of new sources of sustainable energy s is a crucial challenge for
the 21st century. The unique properties of nanomaterials have great potential to
improve technologies for renewable energy production systems, leading to higher
process efficiencies and lower manufacturing costs. The 2015 Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) and the Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Nanomaterials for
Applications in Energy Technology (NET) focus on identifying the progress,
challenges and opportunities of interdisciplinary scientific research to support
emerging applications of nanomaterials in renewable energy production and
storage technologies. The GRC-NET will be held February 22-27, 2015, at the
Ventura Beach Marriott, Ventura Beach, CA. The 2015 GRC-NET has an associated
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), which is a gathering dedicated exclusively to
contributions from graduate students and post-doctoral research associates. The
GRS-NET immediately precedes the GRC-NET on February 21-22, 2015, at the Ventura
Beach Marriott. This award will provide partial support for both the GRC and GRS
on Nanomaterials for Applications in Energy
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of new sources of sustainable energy is a crucial challenge for the
21st century. The tunable properties and abundance of interfaces give
nanomaterials great potential to contribute paradigm-changing approaches to
energy technology, potentially leading to higher process efficiencies and lower
device manufacturing costs. However, such gains have not yet been realized in
many areas of energy technology, due in part to lack of complete understanding
of fundamental energy conversion, storage, and transport processes, the
challenges associated with integrating nanomaterials into energy devices, the
difficulties in inexpensively producing large amounts of nanomaterials with
well-defined properties, and the lack of full assessment of the potential health
and environmental impacts of nanomaterials. The 2015 Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) and the Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Nanomaterials for Applications in
Energy Technology (NET) focus on identifying the progress, challenges and
opportunities of interdisciplinary scientific research to support emerging
applications of nanomaterials in renewable energy production and storage
technologies. The GRC-NET will be held February 22-27, 2015, at the Ventura
Beach Marriott, Ventura Beach, CA. The 2015 GRC-NET has an associated Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS), which is a gathering dedicated exclusively to
contributions from graduate students and post-doctoral research associates. The
GRS-NET immediately precedes the GRC-NET on February 21-22, 2015, at the Ventura
Beach Marriott.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenges of exploiting novel
nanomaterials for applications in energy technology cross the fields of physics,
chemistry and engineering. The GRC-NET and GRS-NET focus on exploring the
fundamental mechanisms involved in energy conversion, storage, and transport
with nanomaterials, while also illuminating novel approaches in materials design
and synthesis and evaluating materials sustainability issues. A primary goal of
the conference will be to illustrate how novel and sustainable nanomaterials
enable a multitude of novel or more efficient energy technologies, including
solar cells, photo-physical approaches for producing renewable solar fuels such
can as hydrogen, higher capacity batteries, and more efficient fuel cells. Both
the GRC-NET and GRS NET aim at fostering interactions between scientists from
different disciplines and stages of their careers working in academia, national
research laboratories, and industry. The emphasis on new, largely unpublished
work will make this conference a premier platform for scientific exchange on the
future developments in the nexus of nanomaterials and energy technology.
Furthermore, the culture of this Gordon Research Conference emphasizes the
training of junior scientists, including graduate students, post-doctoral
researchers, and tenure-track faculty. The single-session conference format with
a limited number of invited talks and ample time for joint activities and
scientific discussion gives junior scientists the opportunity to get to know the
leaders in