* 1502059
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Plant toxicity at the top of a tropical mountain
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Lee Dyer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2016
* USD 18,562.00

The "chemical arms race" between plants and their specialist herbivores is
characterized by high diversities of both plant defenses and insect herbivores
with adaptations to those defenses, and is considered to be a driving force of
biodiversity. The newly discovered plant toxins in the tropical pepper plant,
Piper kelleyi, are consumed and metabolized by caterpillars that specialize on
this plant. These chemicals are toxic to all other insects, especially in higher
light environments. The research will quantitatively measure how the abundance
and diversity of plant toxins respond to different light intensities and will
document how specialized caterpillars evolve in response to differences in plant
chemistry. The research strategy links the most recent advances in genetics and
organic chemistry with important ecological questions about plant-insect
interactions. The project will enhance graduate education and will promote
science education through interactive projects with local K-12 students,
teachers, and an international group of collaborators. In addition to providing
insight into the origins of biodiversity, documenting the effects of variation
in plant chemistry on interacting trophic levels provides data that could be
useful for pharmacology and agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation
research will provide a significant contribution to studies of how plant
secondary metabolites contribute to the origin and maintenance of biodiversity
in the tropics. The work examines specific hypotheses relevant to coevolutionary
theory using the recently discovered plant secondary metabolites of the tropical
understory shrub, Piper kelleyi (Piperaceae). These compounds, which dimerize
and are more toxic at higher light levels, are consumed and metabolized by
specialist geometrid caterpillars in the genus Eois but they are very toxic to
generalists. The hypotheses tested using this model system include: 1) if
distinct phytochemical profiles are found in different host plant populations,
these can function as isolating mechanisms for herbivores, and 2) these
isolating mechanisms lead to speciation of specialist herbivores. Light
intensities will be manipulated to quantify their effects on intraspecific
phytochemical variation, and population genomics techniques will provide tests
for local adaptation of detoxification of these compounds by specialist
caterpillars. The project will also provide opportunities for the graduate
student, who will promote science education through interactive projects with
local K-12 students, teachers, and an international team of chemists and
biologists.