* 1502776
* P2C2:Collaborative Research: Rocky Mountain Ecohydrology During the Eemian Interglacial
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Max Berkelhammer, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 226,654.00

This award's goal is to assess controls on Rocky Mountain forest health during
the Eemian-interglacial (beginning ~130,000 and ending ~ 115,000 years ago), the
most recent period in Earth?s history when growing season temperatures exceeded
those of today. Since the Eemian warming occurred in the context of pre-
industrial partial carbon dioxide (pCO2) concentrations, the research aims to
isolate the response of dominant tree species to growing season temperatures
that are comparable to those predicted to be normal by AD 2100.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes advantage of recently recovered and
well-preserved Eemian-age wood samples from Snowmass, Colorado available to this
project through collaboration with the Denver Museum of Nature and Science. The
Eemian wood samples provide a rare opportunity to explore how forests in the
western U.S. have responded in the past to summer temperatures ~3-5Â°C higher
than today?s. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boreal forests play a critical role in the
global carbon cycle and provide important macrofaunal habitat and ecosystem
services. The simultaneous and coupled influences of warming, changes in
mountain hydrology (such as the timing of snowmelt) and elevated pCO2 that are
predicted to occur over the next century have led to widely disparate
projections on the response of this ecosystem to global change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will make sub-seasonally-resolved delta
oxygen-18 and carbon-13 (d18O and d13C) isotopic measurements on modern and
Eemian wood samples from species in the southern Rocky Mountains that were
common during the Eemian and remain dominant today. These wood samples will be
used to test how growing season length, water utilization (i.e., summer rain
versus snowmelt) and Water Use Efficiency during the Eemian (i.e., warm
temperatures and low pCO2) compare to today (i.e., "cool" temperatures and high
pCO2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This analysis will provide clarity on whether
recent changes in a plant?s Water Use Efficiency is a product of the CO2
fertilization effect or from coupled changes in CO2 and temperature. In addition
to the isotope measurements, the researchers will generate nested (50 km
resolution) isotope-enabled general circulation model (GCM) simulations under
Eemian and modern forcings to provide climatic inputs for the ecohydrological
and ecophysiological process models used to interpret the proxy data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The products of this research will be an assessment of how
temperature-driven shifts in surface hydrology (snow and soil processes),
atmospheric circulation (North American Monsoon extent and duration), and
surface/leaf temperatures combine to improve or disintegrate forest health,
including increases in large wildfires and rates of tree mortality in the
western U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support two early career
scientists working at the intersection of paleoclimatology, ecology, and climate
dynamics. The Chicago-based multi-institutional collaboration will facilitate
undergraduate and graduate research opportunities in stable isotope geochemistry
and climate modeling that are leveraged between institutions and are fundamental
for twenty-first century scientific training. Additionally, there is a strong
collaboration with the Denver Museum of Nature and Science for research and
education.