* 1502543
* Neurotechnologically inspired multilayered polymer electrolyte membranes to harness ion concentration gradient for energy restoration
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Thein Kyu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 407,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main concept of this project
emerges from the neuronal circuits of the body as paradigms for novel types of
solid-state batteries based on mechanisms operative in neurotransmission. The
brain controls various functions of the body through the nervous system composed
of neuronal networks. Neurons are excitable, individual cells making specific
contacts with other surrounding neurons. Their signal-processing is empowered by
ion osmosis, driven by ion concentration gradients across the cell membrane
which regulates passage of selective ions via ionic channels. The concept of
polymer-based solid lithium ion batteries to be explored in this project shares
this common origin with neuronal networks, as it operates by harnessing ion
concentration gradients across the proposed "multilayered polymer electrolyte
membranes" (MLPEM) which contain different ion concentrations in each layer,
thus generating an internal voltage. The proposed concentration-gradient
approach to battery design is conceptually similar to the neuronal operation of
an electric eel, whereby series of thousands of innervated and non-innervated
cell membranes are capable of generating internal voltages of about 600 volts to
fend off predators. Just as the neural network of the electric eel allows this
voltage to be regenerated, the proposed MLPEM batteries could be rechargeable on
their own. The working principle of the self-rechargeable battery in this
project is that the mobile lithium cation will be transported to the cathode
during discharging, but it will revert back to the anode during battery resting,
thereby restoring the ion concentration gradient and hence a voltage. This
project will explore these aspects by synthesizing and processing multilayered
polymer electrolyte membranes allowing ionic concentration gradients, evaluate
and attempt to optimize the ionic conductivity, the thermal and electrochemical
stability, and the mechanical properties of the battery. If successful, this
project may benefit society by leading to novel lightweight, shape-conformable,
thermally and electrochemically stable, flame-retardant, self-rechargeable
batteries. The project also includes integration of research and education
through interdisciplinary training of students and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is inspired by the neuronal circuits
of the body as paradigms for novel types of solid-state batteries based on
mechanisms operative in neurotransmission, e.g. the generation of high voltages
by electric eels followed by internal recharging. It focuses on five thrust
areas: (1) Development of all-solid-state multilayered polymer electrolyte
membranes (MLPEM) having specific chemical and electrochemical compatibility
with electrodes for enhancing energy-storage capacity. MLPEM will be fabricated
by stacking individual polymer electrolyte (PEM) layers having different ion
populations by photopolymerizing network-precursor (poly(ethylene glycol)
diacrylate)/solid plasticizer (succinonitrile)/ionic salt (lithium bis-
trifluorosulfonylimide). The ion concentration gradient thus produced in MLPEM
will create potential differences across the membrane interfaces, thereby
affording self-rechargeability of the battery. (2) Fabrication of directionally
aligned phase-separated domains having various concentration gradients via
holographic photopolymerization-induced phase separation in multicomponent solid
electrolytes containing plasticizer and modifiers as a means of creating
networks of micro-electrolyte cells. (3) Synthesis of PEM additives such as
amido-carbonyl carbamate and amido-carbamate to prevent uncontrolled solid
electrolyte interface formation on electrodes. (4) Grafting of poly(ethylene
glycol) diamine to multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) followed by end-capped
reaction with carbamate derivatives to improve interface compatibility of MLPEM
with carbonaceous anode and concurrently increase in ionic conductivity. (5)
Modification of MWCNT surface by grafting of lithiated PEG-chains and/or
arborescent PEG to raise lithium ion storage capacity and provide separate
pathways for electron and ion conductions. The network of lithiated arborescent
hyperbranched PEG resembles a neuronal network structurally and functionally.
The ion conductivity and mobility will be determined by AC impedance, solid-
state NMR, and Raman spectroscopy. Electrochemical stability will be evaluated
by means of cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling in
half-cell configurations. By virtue of the self-restored potential difference
between the electrodes afforded by the ion concentration gradient of MLPEM, the
battery would be rechargeable in the rest state, thereby prolonging the battery
life. The project includes integration of research and education through
interdisciplinary training of students and outreach activities.