* 1502156
* Understanding Gravity at the Smallest Scale
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Giorgio Gratta, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 03/31/2019
* USD 356,192.00

Understanding the nature of gravity at microscopic distances is one of the most
important open problems in fundamental physics. Although General Relativity
provides an extremely well-tested framework for describing gravitational effects
at large distances, it cannot provide consistently a description of gravity at
small scales where quantum effects are prevalent. The development of a quantum
theory of gravity is a central goal of fundamental physics, with broad
implications for our understanding of particle physics and the mysterious nature
of the "dark energy" that appears to permeate the universe. Many theories
attempting to provide a consistent microscopic framework for gravity (e.g.,
those involving extra dimensions) predict that gravity could deviate from the
familiar inverse square law at sub-millimeter distances. Such deviations are
extremely difficult to measure experimentally due to the small strength of
gravitational interactions at microscopic distances. This project represents an
attempt to do this. At the same time, while the direct scientific goals of this
program are clearly central to the development of modern physics, the general
investigation of the technique should enrich many other fields of science and
technology. The ability to trap and control small objects in vacuum using laser
beams is being explored for applications in quantum control, quantum computing
and in the general area of detection of small forces. In addition the work will
require the detailed understanding of residual electromagnetic interactions
between the microspheres and the materials composing the attractors, and it is
conceivable that progress in this area may enable new techniques for measuring
properties of surfaces that are not yet accessible by probes such as Atomic
Force Microscopes. Finally, the students (graduate and undergraduate) exposed to
the project will receive a very complete training in many areas of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous measurements at these distance scales
have employed techniques derived from human-size devices in which mechanical
springs are used as force sensors. We propose in this project to develop a
drastically new technique, using the light field of a laser to confine and
measure the motion of micron (or, eventually, submicron) size quartz nanosphere.
This technique takes advantage of the modern development of optical tweezers,
which has produced significant advances in biology and polymer science. By
confining the nanospheres in vacuum and cooling them to low temperatures through
active feedback of the trapping laser, the nanospheres can be decoupled from the
room temperature environment, significantly reducing thermal and vibrational
noise sources. The nanosphere oscillates in the harmonic potential of the
optical trap, and its interaction with attractor masses positioned several
microns away can be measured by studying the motion of the microsphere. The use
of a light field in lieu of a mechanical spring affords much greater
flexibility. Backgrounds can be mitigated through careful selection of the
materials used for the attractors and the coating of the attractors with
appropriate shielding layers. We have already cooled 5 micro-meter diameter
microspheres to mK temperatures and demonstrated force sensitivities of 10^-17
N/sqrt(Hz). We have recently published a paper in Phys Rev Lett showing that the
nanospheres can be easily discharged and setting a new limit on the existence of
particles with very small fractional charges. In the course of this project we
expect to be able to study the Casimir effect and, in general, residual
electromagnetic interactions between the nanospheres and the attractors and
perform a first competitive gravity measurement.