* 1502649
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Development and Fundamental Studies of N2-absorbing, Iron-phosphine-containing Polymers for Pressure Swing Purification of Natural Gas
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Joel Gohdes, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Natural gas is an important source of energy in the United States. However, some
of the U.S. natural gas reserves are contaminated with nitrogen gas to the
extent that it is necessary to remove the contaminant before it is used. Under
the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Gohdes at Pacific University and Dr. Tyler at the
University of Oregon combine molecular chemistry synergistically with polymer
science to design and synthesize novel metal-templated polymers (MTPs) that will
be useful as long-lived absorbents for the purification of natural gas. The
fundamental knowledge gained from this project has broader scientific
implications in other important areas such as catalysis and sensor design.
Undergraduate and graduate students working on this project receive training in
experimental design and a broad array of synthetic and analytical techniques.
This project is expected to provide training of STEM educators through vehicles
such as a summer workshop on Informal Science Education (ISE) where students
interested in science education learn techniques for effectively communicating
with the public in venues such as science museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior
work in the Tyler lab at the University of Oregon showed that water-soluble
trans-Fe(P2)2(X)(Cl)-type complexes (X = Cl, H; P2 = a water-soluble bidentate
phosphine) can successfully bind dinitrogen reversibly under conditions suitable
for a pressure-swing separation process. In this project, Dr. Gohdes and Dr.
Tyler aim to enhance the stability of the nitrogen binding Fe(II) complexes by
encapsulating them in a polymer matrix, forming MTPs around the nitrogen binding
motif. Another approach to enhance stability of the nitrogen binding complexes
is by replacing the bidentate phosphines with macrocyclic, tetradentate
phosphines. These groups collaboratively perform research to study the
thermodynamics and kinetics of the nitrogen-binding reactions of the iron
complexes and MTPs. A fundamental understanding of how the properties of the
polymer affect the intrinsic reactivity of the metal center is important for the
design and optimization of the next generation nitrogen-absorbing materials.