* 1502412
* CAREER: Reconfigurable Communication Interface using Ultra-Low-Power Technique for Future Heterogeneous Mobile Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/13/2014,05/31/2020
* Gyungsu Byun, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

As mobile devices such as smartphones, tablets and portable devices continue to
have enhanced graphic/media computing capabilities and superior battery life,
higher power and bandwidth efficiency is becoming significantly important.
Furthermore, ever-increasing full integration of heterogeneous key circuits such
as CPU, memories and other IPs is creating another challenging problem such as
non-reconfigurable data communication. The objective of this proposal is to
develop power-efficient and reconfigurable interface to address key issues such
as limited bandwidth, energy efficiency and data communication flexibility of
mobile devices. The proposed approach is a new reconfigurable multi-modulation
interconnect (MMI) technology as the mobile communication interface between CPU
and memories, which is expected to provide dramatically reduced system power
consumption, increased computing bandwidth, simultaneous multiple data
communication and reconfigurable data access capabilities. Moreover, the
proposed MMI communication system could have significant impact on industries
and academia and improve the competitiveness of the U.S. microelectronics
industry. This research is interdisciplinary, which will provide excellent
education opportunities for students at various levels to acquire broad
knowledge and skills related to analog/mixed-signal and radio
frequency/microwave integrated circuit and system design. Minority students and
women from underrepresented groups will be recruited and trained by integrating
research with education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop new energy-efficient and reconfigurable interface circuit architecture
by overcoming the current technological challenges associated with limited
bandwidth, high power consumption and non-reconfigurable data accesses.
Specifically, the PI proposes reconfigurable multi-modulation interconnect (MMI)
to allow significant advances in both energy efficiency and bandwidth between
mobile CPU and memories through incorporating advanced pulse-amplitude
modulation and multi-band signaling interconnect. A prototype of MMI signaling
in CMOS will be demonstrated, which will be the first effort in analyzing,
designing and fabricating fully CMOS-compatible MMI-based memory interface for
mobile devices. The proposed innovative MMI technology is also expected to
impact on mobile computing and communication device and computer architecture by
enabling concurrent and reconfigurable data communication on a shared link and
extending significantly battery life simultaneously.