* 1502990
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Last Interglacial Earth System: Testing Transient Climate and Ice-sheet Simulations with a Proxy-data Network
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Michael Notaro, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2019
* USD 100,007.00

This project's goal is to conduct high-resolution synchronously coupled
transient simulations of the last interglacial period (LIG) using a coupled
ocean-atmosphere-ice sheet model (Community Earth System Model) in order to
provide a consistent physical framework to investigate the mechanisms behind the
higher sea level and the potential ~2 degrees Celsius atmospheric warming during
the LIG. With both transient and sensitivity simulations of the LIG, the
research team aims to systematically investigate the response of climate and the
Greenland ice sheet to variations in Earth's orbital configuration, greenhouse
gas concentrations, meridional ocean heat transport associated with the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC), and vegetation feedbacks.

By comparing these simulations of the LIG with proxy data from published studies
and a new data compilation that captures temporal and spatial temperature
variability, the researchers plan to address the following fundamental questions
about the LIG: 1) What climate feedbacks are responsible for the up to ~2 degree
Celsius reconstructed warming during the LIG with respect to the pre-industrial
period; 2) How much did the Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) contribute to global sea
level rise above present day during the LIG; and 3) How well can the coupled
ocean atmosphere-ice sheet model simulate abrupt climate change during major
climate transitions, such as the last glacial inception.

This project supports an early career scientist, developing high-resolution
climate model output that could serve the wider science community, and
engagement of the broader civil society in science-based education outreach