* 1502282
* Local Cohomology and Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Craig Huneke, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2019
* USD 88,001.00

The Principal Investigator plans to study geometric problems using different
techniques in commutative algebra. This research focuses on spaces given by the
set of points that satisfy certain polynomial equations in many variables. Since
many phenomena can be described in terms of polynomial equations, these spaces
appear in many fields of science and its applications. In such spaces most
points are what is called "smooth", which, roughly speaking, means that after
zooming in, their vicinity looks like a linear space. For instance, in a sphere
every point is smooth and, just as the Earth, from a very close view its
neighborhood looks like a plane. Then, those points that are not smooth present
a particular behavior and, for that reason, are called "singular points". For
instance, a cone has exactly one singular point at its vertex. The set of
singular points can be described in terms of the derivatives of the polynomial
equations that the points in the space satisfy. For many purposes, detecting
singularities is not enough, as some are worse than others. For instance, the
sharper vertices of cones are considered worse. To distinguish different
singularities, one needs to use more sophisticated algebraic techniques. This
research project seeks to study singularities using local cohomology modules,
which can be seen as algebraic objects associated to a point. This has already
proven to be a powerful tool to detect different kinds of singularities. The
Principal Investigator plans to use local cohomology to study measurements of
how bad a singular point is. The research includes long-standing problems in the
study of singularities as well as new conjectures that could have theoretical
and computational consequences. The project involves graduate students in the
research.

The Principal Investigator seeks to study the structure of local cohomology
modules and singularities in positive and mixed characteristic. One of the main
problems that one encounters while working with local cohomology modules is that
they are usually very large and difficult to handle. However, these modules
behave as if they were finitely generated over regular local rings that contain
a field. An example of a regular ring in mixed characteristic for which
injective dimension behaves differently from equal characteristic was recently
found. Motivated by this result, the Principal Investigator intends to explore
potential counter-examples for the properties regarding associated primes and
Bass numbers of local cohomology modules over regular local rings of mixed
characteristic. In addition, the Principal Investigator plans to work on the
following related conjecture: the support of a local cohomology module is a
Zariski closed set in the spectrum of the ring. Using local cohomology over
rings containing a field, Lyubeznik introduced a family of invariants now called
Lyubeznik numbers. These invariants have shown several connections with the
algebraic and geometric properties of a ring. This inspired an analogous
definition of these numbers in mixed characteristic. The project aims to compare
the Lyubeznik numbers of rings that contain fields with those that do not. In
particular, the research seeks a topological or arithmetic criterion that
relates both notions of Lyubeznik numbers. In addition, the project seeks to
find geometric properties encoded by the Lyubeznik numbers in mixed
characteristic. Lastly, the Principal Investigator plans to work on
singularities in positive characteristic via the Frobenius map. In particular,
he is planning to work on the ACC conjecture for F-pure thresholds and its
corollaries. In addition, the Principal Investigator and a collaborator will
investigate a conjectured inequality that relates the F-pure thresholds with the
Hilbert-Kunz multiplicities. If this project succeeds, the conjectured relation
could have several computational and geometric consequences.