* 1502778
* Building Assessment Items and Instructional Tasks to Build Intercommunity Capacity to Develop Teachers' Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* William McCallum, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,996,550.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. The infrastructure to improve mathematics education in the US requires
building human resources in mathematics and mathematics education into a
professional community that can respond to the critical needs in the field. This
project seeks to build a professional community with shared understanding of the
specialized content knowledge (SCK) - the special forms and ways of reasoning
about mathematical knowledge used in teaching (MKT). This community will help
increase the capacity for further research and development on teachers' SCK in
mathematics, which has been shown to relate to student achievement. Building on
the professional community's shared knowledge, the project will also work to
collaboratively develop an item bank of MKT/SCK items and tasks using the
platform developed by the Illustrative Mathematics group for similar task and
item development for K-12 students. Better measures, with a larger item bank,
will help support both the learning and assessment of teachers' MKT/SCK.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on theories of communities of practice, this project
will bring together mathematicians and mathematics educators to build a
professional community with a shared understanding of the SCK in mathematics
through engaging in efforts to develop items to measure SCK and the development
of a task bank. Based on the "item camps" they engaged with to develop prior
measures, the project will host twelve 4-day camps with varying themes for pairs
of faculty and teachers or graduate students, ensuring a mix of mathematicians
and educators. This work will lead to a certification for MKT/SCK. They will
also develop approximately 60 items and have a mechanism for the future review
and publishing of items. Using case-study methodologies, the project will study
the development of these partnerships and the professional communities within
and across the camps.