* 1502310
* SCH: EXP: Canine-Inspired Smart Sensor for Detecting Hypoglycemia from Human Breath
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Sudhir Shrestha, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 738,311.00

Diabetes is a global and national epidemic. One in ten healthcare dollars in the
U.S. is spent on costs directly attributable to diabetes. Persons with Type-1
diabetes, especially children and the elderly, can experience sudden drops in
blood sugar, that is, they can become hypoglycemic. This can be very dangerous
if it remains unrecognized. The metabolic processes that lead to hypoglycemia
generate odorants in human breath and perspiration. The specific odorants are
not known by the medical community, but trained diabetes alert dogs can
recognize the onset of hypoglycemia from odorants in a patient's breath. This
award supports the basic research to identify the odorants of hypoglycemia in
human breath and the development of a noninvasive hand-held smart sensor able to
detect the odorants and communicate health information to patients, caregivers,
and family members. Development of the smart device will improve health-
monitoring options for persons with Type-1 diabetes, ultimately leading to
decreased healthcare costs and improved lifestyles for the patients and their
caregivers. This research will provide interdisciplinary research experiences to
graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, this project will support
participation of underrepresented groups and educational outreach programs for
K-12 students and teachers across Indiana and the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
metabolic processes that lead to hypoglycemia cause the production of specific
volatile organic compounds in human breath. This fact is not currently used by
the medical community to monitor diabetes or track the onset of hypoglycemia.
However, trained diabetes alert dogs are able to identify these compounds and
recognize the onset of hypoglycemia. Following this, the objective of this
proposal is to develop a novel smart device able to detect the volatile organic
compound profile in human breath that correlates with hypoglycemia. This will be
accomplished in three steps. First, the identification of the hypoglycemic-
signature breath profile, which will be validated by testing with diabetes alert
dogs. Second, the development of a nanosensor array capable of detecting the
identified compounds. Third, the incorporation of the nanosensor array into a
portable smart device. The monitoring of volatile organic compounds in breath
challenges the existing way of thinking that glucose is the only useful
metabolic marker of hypoglycemia. This work will also aid researchers in
understanding metabolic pathways associated with hypoglycemia. Moreover, the
intuitive and secure mobile application interface that will be developed will
effectively communicate relevant healthcare information.