* 1502032
* The Pacific Northwest Photonics Technology Project
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Joe Gryniuk, Lake Washington Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,380.00

To address the needs of employers for highly skilled workers in the applications
of photonics, Lake Washington Institute of Technology will partner with high-
tech companies in the Pacific Northwest, the National Center for Optics and
Photonics Education (OP-TEC), Fluke Corporation, the Center of Excellence for
Aerospace and Advanced Manufacturing (COE), and the International Society for
Optics and Photonics (SPIE) to produce associate degree photonics technicians
for employment in the region. Photonics technology is the practical application
of light, including lasers, and photonics plays a diverse role in regional
economy, but labor market data and OP-TEC reports show a growing gap between
industry needs and photonics technology graduates. This effort will create the
only associate degree employer-validated, NSF-affiliated photonics program in
Washington and the neighboring states of Oregon and Idaho. After building upon
OP-TEC's highly-regarded curriculum and adapting it to regional needs and
evaluating its impact, the college will disseminate the revised model and
teaching strategies to other colleges in the Pacific Northwest using OP-TEC and
SPIE networks as well as the Washington State Board for Community and Technical
Colleges (SBCTC).

With industry collaboration, the college will develop this two-course photonics
technology certificate to be added to advanced manufacturing Associate in
Applied Science (AAS) degree programs. To support the goal of improving and
diversifying the regional technical workforce, the project will develop a
regionally-specific, application-based sequence culminating in a photonics
certificate aligned with 21st Century Skill standards to meet specialty needs of
employers in the Pacific Northwest. It will utilize multiple recruiting efforts,
including social media, to attract students and increase enrollment of
previously underrepresented populations in photonics and advanced manufacturing
and optimize and accelerate learning environments and career pathways to high-
wage, in-demand jobs for students. This project will increase enrollments in
photonics and advanced manufacturing at the college by engaging both traditional
and non-traditional students as it seeks to enroll veterans, females, and older
learners and create a more diverse workforce. Recruitment efforts will implement
promising practices published by the Institute for Women in Trades, Technology
and Science (IWITTS) and will contribute to the body of knowledge about
recruiting and retaining underrepresented populations in technical programs at
two-year institutions.