* 1502063
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Immunogene Mediated Mate Choice in Populations of Peromyscus spp. Rodents with Different Mating Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Eileen Lacey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,401.00

The fundamental question of how animals choose mates has fascinated and
intrigued biologists for centuries. Today, technological and scientific
developments make it possible to push the limits of our knowledge in the field
of mate choice. Recent research has generated support for a particular group of
genes, the Major Histocompatibility Complex, or MHC genes, as key players during
mate selection. MHC genes are ubiquitous in vertebrates and play a major role in
the adaptive immune system. In mammals, MHC-genotypes, or "profiles," are
communicated via urine. This allows conspecifics to identify and choose
individuals based on their immunogenetic makeup. Theory predicts that if
individuals are selecting mates based on MHC, they should prefer those who
complement their own MHC profile. In this way, their offspring will have higher
MHC diversity and/or improved immunocompetence. This project explores how
differences in two factors thought to affect exposure to pathogens -- mating
behavior (e.g., monogamy versus promiscuity) and population density -- influence
how animals use MHC during mate choice. Studies on MHC and mate choice have
important applications to conservation and captive breeding programs, where they
may help determine the best strategies for maintaining diversity and improving
survival. Improved understanding of the function and evolution of MHC variation
also has important implications for human health, since these are the genes that
underlie our adaptive response to pathogens.

Traditionally, MHC-based mate choice studies have used inbred lab animals, and
while a few have examined wild populations, they have been limited to the study
of only a few MHC-loci. These constraints are in large part due to MHC
complexity and previously available molecular techniques. As a consequence,
studies on different loci and/or species have yielded contradictory results.
This project aims to generate a comprehensive understanding of the relationships
between immunogenetic variation and patterns of reproductive behavior by using
Next Generation Sequencing techniques to study all transcribed MHC and non-MHC
immunogenes in free-living peromyscine rodents with different mating systems.
Special emphasis is directed towards understanding how immunogenetic variation
and selection on immunogenes differ with mating system. Further, this project
will explore how changes in ecology, particularly density, influence mate choice
decisions based on immunogenes. Understanding how individual-level decisions
interact with population level dynamics should facilitate understanding of the
selective pressures acting on the immune system in natural settings. The
molecular methods proposed are novel and can be applied to a wide range of
studies interested in minimizing invasive sampling. Field notes, behavioral
observations, trapping data, photographic and GPS data, and biological samples
will be contributed to the MVZ collections, thus accessible in an online
database and available to interested researchers. All DNA sequence data
resulting from this project will be made publicly available after publication
through GenBank.