* 1502798
* Thinking Spatially about the Universe- A Physical and Virtual Laboratory for Middle School Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Philip Sadler, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2020
* USD 149,835.00

Critical breakthroughs in science (e.g., Einstein's Theory of General
Relativity, and Watson &amp; Crick's discovery of the structure of DNA),
originated with those scientists' ability to think spatially, and research has
shown that spatial ability correlates strongly with likelihood of entering a
career in STEM. This project will develop and study three week-long middle
school lab units designed to teach spatial abilities using a blend of physical
and virtual (computer-based) models. "ThinkSpace" labs will help students
explore 3-dimensional astronomical phenomena (moon phases and eclipses;
planetary systems around stars other than the Sun; and celestial motions within
the broader universe) in ways that will support both understanding of these
topics and a more general spatial ability. Students will learn both through
direct work with the lab unit interface and through succeeding discussions with
their peers. The research program will determine which elements in the labs best
promote both spatial skills and understanding of core ideas in astronomy; and
how then to optimize interactive dynamic visualizations toward these ends.
Virtual models of the sky and universe will be created using WorldWide
Telescope, a free visualization tool that runs on desktop computers, tablets,
and mobile devices. The ThinkSpace lab materials will be available at no cost on
popular curriculum-sharing sites, including PBS Learning Media and
BetterLesson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ThinkSpace team will address two main
Research Questions: 1) How can spatial tasks that blend physical and virtual
models be embedded into a STEM curriculum in ways that lead to significant
improvements in spatial thinking? and 2) How can practitioners optimize design
of interactive, dynamic visualizations for teaching spatially complex concepts?
The first year of the study will examine two of the lab units with four teachers
and about 320 students. The second year of the study will be similar. The third
year of the study will test all three lab units in 10 classrooms. Over this
study, each week-long ThinkSpace Lab will be formatively tested, using pre/post
written assessments of astronomy content and spatial thinking; pre/post
interviews with students; and in-class video of students using the lab
activities. Scaffolded learning designs will support students in making
connections between different spatial views of the phenomena, and will guide
them to construct explanations and argue from evidence about how various
phenomena (e.g. moon phases) arise in the real Universe, as Next Generation
Science Standards demand. The impact of the ThinkSpace labs will be felt far
beyond astronomy because the learning models being tested can transfer to other
fields where spatial models are critical, and findings on optimization of
dynamic visualizations can help to inform instructional design in the age of
online learning. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.