* 1502192
* Southwest Local Algebra Meeting 2015
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Louiza Fouli, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,799.00

This award supports participation in the Southwest Local Algebra Meeting 2015,
held at Oklahoma State University on February 28 - March 1, 2015. This
conference will facilitate interactions between students and faculty with
interests in ring theory, broadly interpreted, from institutions in the
Southwest. Algebraists in the Southwest region pursue research on a variety of
topics under the umbrella of pure and applied ring theory. The geographical
distances in the region are such that interactions between people at different
institutions rarely happen spontaneously. The meeting will bring together
students and faculty from a variety of institutions for inspiring talks, with
ample time for scientific interaction, providing opportunities for participants
to begin new collaborations and catalyzing new research projects. About 50
participants are expected, including students and young and senior faculty from
throughout the Southwest and South. The participation of students from
underrepresented minority groups, women, untenured faculty, and faculty at non-
Ph.D. granting institutions is particularly encouraged. Six experts will deliver
hour-long talks on topics within their areas of specialty; the lectures will be
accessible to graduate students. The meeting will also feature three hour-long
poster sessions in which the participating students will present their research.
More information can be found at the conference webpage:
http://www.math.ttu.edu/~lchriste/slam2015.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
of rings, in the broadest sense, is crucial to many branches of mathematics,
including commutative and non-commutative geometry, group representations,
number theory, coding theory, and cryptography. Participants will discuss
several key problems in commutative algebra, including progress on finding
bounds for Betti numbers, a topic that has significant implications for
classical problems in combinatorics and algebraic geometry, including Cayley-
Bacharach theory. Several speakers work in combinatorial or computational
algebraic geometry and will also shed light on connections between these fields
and commutative algebra. Finally, the research expertise of one speaker is in
Lie theory, providing an opportunity to introduce ring theorists to problems in
a different field close to their area of work.