* 1502037
* Aerospace Career Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Matthew Swenson, Green River Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 891,186.00

Aerospace Career Education (ACE) will create a diverse, world-class STEM
workforce by educating students for high-wage, high-demand technical careers in
Maintenance Mechatronics (MTX). Project ACE addresses a growing shortage of
qualified aerospace technicians with interdisciplinary skills. The project will
generate useful data and practices for high schools and colleges to recruit and
prepare a larger and more diverse body of students for STEM careers. Its
collaboration between Green River Community College, the local K-12 school
district, a global aerospace company (Boeing), statewide Center of Excellence, a
national dual-enrollment accrediting body, and cooperation with the Advancing
Technological Education Center for Aerospace Technical Education (SpaceTEC) will
enable wide dissemination. Project ACE will prepare more than 80 diverse high
school students for college-level work through hands-on, industry-based, dual-
enrollment courses. Students will earn both high school and college credit.
Coursework will be complemented by paid summer internships in the aerospace
industry and participation on robotics competition teams. Courses and activities
will form a progressive career pathway from high school to a postsecondary MTX
certificate and two-year degree. Project ACE will help our nation reach new
heights in scientific innovation and economic
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project ACE reflects contemporary research
evidence on effective practices and models. Courses will be co-taught by college
and high school instructors using a "flipped" hybrid online/classroom structure.
The project will advance scientific understanding by producing a diverse body of
well-educated and skilled graduates, increasing the breadth of perspectives and
backgrounds in our STEM workforce. It will use innovative industry practices to
increase the effectiveness and sustainability of instruction. It will also
improve the technical skills and general STEM preparation of high school
educators. The project will advance understanding of how long-term degree
pathways and industry-based practices can broaden access to STEM careers for
low-income and under-represented students. Its evaluation plan includes
quantitative and qualitative measures for assessing its impact upon students and
teachers. Evaluation will use a combination of original instruments developed
for the project, and standardized instruments. The evaluator will create a
survey that will be administered at the beginning and end of the course sequence
to track changes in students' educational and career aspirations. The project
will administer two standardized instruments to participating students using a
"pre-post" design. These instruments are: (1) the Developmental Asset Profile by
the Search Institute, measuring growth in students' internal and external
developmental assets believed to support resilience and growth and assessments
for their National Career Readiness Certificate (NCRC), measuring skill growth
in in the areas of applied mathematics, locating information, and reading for
information. Project materials will be rigorously evaluated and regularly
updated using real-time labor market data. Educational, labor, government, and
industry representatives will inform the project and engage their peers to
ensure its long-term sustainability.