* 1502242
* SCH: EXP: Contingent Cueing for the Alleviation of Symptoms of Parkinson's Disease in Ambient Settings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Eric Wade, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 551,196.00

Millions of Americans live with incurable chronic conditions such as stroke,
traumatic brain injury, and Parkinson's disease (PD). These degenerative
neurological conditions cause difficulty in the performance of daily life
activities such as walking and self-care, limit independence, and lead to
depressed quality of life. There are currently no quantitative tools that allow
us to understand how these individuals are affected by their conditions on a
daily basis, and how rehabilitation and medication affect these people in the
long term. The advent of novel technologies such as smart phones and smart
watches facilitates exciting new opportunities. These tools allow us to
quantitatively monitor, and to positively affect the behaviors of such
individuals. This award supports research that will determine how to measure the
movements and behaviors of these individuals, and then tests a technique that
uses real-time feedback and stimuli to minimize the disease symptoms. We
evaluate our approach in individuals suffering from PD, a particularly
debilitating disease. Research results will provide much richer information on
how people respond to therapy and medication, and may prove useful in other
populations of people aging with and into disability. The approach, which
integrates engineering and medicine, will help broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wearable sensing and telehealth are promising
tools for revolutionizing healthcare outside of the clinical setting. However,
the adaptation of these technologies to specific populations in remote settings
remains a challenge. The current research approach focuses on individuals living
with the chronic effects of Parkinson's Disease (PD). We propose a system that
combines wearable sensors and smart phones to assist these individuals with a
particularly debilitating syndrome, freezing of gait. This research will fill
the knowledge gap of how to monitor and affect the symptoms of these individuals
in ambient settings. We leverage electronic sensor design, machine learning, and
signal processing approaches to: (1) determine user-specific models of movement
from worn sensor data; (2) develop algorithms to predict onset of user symptoms;
and (3) provide context-dependent external stimuli to alleviate symptoms. These
methods may generalize to other individuals living with the chronic disability.