* 1502971
* P2C2: Long-term Environmental Changes and Anthropogenic Impacts on Tropical African Landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Lawrence Kiage, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 09/30/2018
* USD 145,683.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award to Georgia State University will
study the long-term history of climate change, vegetational changes and human
impacts on tropical African environments. The investigator will analyze carbon
and nitrogen isotopes, fossil pollen, diatoms, fungal spores, and charcoal in
lake and swamp-sediment cores from East Africa. Understanding climate and
vegetational change in East Africa is significant because it opens a window for
studying the variability of tropical climate systems. This project will
reconstruct East Africa's environment with the necessary time resolution and
sufficient precision to reveal the causal mechanisms behind the climate changes
during the last 10,000 years. An important scientific goal of the project is to
investigate the interaction of human-induced impacts and the pattern of climate
change in shaping East Africa's environment in the past. Specifically, the study
seeks to answer the following questions: At what point during the the last
10,000 years does the evidence of human-induced impacts on the environment
appear in the record? To what extent does variability in the solar cycle and
long-distance climate events explain changes in East Africa's climate and
environment through time? And lastly, does the human-induced imprint on the
environment supplant natural climatic change trend in East Africa during the
last 4,500 years? The project holds the promise of providing important data and
a broader understanding of environmental change and its relation to climate, and
provides a context for better understanding the interplay of humans and climate.
The broader impacts of the project include supporting graduate students,
contributing to local capacity building in Kenya, and international
collaboration with scientists in Kenya through collaborative research and joint
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Discerning the
dynamics of human-climate interaction remains one of humanity's eminent
unanswered questions. This project aims to study the history of climate change,
vegetational changes, and human impacts on tropical African environments during
the Holocene through the examination of a multi-proxy record of the
lithostratigraphy, fossil pollen, diatoms, fungal spores, and microscopic
charcoal in lake-sediment cores. Geochemical, biological, and sedimentary
records preserved in lacustrine and palustrine environments provide an excellent
archive of past changes in the environment resulting from both climate changes
and anthropogenic impacts which could reveal how the natural environment may
respond to human-related climate change in the future. Understanding climate and
vegetational change in East Africa is significant because it opens a window for
studying variability in tropical climate systems and their causal mechanisms
which, to date, remain largely unresolved. This project will use a multi-proxy
approach to reconstruct East Africa's paleoenvironment with the necessary time
resolution and sufficient precision to reveal the causal mechanisms behind the
climate changes during the late Holocene through analysis of cores from Lake
Kanyaboli (a satellite of Lake Victoria) and Saiwa Swamp in western Kenya.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The important goals of the project include: producing a
high-temporal-resolution multi-proxy paleoenvironmental record of the late
Holocene for the East African region based on analysis of sediment cores
collected from lacustrine and palustrine environments; understanding the control
mechanisms for the spatial and temporal variability of environmental changes in
East Africa and their possible linkage to solar activity and teleconnection
events; isolating human-induced changes in the East African landscapes from the
changes due to climate variations by employing the multi-proxy approach
involving geochemical species, pollen, mycological data, diatoms, and
microscopic charcoal; and identifying and dating the onset of anthropogenic
impacts on the environment and exploring their relationship with environmental
changes in the tropical African region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
issues that will be investigated are interdisciplinary in nature and will
address questions which are important to understanding the impacts of human
activities on geophysical processes and paleoenvironmental change. The research
holds the promise of providing important data and a broader understanding of
environmental change and its relation to climate, and provides a context for
better understanding the interplay of humans and climate. The broader impacts of
the project include supporting graduate students, contributing to local capacity
building in Kenya, and international collaboration with scientists in Kenya
through collaborative research and joint publications.