* 1502154
* Second Latin American School of Algebraic Geometry and Applications (II ELGA)
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Ana-Maria Castravet, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports U.S. participants in the Research School "Second Latin
American School of Algebraic Geometry and Applications (II ELGA)" held in Cabo
Frio, Brazil from June 1 to 12, 2015. The school is the second of its kind in
Latin America, with the first ELGA being held in Argentina in 2011. The school
has several goals: to introduce a new generation of students and researchers to
the subject of Algebraic Geometry, to present a broad view of recent
developments in the area, to disseminate new problems and directions of
research, to promote greater interaction among researchers and students, and to
help young researchers build a network of collaborations.

Algebraic Geometry is a fundamental field of research, with applications and
connections throughout mathematics and other sciences. The first week of the
school will include four mini courses (of 5 hours each) which cover some of the
most active topics in the field, as well as reflect the diversity and scope of
modern Algebraic Geometry. The main speakers are prominent algebraic geometers:
Robert Lazarsfeld, Olivier Debarre, Barbara Fantechi, and Burt Totaro. The
second week will be a research conference, with 28 talks given by world class
researchers. The hosting institution is IMPA (Institute for Pure and Applied
Mathematics), in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. There are 6 organizers working in
several different countries: Brazil, Chile, Italy, France, Mexico, and the
United States. The II ELGA is the only event in Latin America in two years
devoted to Algebraic Geometry and explicitly aimed at Ph.D. students and young
researchers. The organizers expect a large participation and impact for the
school, as Algebraic Geometry is much on the rise in Latin America. The success
of the first ELGA school, along with the high reputation of IMPA and the
speakers, should guarantee a large international participation. The award funds
will be used to support Ph.D. students and young researchers working in the
United States. More details about the meeting can be found at
http://www.impa.br/opencms/pt/eventos/store/evento_1503.

This award is co-funded by the International Science and Engineering (ISE)
Section of NSF.