* 1502832
* Ensemble Estimation of Central Tropical Pacific Climate over the last 6,000 Years
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Kim Cobb, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2019
* USD 550,063.00

Significant uncertainty surrounds future climate change impacts in many regions
of the world, particularly regarding potential changes in tropical rainfall
levels, and their extremes. Much of the uncertainty stems from poor constraints
on future trends in the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), a natural climate
cycle that affects temperature and rainfall patterns around the globe, with its
largest effects in the tropics. The instrumental record of ENSO is too short to
isolate statistically robust trends, so this study seeks to provide hundreds of
years worth of additional observations of past ENSO variability in an effort to:
1) quantify the natural baseline for this globally-relevant climate cycle, and
2) assess whether recent changes fall outside the range of natural variability.
Using a suite of well-dated and high-resolution coral records from the central
tropical Pacific, the study will extend the record of ENSO and longer-term
climate patterns in the heart of the ENSO region. As such, it will inform future
projections of tropical Pacific climate and constrain regional rainfall trends
throughout the tropics and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical Pacific
climate trends are difficult to isolate from the short instrumental record of
climate, owing to significant tropical climate variability on interannual to
decadal timescales. Recent paleoclimate records hint that the El Nino-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) may be intensifying in response to anthropogenic climate
forcing, implying that tropical rainfall extremes may increase in coming
decades. Such records also show that natural ENSO variability is much larger
than previously thought, requiring a larger number of paleo-reconstruction to
define natural ENSO variability and distinguish it from possible anthropogenic
signals. The last 6,000 years is an particularly important baseline for probing
past ENSO variability, as global climate models show that ENSO may be sensitive
to a range of natural climate forcings over this period. This project involves
generation of a highly-replicated reconstruction of both mean climate and
climate variability in the tropical Pacific over the last 6,000 years using
hundreds of fossil coral records from Christmas Island (2ºN, 157ºW), which lies
in the heart of the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) region. The research
team, which includes a graduate student, will compare the new reconstructions to
numerical climate model simulations of tropical Pacific paleoclimate
variability, probing the relationships between climate forcing, mean climate
state, and ENSO variability.