* 1502792
* RAPID: Cultural Patterns in Stigma in the Transmission of Disease: Ebola in Two Dallas Neighborhoods
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Faith Nibbs, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 28,577.00

This project was submitted in response to NSF 15-006 Dear Colleague Letter on
Ebola. Scientific researchers have established that efforts to contain disease
are highly variable depending on how different groups of people perceive their
vulnerability. Perceptions of risk and stigma can vary considerably between
different cultural, linguistic and cultural settings. This project proposes to
explore how ideas about stigma and risk evolve in the context of communities
impacted by Ebola. The project has the potential to inform public health debates
about how to improve human response to mobile health threats, while promoting
public safety to reduce the threat of transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs.
Smith-Morris, medical anthropologist, and Dr. Faith Nibbs, cultural
anthropologist, both Dallas residents with ongoing research in affected Dallas
neighborhoods, have a unique vantage point from which to compare neighborhood-
level experience of this infectious disease, and the experiences of stigma by
residents of different socioeconomic class, ethnic and linguistic mix, and
culture. The project addresses two key questions. First, how is human behavior
changing in response to heavy media coverage of the three Dallas Ebola cases,
and the neighborhoods from which those victims emerged? And second, are there
cultural patterns in the way that people change their behaviors, both
individually and collectively in neighborhoods, to manage risk and stigma, or to
share and respond to educational materials about Ebola? Drawing upon stigma
scales that have proven effective in comparable mental and public health
contexts, the researchers will adapt the prompts to include questions specific
to Ebola. The researchers will then follow up with more in-depth interviews that
examine the Ebola and stigma, information tracing, and the impact of the Ebola
crisis on resources and actions. Quantitative and qualitative data from surveys,
interviews, media analysis, and participant observation within the two
communities under study will be catalogued and analyzed with concordance
software widely recommended for corpus-based methods. The results are expected
to create a better understanding of crisis management patterns in urban, multi-
cultural neighborhoods, so that future public health and education strategies
may be more efficient and more effective.