* 1502061
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating the main contributors to plant speciation in a rapidly diverging lineage in western North America
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* David Tank, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2018
* USD 18,738.00

Studies of the process of speciation, or the splitting of one species into two,
have most often taken the approach of intensive study of a single species or
species pair, and have therefore focused on the primary driver of divergence of
that one event. If instead, we take a longer-time, evolutionary view of
speciation, examined through the lens of evolutionary relationships and the
traits that are important for recognizing and defining species, we have the
opportunity to investigate the relative contributions of the properties of a
species at both the level of recent speciation events and back through the
evolutionary history of the group. This implies that we can confidently identify
and describe species. Molecular, morphological, ecological, and/or geographic
variation often serve as evidence of boundaries between one species and another,
however, when used alone, these characteristics are not always capable of
differentiating species. This study will contribute significantly to empirical
tests of the theory and methodologies of species delimitation, and will bridge
the gap between theoretical, empirical, and applied sciences. By working towards
definitions of species that reflect their evolutionary histories, this project
will contribute to the discovery, conservation, and management of biodiversity
in western North America. Finally, this research will directly impact the
training and academic development of the co-PI through the learning of new
laboratory, field, and analytical techniques, as well as the mentoring and
training of undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify
the macroevolutionary signatures of speciation via the identification of species
criteria, the robust delimitation of species, and the evaluation of the
contribution of individual species criteria across a phylogeny, to begin to
construct a broad picture of speciation in the mountains of western North
America. To accomplish this objective, this project entails 1) the collection of
extensive species criterion data (i.e., molecular, morphological, ecological,
geographic, and cytological data, 2) the application of rigorous species
delimitation methods (using multiple individual criteria and an integrated data
approach) focused on poorly resolved nodes in a genus-wide phylogeny, and 3) the
examination of the relative contributions of individual species criteria through
comparative phylogenetic analyses of the rate of trait evolution through time.
Several western North American species complexes from the diverse perennial
clade of the paintbrushes (Castilleja, Orobanchaceae) are the model system for
approaching these questions, and were selected for their contrasting variation
in morphological, ecological, and cytological characteristics.