* 1502085
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution and Systematics of Claytonia lanceolata sensu lato (Montiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* J. Travis Columbus, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 18,510.00

Polyploidization (whole genome duplication) is, and likely was, instrumental in
the diversification of flowering plants. Understanding how and why polyploidy
occurs in flowering plants may provide critical insight into the interplay of
adaptation and historic environmental changes like glaciation, volcanism, and
global climate change. This research will provide an improved understanding of
diversification in the Claytonia lanceolata species complex, which is critical
for effective conservation and management of the habitats in which they grow.
Cutting edge biochemical and computational techniques now allow us to better
estimate evolutionary histories, and test hypotheses concerning the ecological,
temporal, and geographic context of speciation. This research will increase our
understanding of gene dispersal via seeds and pollen, gene sharing among
species, and the influence of chromosome number variation on plant
diversification. A better understanding of relict alpine communities in
California will be an additional, important contribution. Scientific
communication, public outreach and mentoring undergraduate students are integral
parts of the project as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyploidy, potentially
giving rise to species complexes, represents one of the fundamental processes in
diversification and polyploids are important elements of plant communities
across the globe. Preliminary study indicates that the Claytonia lanceolata
species complex (Montiaceae), as currently circumscribed, is non-monophyletic
and consists of many polyploid lineages inhabiting a variety of unique spatial
and ecological conditions in the mountains of western North America. This
project involves research into biogeography, chromosome evolution, niche
diversification, and phylogeny of the C. lanceolata species complex and close
relatives. The project investigates (1) abiotic and biotic habitat
characteristics in the field to better understand mechanisms responsible for
reproductive isolation, (2) chromosome number within and among populations using
flow cytometry and chromosome counting methods to characterize potentially
adaptive variation, (3) variation in vegetative characters using morphometrics
to better develop hypotheses concerning selection acting on leaf and
subterranean stem anatomy and morphology, and (4) patterns of inter-specific
gene flow in sympatric populations using Next Generation Sequencing (RADseq) to
understand the extent to which species are reproductively isolated. This
research will result in a significant revision of our knowledge of species
boundaries and their distributions in the C. lanceolata complex, in addition to
the description of several taxa new to science.