* 1502848
* Transient absorption microscopy studies of the dynamics of single metal and semiconductor nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Gregory Hartland, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 596,552.00

Prof. Gregory V. Hartland of the University of Notre Dame is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the Division
of Chemistry to study chemical reactions and the conduction of electrons in
metal nanowires. The results from these experiments are important for developing
ultra-sensitive mass sensors and circuits that use light instead of electrical
current to transport information. If successful, this innovation will allow
miniaturization of circuits and sensors to nanoscale dimensions. Both graduate
and undergraduate students are participating in this research. The undergraduate
students are being recruited to the project from the University of Notre Dame,
as well as from nearby four-year colleges in the northern Indiana area that have
limited research facilities. The undergraduate and graduate students are also
involved in a series of outreach activities that connect to local high school
students in the South Bend area.

The experiments that are being conducted are providing new information about how
nano-materials interact with their environment, and how these interactions are
different to those of macroscopic objects. The effects that are being explored
include the role of surface bound molecules in mediating energy relaxation in
nanomaterials, whether simple solvents such as water behave like viscoelastic
solvents at nanoscale dimensions, and the way the environment influences the
properties of surface plasmon polaritons - which are electromagnetic magnetic
waves that propagate at the surfaces of the nanowires. These measurements are
being performed using transient absorption microscopy, which is an experimental
technique that allows ultrafast laser measurements to be performed on single
nano-objects. Simulations are also being conducted as part of the project.
Comparison of the experimental results to the simulations is generating
information about the properties of the materials that can be used by other
researchers in different areas of science and engineering.