* 1502036
* Advancing Education in Production Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* David Felton, Jefferson State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2019
* USD 199,306.00

As advanced manufacturing supersedes traditional manufacturing, and domestic
manufacturers deepen their investment in advanced technologies, the skill
requirements for manufacturing jobs are rising, and the shortage of skilled
workers to fill these jobs is at a crisis point. The emergence of manufacturing
as a major industry in Alabama is creating numerous career opportunities for
trained production managers and technicians; however, finding skilled and
trained workers to fill open positions is a major barrier to innovation and
growth for many companies. Because Alabama has been identified as a state with a
significant worker shortage and a skilled production workforce is in short
supply, manufacturers and other industry partners in Alabama are being
challenged to collaborate with community colleges to develop curriculums that
meet their needs. By building on the successes of existing program options at
the college and proven solutions, this project at Jefferson State Community
College will improve technician education and increase the number of highly
skilled workers in regionally targeted manufacturing technology areas through
the development of a new Manufacturing Systems Technology degree option.
Manufacturers and industry partners will be involved so that the college can
ensure that regional industries have the workforce that will allow them to
succeed in a globally competitive environment. The project will leverage the
work performed by the college as a partner in the Consortium for Alabama
Regional Center for Automotive Manufacturing (CARCAM) as well as other ATE
Centers of Excellence in manufacturing in Florida and South Carolina and the
Production Associate Technology curriculum used at Spartanburg Community College
in South Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will increase
the number of skilled workers in technology areas unique to the production
department of manufacturing companies rather than to the maintenance/engineering
departments in these companies by development of the new degree and certificate
option and through evaluation of their effectiveness. To accomplish this goal,
the college will partner with industry members and other critical stakeholders
in the development of a more highly skilled workforce in the Greater Birmingham
Region as the college works with local industry to create this new program to
support needs of manufacturing companies in emerging technologies. The
curriculum will be validated by experts from these organizations in terms of its
effectiveness in meeting learning goals. The new curriculum will allow for
future extension for delivery via dual enrollment-dual credit programs to
partner high schools and thereby will create new educational pathways and
improve articulation between secondary schools and the college. Project
personnel will investigate the incorporation of nationally recognized industry
certifications such as the Certified Production Technician certification
administered by the Manufacturing Skills Standards Council into the resulting
curriculum. The project will be designed to increase the participation of
underrepresented minorities, particularly women, in science, technology, and
engineering (STEM) education. Project personnel will also work with Alabama
Industrial Development Training, an industry leader in education for start-up
companies, and the Alabama Technology Network, which addresses the ongoing
education needs of companies in Alabama.