* 1502606
* Research in Algebraic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Michelle Wachs, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 180,000.00

The research supported by this grant is in algebraic combinatorics, which is an
area of mathematics that seeks to develop connections between combinatorics (the
science of counting, arranging, and analyzing concrete discrete configurations)
and fields of pure mathematics that involve sophisticated abstract algebraic
structures. The idea is to use these connections to gain deeper insights and
solve problems in combinatorics and in the other fields. The discrete
configurations that are studied in combinatorics arise in various fields of
mathematics, computer science, physics, biology, and engineering; DNA sequences,
phylogenetic trees, and communications networks are all examples of discrete
configurations. Combinatorial methods are playing an increasing role in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common thread running through the various parts
of this project is that of palindromicity and unimodality of polynomials. Many
important enumerative sequences arising in algebra, combinatorics, and geometry
are palindromic and unimodal, but proving unimodality can be quite challenging.
Proofs of unimodality appearing in the literature have made striking use of
combinatorial, analytic, algebraic, and algebro-geometric techniques. In the
PI's current work, unimodality issues have led to the discovery of intriguing
connections between certain combinatorial and geometric structures and to the
discovery of elegant new q-analogs of classical enumerative formulas. For
example, palindromicity and unimodality of a generalized Eulerian polynomial
(due to De Mari, Procesi and Shayman) play a role in the PI's and Shareshian's
ongoing work on chromatic quasisymmetric functions, which are a refinement of
Stanley's chromatic symmetric functions. One aim of this project is to prove a
conjecture of the PI and Shareshian on a relationship between the chromatic
quasisymmetric functions and Tymoczko's representation of the symmetric group on
the cohomology of the regular semisimple Hessenberg variety of type A. This
could establish, among other things, a longstanding e-positivity conjecture of
Stanley and Stembridge for chromatic symmetric functions. A property stronger
than palindromicity and unimodality, known as gamma-positivity, is of current
interest in combinatorics and discrete geometry, as many important classes of
enumerative polynomials are gamma-positive. Part of this project is concerned
with a q-analog of gamma-positivity recently studied in joint work with Dilks
and Krattenthaler. Another part of the project continues the work of the PI on
the interplay between poset topology and enumerative combinatorics. One aim is
to prove a conjecture of the PI and her former student Gonzalez D'Leon
connecting the topology of certain subposets of the poset of weighted partitions
to gamma-positive h-polynomials of graph associahedra.