* 1502007
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Localizing the translational machinery of an obligate symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* John McCutcheon, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2017
* USD 17,829.00

Endosymbiosis is a process whereby one cell takes up stable residence within
another cell, occasionally allowing the new consortia to harness previously
unexploited resources. For example, plants are able to use the Sun's energy
because of an ancient endosymbiosis between a bacterium and a eukaryotic cell.
Similarly, many sap-feeding insects-some of which are devastating crop pests-
rely on bacterial endosymbionts to survive. Insect endosymbioses are useful
models because they are of an intermediate age: old enough to show many
parallels to mitochondria and chloroplasts, but recent enough to retain a clear
bacterial character. Studying insect-bacterial symbioses thus provide insight
into the forces and mechanisms involved in establishing and maintaining
bacteria-host relationships. This proposal includes outreach through a
children's science program to teach about bacterial
symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Obligate insect endosymbionts have highly
reduced genomes that have lost many genes compared to their free-living
ancestors. Similar to organelles, some endosymbiont genomes contain fewer genes
than thought necessary to support cellular life. This project will use the
cicada endosymbiont Hodgkinia as a model to study how symbionts with reduced
genomes function with so few genes. The PIs will investigate the structure and
function of Hodgkinia-supporting insect tissues using a combination of cutting
edge light and electron microscopy, with the aim of better understanding if
and/or how insect hosts provide symbionts with essential cellular components.
The awardee will answer these questions by labeling cicada proteins and RNAs to
localize these gene products within symbiont-harboring tissues. The results of
this study are important for understanding host-bacterial interactions, the
evolution of organelles, and for improving microscopy methods on insect tissues.