* 1502578
* Homological Mirror Symmetry Conference Miami 2015
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Maxim Kontsevich, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports participation in a conference on Homological Mirror Symmetry
held at the University of Miami from January 26 through January 31, 2015. Mirror
symmetry originated in physics as a duality between superconformal quantum field
theories. Maxim Kontsevich interpreted this duality in a consistent, powerful
mathematical framework called Homological Mirror Symmetry (HMS). The ideas put
forth by Kontsevich have led to dramatic developments in how the mathematical
community approaches ideas from theoretical physics, and indeed our conception
of space itself. Several cutting edge developments have happened in the last
year.

The conference on Homological Mirror Symmetry at the University of Miami will
serve as a perfect opportunity for a dissemination of these developments and
encouragement of a wave of young, early career researchers in this subject area.
The wide range of topics appearing in HMS research necessitates venues for the
open exchanges of ideas in order for graduate students and early-career
researchers to stay informed on current topics. The subject has developed
extremely rapidly in recent years, and this conference will have an immense
broader impact by bringing young people into it. More details on the conference
can be found at https://math.berkeley.edu/~auroux/miami2015.html.