* 1502919
* P2C2: Climate and Environmental Variability over the Last Glacial Cycle from Ice Cores in the Western Kunlun Mountains (Tibetan Plateau)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,374,171.00

This award uses funds to conduct a collaborative expedition between The Ohio
State University's Byrd Polar and Climate Research Center (BPCRC) and the
Institute of Tibetan Plateau Research (ITP) of the Chinese National Academy of
Sciences to recover and analyze four ice cores from the Guliya ice cap (6,700
meters) in the western Kunlun Mountains on the Tibetan Plateau
(TP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a strong and equal research
partnership between scientists from the U.S. and China and the opportunity to
obtain one of the oldest ice records in the Northern Hemisphere that could help
understand natural climate variability. As such, the project will help foster
regional international scientific collaborations and support two graduate
students and a postdoctoral scholar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the Guliya
ice cap (GIC) was surveyed and successfully drilled to bedrock at an off-summit
site in 1992, logistical and time limitations prevented summit drilling, and few
dating techniques were available at that time to help establish a robust
timescale beyond 100,000 years Before Present (BP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently enhanced logistics and technologies will help the
international research team significantly address these former impediments. The
short (&lt;decadal) to long (&gt;millennial) term time series produced over the
last 100,000 years could provide a long-term context for climatic, atmospheric
and environmental variability in one of the least studied places on Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate signals over the anticipated Last Glacial Cycle
(LGC) time record in these ice cores will be assessed using continuous high-
resolution stable isotopic, glaciochemical, dust, trace element, and black
carbon measurements. Specifically, the research team will focus on the following
objectives: (1) document abrupt climate variations, both past and present,
recorded in the GIC and assess how climate has changed over the last quarter
century; (2) establish tightly constrained timescales for the Guliya ice cores
from both the lower elevation site and the summit; (3) determine the atmospheric
and climatological dynamics that allowed the GIC to survive since the Eemian
Period (~130,000 ago) while other TP glaciers to the east and south date back
only to the Early or Middle Holocene Period, and; (4) assess the regional
characteristics of climatic and environmental variability during the Holocene,
Last Glacial Stage, Eemian and beyond and how they compare to conditions
elsewhere, including the Polar Regions.