* 1502746
* Collaborative Research: Distinguishing the drivers of benthic foraminiferal faunal change to improve mechanistic interpretations of abrupt hypoxic events in the North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Christina Belanger, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 11/30/2017
* USD 179,386.00

During the last ice age, episodes of expanded low-oxygen conditions (hypoxia)
developed along the margins of the North Pacific Ocean and, while multiple
potential drivers have been proposed, the causes of these environmental changes
remain controversial. Documenting the full dynamic range of variability and
causes of hypoxia is essential for understanding carbon cycle processes and the
biogeochemical feedbacks associated with large-scale climate changes. Low-oxygen
events in the North Pacific are expected to become more severe in the future,
thus understanding their dynamics, drivers, and ecological consequences in the
past can provide important information for managing today's and tomorrow's
marine ecosystem resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two sediment cores collected
by IODP Expedition 341 in the Gulf of Alaska will provide records of ecological
and environmental change over the past 60,000 years and will be used to document
the range of oxygenation states, quantify the ecological consequences of changes
in oxygenation, and evaluate the role of changing organic carbon fluxes in
driving hypoxic events. High sedimentation rates at the two study sites (at 680
m and 3680 m water depth) permit high temporal-resolution studies that will be
used to quantify the abruptness of changes in oxygenation and the severity of
hypoxic conditions. This study design permits testing the generality of the
drivers and dynamics of hypoxic events in different environmental settings and
climate states. Well-established methods for determining paleo-oxygenation
(focusing on laminations, bulk sediment Re, and excess Mn, U, Mo) will identify
hypoxic events. Systematic comparisons of benthic foraminiferal whole-community
faunal counts in downcore records to the independently derived geochemical
proxies measured on the same samples will be used to identify the primary
factors associated with benthic foraminiferal faunal change, and to develop more
accurate faunal proxies for benthic conditions that do not rely on the
assumption that modern spatial variability encompasses temporal variability.
Quantitative multivariate analysis of diverse species-level assemblages of
benthic foraminiferal faunas will allow the research team to assess relative
severity and abruptness of hypoxic events, which is not possible with
geochemical proxies that rely on redox thresholds. The incorporation of faunal
information will also improve evaluation of the relationship between hypoxia and
organic carbon flux. The multivariate faunal and geochemical data sets produced
by this project can serve as model test data and will improve faunal proxy
methods for recognizing variations in benthic environments, determining rates of
environmental change, and evaluating the mechanisms underlying low-oxygen
(hypoxic) events. Comparison of these high-latitude North Pacific sites with
published far-field data will contribute to assessing the causes and impact of
hypoxia in the larger Pacific Basin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports
an early career faculty member in an EPSCoR state, two graduate students, and
undergraduate students who will connect with active researchers though senior
theses and established REU activities. Through this project, students from South
Dakota School of Mines and Technology will have access to advanced research
facilities at Oregon State University. In addition, results of this project will
be integrated into public outreach conducted by researchers at both
institutions, which includes STEM activities intended to benefit female and
Native America middle and high school students, elder education programs, public
education through the Museum of Geology at SDSMT, and young international
students though FutureEarth/PAGES.