* 1502141
* EAGER: Improvement of Ammonia and Nitrogen Dioxide Uptake and Utilization in Crops
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2019
* Cankui Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2019
* USD 356,997.00

PI: Cankui Zhang (Purdue University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Yona Baguma
(National Agricultural Research Organization, Uganda) and Henry Wagaba (National
Crops Resources Research Institute, Uganda)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic
emissions of gaseous nitrogen (N) have become a severe problem worldwide.
Although much is known about the alteration of physiology and growth of plants
exposed to pollutant gases, most of these studies are observational, from an
ecological perspective, and do not address the possibility of using gaseous
nitrogen to augment plant growth. If successful, this EAGER project will harness
and exploit known molecular mechanisms of uptake and transport of soil N to
facilitate these processes for airborne N. The results generated from this
exploratory and high risk research may also point the way to similar strategies
for N use in other species and for other important gaseous pollutants. This
project will foster intellectual and technical exchange in U.S. and Africa in
the area of molecular plant physiology to develop novel strategies for
"pollutant" utilization in important crop species such as cassava, rice and
potato. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Certain air pollutants, including
ammonia and nitrogen dioxide, are absorbed by leaves and are potential sources
of nitrogen (N) needed for plant growth. However, plants did not evolve to take
up these compounds from the air, and even if the nutrients are absorbed they may
not be utilized correctly. Indeed, it has been noted primarily by
ecophysiologists and forest biologists that these aerial nutrients stimulate
shoot growth under certain conditions. However, it is also the case that the
newly formed organic compounds are not transported out of the leaves,
sequestering not only the absorbed N, but much of the carbon (C) derived from
photosynthesis. As a result, root growth is inhibited, leaving the plants
susceptible to drought and other stresses. In addition, the edible parts of crop
plants, including tubers, do not benefit from nutrients if they stagnate in the
leaves. To address this challenge, this EAGER project will develop and test
novel molecular strategies for increasing the absorption and transport of
aerial-derived nitrogenous compounds in potato, cassava and rice using select
candidate genes identified in model plants such as Arabidopsis. All data and
resources developed in this project will be available to the public. DNA
sequences will be deposited at GenBank.