* 1502296
* Arithmetic of differential operators, K-theory and periods of motives
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Deepam Patel, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2019
* USD 156,000.00

Mathematically, this research project lies in the field of algebraic geometry.
The fundamental problem in algebraic geometry is the study and classification of
geometric objects given by solutions to polynomial equations. This research
project focuses more specifically on the application of the tools and techniques
used in algebraic geometry to study equations arising from algebraic number
theory. The study of such equations has a rich history and can be traced back to
Diophantus, who first studied solutions to what are today called Diophantine
equations. Because of their diversity, the study of such equations has led to
numerous applications in fields such as biology, chemistry, cosmology, and
computer encryption. The general strategy towards classification of such
arithmetic objects is to associate various invariants to the given geometric
objects. One example of such an invariant is a set of complex numbers, usually
known as periods, associated to a given polynomial system. A central focus of
this research project to study which complex numbers can arise as periods of
various objects appearing in algebraic geometry. The project also contributes to
the training of the next generation of researchers by engaging postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students, and undergraduate students in research.

In this project, the principal investigator intends to study periods arising
from the theory of algebraic varieties. The study of periods is in fact a shadow
of some foundational questions in the theory of motives and algebraic cycles.
The PI intends to pursue three broad projects dealing with such questions. In
the first project, The PI studies periods of vector bundles with connections.
Periods arise when the rational structures on two different cohomology groups
are compared. This project attempts to generalize to higher dimensions results
on the periods of irregular connections in the case of curves. The second
project deals with giving explicit constructions of mixed Tate motives. In
previous work, the PI constructed such motives from the higher homotopy of
algebraic varieties. An explicit outcome of this project will be to compute the
periods and Galois modules coming from these higher homotopy motives. In
addition to these projects, the PI also plans to use K-theory to study the
deformation theory of algebraic cycles as well as the behavior of algebraic
cycles under extension of base fields. The last project attempts to apply
methods in algebraic geometry to the study of infinite dimensional
representations of certain p-adic algebraic groups, and is an excellent example
of an application of algebraic geometry to other areas of mathematics.