* 1502011
* Dimensional Metrology Certification Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Harold Halliday, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 895,618.00

Through this project American Indian students are gaining knowledge and
experience by applying cutting-edge metrology techniques using data capturing
equipment to improve manufacturing quality. Students are learning equipment
operation and maintenance skills and how to analyze and solve complex metrology
problems. Students are directly applying the technology in meaningful and
relevant projects, thereby growing in competence, comfort, and self-confidence
to work successfully as technicians in the high tech manufacturing disciplines.
NTU is introducing metrology technology to teachers and students at secondary
schools with majority American Indian student populations through workshops and
demonstrations to cultivate the STEM pipeline. Investigators are conveying how
technologies are used in engineering, manufacturing, architecture and geographic
information systems fields and providing learning opportunities for high school
students. By developing ties with high tech organizations and educating Navajo
students in cutting-edge STEM technology fields, this project is aiming to
communicate new education and employment potentials in STEM, which for Navajos
living on the reservation was previously considered
unattainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navajo Technical University's (NTU)
Dimensional Metrology Certification Project is incorporating formal training
within various STEM curricula to provide industry standard certifications in
advanced metrology technologies, specifically Laser Scanner, Laser Tracker, and
Portable Coordinate Measuring Machine. NTU is partnering with industry to
develop educational materials and standards leading to certifications and
training primarily in the area of Dimensional Metrology data capture and related
technical hardware and software operations. NTU students are learning these
technologies through culturally relevant metrology technology education
materials, problem-based learning methodologies, internships and peer mentoring.
The project's evaluation effort will take a mixed-method approach (quantitative
and qualitative analysis) to assess and to develop an understanding of what
changes in faculty and student learning take place as a result of project
activities and the contextual circumstances associated with these changes. In so
doing the investigating team will add to the knowledge base of how projects of
this type contribute to the improvement of technician education in tribal
colleges, thereby offering a model for other similar institutions.