* 1502244
* Tensor Categories and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Pavel Etingof, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 12/31/2021
* USD 661,310.00

Representation theory is a study of symmetries of space, such as our
3-dimensional space, or, more generally, a space with any number of dimensions
(even infinite). In this theory, symmetries of the underlying space are encoded
in an algebraic structure and the elements in the algebraic structure are
represented by linear transformations, or, more explicitly, by matrices. Thus, a
representation is basically a collection of matrices that satisfy a certain
natural system of nonlinear equations. These equations are determined by the
collection of symmetries that are being studied. Representations of a given
structure themselves form a quite intricate and rich structure, which encodes
relations (or mappings) between different representations. This higher-level
structure is called the category of representations. For some types of
structures (e.g., for groups, Lie algebras, and quantum groups), representations
can be multiplied; in this case the corresponding categories are tensor
categories because multiplication of representations is similar to
multiplication of tensors. It turns out that the notion of a tensor category is
very interesting in its own right, and that many tensor categories don't arise
as categories of representations. This research concerns ordinary and tensor
categories, some of which arise as representation categories and some of which
don't, and to study connections between them. In particular, the project studies
complex rank generalizations of representation categories proposed by P.
Deligne. Roughly speaking, this is a generalization in which the number of
elements of a set or rows of a matrix is allowed to be nonintegral. This becomes
meaningful and useful when the invariants of interest turn out to be polynomials
of the number of elements or rows, which is often the case. The project also
involves the study of quantum groups which describe hidden symmetries of quantum
systems, and yield tensor categories which lead to invariants allowing us to
distinguish in-equivalent knots and links. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will study tensor categories; Hopf algebra actions on rings; quantum
groups; representation theory in complex rank; Hecke algebras, Cherednik
algebras, symplectic reflection algebras; noncommutative algebra; and Poisson
homology. The PI's plan is as follows. (1) Develop a theory of actions of finite
dimensional Hopf algebras on division algebras (in particular, fields) and apply
it to proving non-existence statements for Hopf actions, develop a theory of
extensions of tensor categories, classify unipotent categories, and classify
fiber functors and module categories for the small quantum group. (2) Study a
discrete analog of the monodromy theorem of Toledano Laredo for the Casimir
connection, using dynamical Weyl groups; trace functions for quantum affine
algebras; and signatures of representations of quantum groups for |q|=1. (3)
Develop the ideas of P. Deligne, and extend representation theories of various
classical structures (containing the symmetric group S(n) or classical Lie
groups GL(n), O(n), Sp(2n)) to complex values of n. (4) Study the representation
theory of double Yangians, of Cherednik algebras on curves, on elliptic
algebras, and on signatures of representations of rational Cherednik algebras.
(5) Supervise the work of undergraduate and high school students on the lower
central series of associative algebras.