* 1502700
* GEM: Response of Global Ionospheric Currents to Substorms: Implication for the Electric Field Penetration to the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Shinichi Ohtani, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 04/30/2022
* USD 298,215.00

This proposal builds on surprising evidence from an earlier study by this group
that perturbations in the equatorial electrojet (a narrow ribbon of strong
dayside ionospheric current flowing along the magnetic dip equator) may actually
be caused by bursts of auroral activity called substorms on the nightside at
polar latitudes. During substorms, strong currents are diverted from large
radial distances in the extended tail of the magnetosphere along magnetic field
lines into and through the ionosphere on the nightside. The ionospheric segment
of the current is seen as a strong auroral electrojet (AEJ) at polar latitudes.
The equatorial electrojet (EEJ), on the other hand, is generated as a result of
the interaction between neutral winds flowing away from a region of strong solar
heating while dragging ions across magnetic field lines, and the unique geometry
of strictly horizontal magnetic field lines at the dip equator. The association
between these electrojets implies that electric fields are penetrating from the
polar region as far as the dip equator during substorms. Even though weak by the
time they reach the equatorial region, their signatures can be observed in the
modulation of the intense equatorial electrojet. This is a proposal to
investigate more completely the response of the equatorial electrojet to
substorms and determine its global closure. The penetration of the auroral
electric field to low-latitudes, and the shielding that inhibits or prevents
this penetration, are open and compelling questions for understanding and more
accurately predicting space weather, which ultimately has benefits to society.
Significant broader impacts include the participation of high-school teachers
and students during the summer in research associated with this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the goals of this project, the
proposers will address two questions: (1) how does the auroral electrojet
respond to substorms, and (2) how is the substorm-related change of the dayside
EEJ connected with the nightside AEJ.&lt;br/&gt;They will use data from a
network of ground magnetometers, which includes 7 ground stations around the dip
equator and a meridional chain of stations, along with auroral images from the
Polar and IMAGE satellites. To answer question 1, they will use publicly-
available lists of substorms, along with these observations, to determine
statistically how often the EEJ responds to substorm onsets either by
intensifying or weakening, the magnetic local time dependence of the response,
and whether it is changed by the preceding level of geomagnetic activity. To
answer question 2, they will examine the magnetic deflection (a measure of
electric current intensity) as a function of solar zenith angle and magnetic
latitude to test the idea that the EEJ and AEJ are connected by meridional
currents that flow around the terminator. This is a new idea and a unique aspect
of this proposal.