* 1502923
* GEM:  The Generation of Falling-Tone Chorus and Scattering of Particles by Chirped Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Angel Soto Chavez, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 369,996.00

Plasma waves called "chorus" are thought to be one of the most important waves
for creating the high-energy electrons in the radiation belts from lower energy
populations and are also believed to be involved in their loss through
scattering into the atmosphere. Chorus waves are radio waves in the acoustic
frequency range. If converted to acoustic waves they sound like whistling or
chirping, hence the name. Fine structures in the waveform called rising and
falling tones are the source of these chirping sounds. The rising tones have
received a lot of attention, with several mechanisms suggested for their
formation. Not so for the falling tones. This project will investigate further a
new mechanism for the generation of falling tones and examine the interaction of
radiation belts electron with chorus - both rising and falling tones. Research
into these waves benefits not only the field of space physics but also plasma
physics and fusion. In addition the project will provide training for a
postdoctoral student and research support for an early-career scientist (the
proposer) at the New Jersey Institute of Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are significant differences in the mechanisms that have been proposed to
generate chorus (focusing mostly on rising tones) compared to the new mechanism
suggested for falling tones. Most current theories conclude that plasma density
variations and/or inhomogeneity of the magnetic field are necessary to generate
chorus. In fact, for rising tone chorus, simulations show that spectral
characteristics of the chorus are directly related to the geomagnetic field
inhomogeneity. However, the falling tone waves have much more oblique wave
normal angles and, as a result, more resonances with plasma electrons are
possible. Competition between resonances that cause growth and damping of the
waves can make them marginally stable, resulting in nonlinear effects that
produce chirping. This new picture of falling tone chorus generation along with
scattering of electrons by chorus will be investigated through the combined use
of analytic model developments and computational particle in cell (PIC) and
Tristan-mp code runs. The roles of various plasma parameters will be determined
from runs of a 1D Vlasov code, which solves for the time evolution of the
electron distribution.