* 1502999
* International Symposium on Plant Photobiology (ISPP 2015)
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Enamul Huq, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 02/29/2016
* USD 16,000.00

Light is life for plants; the ultimate source of bioenergy. Light acts as one of
the most critical environmental signals regulating growth and development
throughout the life cycle of plants. This proposal seeks financial support for
the International Symposium on Plant Photobiology (ISPP 2015), an ad hoc
biennial conference focused on the structure and function of light receptors,
signaling mechanisms, ecological significance and biotechnological applications
of photobiology, to be held at The University of Texas at Austin, TX from May 26
to May 31, 2015. Through education of participants in state-of-the-art research
developments during daily symposia and poster sessions in a relaxed venue with
plenty of free time for informal discussion and mentoring of young
investigators, ISPP 2015 seeks to inspire new approaches to tailoring organisms,
photoreceptors and light-energy converting catalysts for efficient sustainable
food, fiber and energy production applications. ISPP conferences represent a
unique niche for the plant photobiology communities worldwide. Leading experts
on diverse photoreceptors and their signaling mechanisms, new investigators, and
invited participants from associated fields will contribute critical analyses of
the current state of their fields, the challenges and opportunities therein and
their most recent unpublished discoveries. While the dissemination of ideas from
this conference will be encouraged, no formal proceedings publication is
anticipated in order to encourage discussion of unpublished results, ideas and
new directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include
integration of research, education and training by soliciting participation of
faculty from primarily undergraduate institutions, Ph.D. students and
postdoctoral fellows with a focus on female and/or a member of an under-
represented community. The sessions have reserved slots for oral presentations
by early career investigators, who are either invited or will be chosen from the
poster abstracts by a committee of established investigators. The conference fee
will be covered for these participants and for other meritorious students and
postdoctoral fellows based on financial need and/or merit of poster
presentation. The International Symposium on Plant Photobiology (ISPP) has a
long tradition of bringing together a diverse international network of
researchers, linked simply through their shared goals, and a plethora of
national and international collaborations that have been spawned by these
Symposia.