* 1502433
* SusChEM: Photocatalytic Generation of Hydrogen from Water using Organic Nanofibril Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ling Zang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Ling Zang&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1502433&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen
gas is a clean and zero-carbon fuel which can be converted to electrical power
using a device called a fuel cell for electric vehicle or industrial
applications. Most of the hydrogen gas produced today comes from processing of
natural gas, primarily from fossil fuel resources. However, future sources of
hydrogen will need to come from renewable resources if they are to become part
of our sustainable energy future. The goal of this project is to develop
inexpensive, polymer-based materials that will convert water into hydrogen gas
using sunlight to drive the reaction. In the proposed research, electrically
conductive organic polymers will be extruded into nanometer diameter fibrils
designed to capture the suns photons. Catalyst materials imbedded in the polymer
help to split apart the water molecule to hydrogen and oxygen gas using these
absorbed photons through a process called photocatalysis. The research will make
and test the performance of these materials for generation of hydrogen from
water. Students involved in this project will be trained at the interface of
renewable energy and nanotechnology. The project will also develop hydrogen
production demonstration for Natural History Museum of Utah to illustrate
renewable energy research to public audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research is to synthesize and characterize the performance of new organic
polymer nanofibril based photocatalytic materials for the splitting of water
into hydrogen gas. These nanofibers, which contain both polymer and metal co-
catalyst nanoparticles, are multifunctional, combining the properties of tunable
band structure, visible spectral response, and large surface area. In the
research plan, the organic polymer nanofibers will be synthesized from building-
block molecules containing donor-acceptor moieties responsive to wide range of
visible light. The donor-acceptor material interface will also be engineered for
increased charge separation upon illumination, as well as for the efficient
transport of the photo-generated electrons to the co-catalyst sites that convert
protons to hydrogen. This interface will also be engineered to maximize the
intake of the photogenerated electrons while preventing their recombination with
cationic radicals. Time-resolved electron spin resonance measurements will
characterize how interfacial electron-scavenging depends on particle size and
energy level alignment in the polymer and co-catalyst. Hydrogen production
activity of the synthesized nanofibril photocatalysts will be correlated to
quantum efficiency, turnover numbers, and dependence on irradiation wavelength.
As part of the educational activities, workshops based on solar fuels and solar
photovoltaics topics will be offered through Utah Science Center and the NSF-
sponsored Nanodays at Nano Institute of Utah.