* 1502947
* GEM Systems Science: Creating and Analyzing an Earth Index Collection
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Joseph Borovsky, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 03/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

The Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) Program is a broad-based, community-
initiated research program on the physics of the Earth's magnetosphere and the
coupling of the magnetosphere to the atmosphere and to the solar wind. The work
of GEM is accomplished in a series of campaigns and focus groups that solve
specific problems leading to the construction of a global Geospace General
Circulation Model (GGCM) with predictive capability. This project will
contribute essential results to this goal pertaining to understanding the global
reaction of the Earth's magnetosphere-ionosphere system to the solar wind and
how the solar wind couples to the magnetosphere. The reaction of the
magnetosphere to driving as well as the driving by the solar wind are more
complex than commonly thought and than current models can capture or explain.
This Investigation will perform a comprehensive statistical analysis to explore
those complexities. The data sets created and the findings of the analysis will
be disseminated via a new "Earth Index Collection" webpage to be created.
Tutorials, examples, and research suggestions will also be made available via
the webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Investigation will take a systems-science
approach, analyzing the reaction of the multiply measured magnetosphere to the
full solar-wind data set. It will collect and create a large number of time-
dependent indices, each one being a different measure of the magnetosphere-
ionosphere system. The "indices" will be measures of the currents, plasmas,
energetic particles, waves, morphology, and energy flow in the system. The
collection of time-dependent indices will be put together to form a time-
dependent "Earth Index Collection" of measurements. Canonical correlation
analysis will be used to identify and explore correlation patterns between the
multivariable Earth index collection and the multivariable solar-wind data set.
For the primary mode of reaction of the Earth index collection to the solar
wind, a time-dependent "collective index" will be identified and defined and the
universal coupling function that drives that primary mode will be defined.
Secondary global modes of the reaction of the Earth to the solar wind will be
identified, cataloged, and investigated and the properties of the solar wind
(the secondary coupling functions) that drive the secondary modes will be
identified. Attempts will be made to connect the secondary coupling functions
with physical mechanisms such as the viscous interaction, changes in the
location of the dayside reconnection line, and changes in the morphology of the
magnetosphere. By analysis of the secondary modes of reaction, the "sectors" of
the Earth index collection will be identified and the indices that comprise each
sector will be cataloged. Exploring suppression and confounding in the
multivariable solar-wind data set as its variables correlate with the Earth
measurements, causal correlations versus non-causal correlations will be
identified. Finally, traditional data-analysis methods will be used to elucidate
the sectors and the global modes of reaction of the magnetosphere to the solar
wind.