* 1502042
* BioBridge
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nick Kapp, San Mateo County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,885.00

The San Francisco Bay Area has been called the "birthplace of biotechnology" and
continues to dominate the international biotechnology industry with the largest
concentration of biotechnology companies and employees in the world. Because
biotechnology is a dynamic and evolving field, employers want well-rounded
individuals with more than traditional technical skills. Skyline College
proposes to build a strong biotechnology program that responds to new and
emerging market forces and addresses the needs of the local
community,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initially, biotechnology faculty will
collaborate with industry partners to design an entry- and mid-level
Biotechnology Technician Certificate program. Additionally, a summer bridge
program will be developed followed by development of the BioBridge program. The
BioBridge project will attract students from groups under-represented in STEM
fields and launch them on a pathway to further education and careers in
biotechnology, while advancing the field of biotech education. The two-semester
program will employ a cohort model; a curriculum that contextualizes and
integrates science, math, English, and 21st century skills acquisition; project-
based learning and teamwork experience in a lab environment; workplace soft
skills instruction; work-based learning opportunities, and wraparound supports
for students. It will be closely aligned with evolving trends and workforce
needs of the immediate geographic region as well as the larger San Francisco Bay
Area. In year one, Skyline and its partners will develop the BioBridge
curriculum; obtain industry commitments for work-based learning opportunities;
and recruit the first cohort of students from high schools in San Mateo County's
South San Francisco school district. In years two and three, the program will be
piloted with cohorts of 25 students. As the program will target and promote the
success of students from groups underrepresented in STEM (specifically Latinos
and women), it will increase their participation in post-secondary STEM
education and careers and support the development of a diverse STEM workforce.