* 1502227
* Curves, covers, and cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Rachel Pries, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2019
* USD 166,539.00

An underlying theme of arithmetic geometry is the existence of solutions to
polynomial equations whose coefficients lie in fields other than the complex
numbers. Historically, equations having extra symmetry have been a focus of
inquiry since the automorphisms of the corresponding geometric object provide
extra structure which helps illuminate the set of solutions. The PI's research
is about functions on curves defined by polynomial equations with coefficients
in a finite field. The goal is to analyze invariants of algebraic structures
attached to these curves, to determine how these invariants vary across
parameter spaces for the curves, and to investigate which exceptional structures
occur. As a broader impact of the proposal, the PI will collaborate with the
Fort Collins Museum of Discovery to build activity kits about cryptography for
children. The PI is also involved with other initiatives that have broader
impacts: the PI is a leader of the WIN network, whose goal is to vitalize the
research careers of women in number theory via new research collaborations; and
the PI was a co-organizer of the Arizona Winter School from 2010-2015.

Curves and abelian varieties exhibit new phenomena in positive characteristic p.
These phenomena typically arise due to the underlying presence of morphisms of
degree p. They lead to important cohomological invariants, such as the p-rank,
Newton polygon, and Ekedahl-Oort type. The goal of the PI's proposal is to
prove: (non)-existence results about abelian varieties and curves with given
invariants; and structural results about the stratifications induced by the
invariants on various moduli spaces. In particular, the PI will investigate
supersingular abelian varieties and Jacobians; the interplay between
automorphisms and p-torsion invariants; formulae, akin to the Deuring-
Shafarevich formula, for the variation in more refined invariants of the
Ekedahl-Oort type in terms of ramification data; and rational points of curves
over non-algebraically closed fields. Key techniques include: intersection of
divisors on moduli spaces; degeneration to singular curves of compact type;
results about monodromy of families of curves; cohomology calculations (de Rham
or of resolutions); and actions of Frobenius and Vershiebung.