* 1502071
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Elucidating the Roles of Abiotic and Biotic Factors in Exotic Species Establishment: A Trait-based Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Priyanga Amarasekare, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2018
* USD 20,013.00

Invasions of non-native species are one of the greatest environmental challenges
of the 21st century, threatening not only native flora, fauna, and the ecosystem
services that they provide, but also agriculture, human health, and the economy.
Invasion and establishment of non-native species is driven by both physical
(abiotic) factors, such as temperature, and by interactions with native species
(biotic factors), such as predation and competition. Understanding how these
biotic and abiotic factors magnify or cancel one another is necessary for
forecasting the conditions under which invasive species establish in new
localities, and for developing methods to control the spread of such species.
Yet, most studies overlook the joint effects of abiotic and biotic factors on
invasion success because they examine on only one type of factor. This project
addresses this problem by examining the joint effect of environmental
temperature and competition for resources on invasion by an insect in
California. The research combines laboratory experiments, field observations,
and mathematical models to forecast the conditions that allow the invasive
species to spread. Currently, the U.S. spends hundreds of millions of dollars
annually on invasive species control. This project aims to reduce this cost by
providing the scientific knowledge needed to develop more cost-effective control
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates manipulative experiments,
field observations and mathematical models to examine how temperature and
competition impact population dynamics and species interactions of an
ecologically related pair of insects, one native and one invasive. The impetus
for this work comes from a native-invasive interaction occurring in the
California coastal sage scrub community in which two Hemipterans (Family:
Pentatomidae), native Murgantia histrionica and recent North American invasive
Bagrada hilaris, compete for their primary host, the perennial shrub Cleome
isomeris. This study aims to (i) quantify the joint effect of temperature and
density on life history traits (fecundity, development, mortality) of the two
species, and (ii) parameterize a mathematical model of stage-structured
population dynamics that incorporates mechanistic descriptions of vital rate
temperature responses, and time-dependent developmental delays that arise due to
temperature variation. These goals are achieved through (i) a fully factorial
lab experiment with density and temperature treatments, (ii) estimation of model
parameters using maximum likelihood methods applied to experimental data, which
are used to analyze a delay differential equation model of population dynamics,
and (iii) field collection of insect abundances to test the model's predictions.