* 1502015
* Providing Opportunities for Women in Energy Related (POWER) Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,10/31/2021
* Lawrence Beaty, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 10/31/2021
* USD 796,639.00

The over-arching mission of Providing Opportunities for Women in Energy Related
(POWER) Careers is to help women achieve equity in STEM-related technical career
fields. POWER Careers will increase enrollment and completion of women in STEM
two-year degree programs that lead to energy industry careers. This pilot
project is designed to evoke transformational change in the way that women are
recruited to and retained in energy systems programs. Education and industry
have not been successful in obtaining equitable participation of females in
historically male-dominated technical fields. POWER Careers addresses the need
to increase female participation, with a focus on non-traditional college-aged
women (ages 25+) who need or want to begin a new career. Entry level energy
technician jobs offer attractive salaries, excellent benefits, and career paths
with promise and opportunity. POWER Careers will implement focused strategies
aimed at increasing the successful participation of women in high quality,
proven Associate of Applied Science (AAS) programs within the Energy Systems
Technology and Education Center (ESTEC) at Idaho State University (ISU) College
of Technology. These strategies will retain women students through graduation
and placement in professional positions. The project is important because it can
help participants make dramatic moves into higher paying STEM-related careers.
It will employ a system of supports and activities that form a continuum across
the student experience. For ESTEC, the best and most powerful voices to recruit
students are those of successful female students and graduates. POWER Careers
will serve as a pilot project to help identify and address the challenges of
recruiting age-diverse women in a rural area, in part by working closely with
program graduates who will be role models and mentors, and with community-based
agencies that are in contact with potential adult students. The project will
also engage industry in efforts to build a more diverse workforce and create
workplace environments that are welcoming to female technicians. Efforts to
recruit women will include those from underrepresented populations - Latinas,
Native Americans, and military veterans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of POWER Careers are to: (1) recruit and enroll 45 women age 25
years and older into ESTEC AAS programs; (2) retain students to graduation with
a supportive student learning community; (3) place graduates in professional
jobs in the energy industry; (4) strengthen ESTEC partnerships with energy
employers to further careers for women; and (5) promote a culture of mentorship
to encourage women who pursue STEM technical careers. Attainment of project
goals will be evaluated using direct measures such as enrollment, retention,
graduation and job placement data, and by conducting surveys to assess affective
outcomes related to the culture and climate, as well as program effectiveness.
The investigators will address two specific research questions related to the
project's goals: (1) How do improvements to educational strategies enhance
student learning and performance for non-traditional college-aged women in rural
areas within the energy field? (2) How do innovative and targeted recruiting and
retention strategies increase the effectiveness of energy technician education
programs in retaining, graduating, and placing non-traditional college-aged
women in STEM-related and energy-specific careers? The investigators will
develop a combination of strategies that will likely serve as a model for other
institutions interested in improving STEM technician education and career
opportunities for women.