* 1502711
* Strengthening the Quality, Design and Usability of Simulations as Assessments of Teaching Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Meghan Shaughnessy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2018
* USD 449,906.00

Ensuring that beginning teachers are "classroom-ready" requires assessments that
efficiently and validly evaluate proficiency in teaching. This project explores
assessments involving simulated students as a way to assess teaching practice,
which could provide an important complement, or alternative, to directly
assessing teaching practice in classrooms. This form of assessment has the
potential to provide a way to avoid onerous expense, logistics, and other
difficulties of assessments happening in classrooms. The project will address
questions about the development of performance expectations for elementary
mathematics teachers, the extent to which the performance of the "student" role
can be standardized across different performance contexts, and different
approaches for generating teaching scenarios. The assessments will focus on the
teaching practices of eliciting and interpreting students' mathematical
thinking. The project will support: (1) establishing the validity of the
assessment as a means to assess readiness to teach elementary mathematics and
(2) providing the necessary foundation for scaling research and the use of
simulation assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
generating, calibrating, and studying standardized simulations of clinical
performance of mathematics teaching. The strategy is to investigate three
components of the simulation assessment that will enable its broader use in the
field. One component will focus on approaches that use different foundations
(wisdom of practice, interactions with children, and learning trajectories
research) for the design of simulations that are authentic and provide robust
information about teaching. Data on the ways in which each approach supplies
resources needed for assessment development will be compared. Another component
will focus on the degree to which the role of the student can be standardized
given the dynamics of teaching. Data on the responses of standardized students,
who have similar initial training, to different situational categories will be
analyzed. A final component will be establishing a basis for calibrating
performance expectations for simulations linked to key points in a teacher's
career trajectory (early career teachers, experienced teachers, "accomplished"
teachers). Data on the performance of teachers at different points in their
careers on the same assessment simulations will be compared. This study of
components impacting assessment design will result in a more robust foundation
for further development of, and further research on, teaching simulation
assessments. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.