* 1502162
* Homological Mirror Symmetry and Categorical Linear Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Maxim Kontsevich, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 07/31/2018
* USD 170,000.00

Category theory is an algebraic approach that formalizes the study of
mathematical structures. This project lays the foundations of classical
geometric methods in category theory. Today, in the second decade of the 21st
century, modern geometry and theoretical physics are more intertwined than ever
before. The convergence of ideas from mathematics and physics is accelerating at
the same time as elementary particle physics is on the cusp of a profound
revolution to be brought about by the new experimental results coming out of the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC). At the same time, a lot of mathematical work
remains to be done to provide a suitable framework for the new physical theories
that are being proposed. The geometric objects investigated in this project are
the foundations for such a framework: homological mirror symmetry is the
mathematical realization of dualities and higher categories, the analogues of
classical manifolds, are the mathematical foundation for quantum field theories.
These new flavors of geometry on which this project is based will continue to
play a fundamental role in the future development of theoretical physics.

The proposed approach is based on the pioneering works by Seidel, Ein,
Lazarsfeld, Mustata, Nakamaye, Popa, and Budur. The PIs will go further and
conjecture that the categorical multiplier ideal sheaf is related to the Orlov
spectrum of the category. Developing K-calculus and making it rigorous the PIs
will break new ground in studying classical questions in Algebraic Geometry,
including questions of rationality of projective varieties. In particular the
PIs plan to consider some more than hundred years old questions about
nonrationality of conic bundles and four dimensional cubics. The applications go
beyond the scope of Algebraic Geometry. Classical questions in Sympletcic
Geometry will be studied as well - using invariants of Fukaya category one can
try to distinguish symplectic manifolds with the same Seiberg - Witten
invariants. The approach connects K-calculus with so called tasting
configurations used in the study of the existence of Kahler-Einstein metrics. An
intriguing question is that of finding a connection between Orlov spectra and
the existence of Kahler-Einstein metrics. Another direction of the project is
the investigation of the connection of K-calculus with physics, for which a
starting point is the interpretation of monodromy data of the K - calculus as
limited stability conditions.