* 1502889
* P2C2: Collaborative Research: Dust Deposition, Paleo-Export Production, and Migration of the (ITCZ) Through the Last Glacial Cycle in the West-Central Pacific (Line Islands)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Gisela Winckler, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2019
* USD 529,204.00

This project's goal is to examine variations in dust deposition throughout the
last 150,000 years in the west-central Pacific from a suite of ocean sediment
cores recently recovered from the Line Islands Ridge and constituting a roughly
north-south transect across the modern Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
near 160Â°W longitude.

During the interval of interest for the project, the Earth's climate shifted
from full glaciation to one of the warmest interglacials in the last million
years. Following that peak interglacial, global climate varied through multiple
20,000 year cycles while trending toward a return to full glacial conditions at
the last glacial maximum (LGM) before the last deglaciation and Holocene
interglacial.

Windblown dust plays important roles in influencing and recording climate. In
the atmosphere, dust contributes to the planetary albedo and serves as cloud
condensation nuclei. In the ocean, dust may fertilize biological productivity
through the addition of crucial trace nutrients, and provide ballast for the
sinking of particles, thus enhancing carbon export from the surface ocean and
drawing down atmospheric carbon dioxide. In deep-sea sediments, the amount,
location and type of dust deposition provide clues for reconstructing its past
sources, pathways, magnitude and removal processes. These removal processes
include the shifting rain belts of the ITCZ that follows the thermal equator
over the tropical ocean.

The project will advance understanding of natural variations in climate, dust,
productivity, and the hydrological cycle, and will promote training and learning
for several early career scientists as well as undergraduate students. The
research team will also leverage their research and education efforts in
collaboration with middle school and high school science teachers through the
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory's Earth2Class program.