* 1502273
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: Preserving Privacy in Human Genomic Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Xintao Wu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 287,159.00

The proposed research will advance theoretical understanding of fundamental
issues related to genomic data analysis, as well as the design and
implementation of practical techniques to effectively protect privacy. The
proposed research is central to preventing privacy breaches for both study
participants and regular individuals due to released summary statistics and
results. A primary outcome of this research will be a suite of novel tools and
technologies and a Web-portal for privacy preserving analysis of genomic data,
which will help researchers in their endeavor to meet growing expectations in
protecting privacy and provide privacy assurance when regular individuals share
their genetic profiles. The proposed research will contribute significantly and
creatively to the limited base of knowledge in the area of preserving privacy in
genetic analysis. This research will involve, through courses and thesis
projects, graduate and undergraduate students to enhance their knowledge and
skills in solving problems in data mining, statistical analysis, privacy, and
bioinformatics. The PIs will collaborate with industrial partners at Baylor
College of Medicine and MD Anderson Cancer Institute to validate the
effectiveness of developed tools.

The proposed work is tied to a key health problem (i.e. genetic privacy) and
will make a fundamental contribution to computer and information sciences, and
biomedical research.. The proposed research activities include the following
three major tasks: 1) develop novel differential privacy preserving techniques
to provide rigorous privacy guarantees for genetic participants when researchers
publish genomic summary statistics and/or conduct advanced analysis; 2)
systematically evaluate potential privacy breaches for regular individuals due
to the released genomic statistics and analysis results; and 3) work with
collaborators to evaluate the efficacy of developed methods using real genomic
data (cancer and Alzheimer's disease) and build an integrated Web-portal
environment to provide researchers secure, reliable, and privacy preserving
access to (anonymized) genomic raw data, statistics, and analysis results.