* 1502049
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Adaptive radiation and hybridization: testing the hybrid swarm origin hypothesis for adaptive radiations in a phylogenetic framework
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* David Tank, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2018
* USD 18,743.00

Adaptive radiation and ecological opportunity are known to play major roles in
the formation of new biodiversity. In this model, a few ancestral species
diversify rapidly to fill ecological space with a variety of new morphological
and ecological strategies. Recently, hybridization among closely related species
has been hypothesized to play an important role during the early stages of an
adaptive radiation, but studies investigating this process in plants are
currently lacking. This project will evaluate the role of hybridization in
facilitating an adaptive radiation using the Andean plant genus Lachemilla
(Rosaceae) as a model. Lachemilla comprises approximately 50 described species
and is restricted to high elevation habitats throughout the Andes. Phylogenetic
analyses of chloroplast and single-copy nuclear DNA gene sequences from multiple
Lachemilla species will first be used to reconstruct evolutionary relationships.
Using this evolutionary framework, researchers will then use a variety of
statistical approaches to investigate the role played by hybridization in
driving diversification within the lineage. This research will provide extensive
training in systematics and evolutionary biology to a graduate student, and
enhance international scientific collaboration with researchers in Ecuador. This
project will provide training for one undergraduate student in laboratory
techniques and data analysis, and also provide valuable mentoring experience for
the co-PI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use phylogenetic methods to
investigate and test the hybrid swarm origin and syngameon hypotheses for the
generation of functional diversity during an adaptive radiation using the plant
genus Lachemilla (Rosaceae). A robust and comprehensive phylogeny from hundreds
of Lachemilla accessions using high-throughput sequencing approaches of whole
chloroplast and multiple single-copy nuclear regions will be generated using
Bayesian approaches. This phylogenetic framework will then be used to first test
for evidence of hybridization, and then investigate whether morphological,
functional, and phylogenetic diversification in the clade coincides with
hybridization events. By integrating modern comparative phylogenetic measures of
trait evolution with sophisticated analyses of lineage diversification rates,
this research will investigate the explicit role of hybridization in the early
stages of an adaptive radiation.