* 1502925
* Collaborative Research: Insights into North African climate variability over the last 1.1 million years from dust fluxes and leaf wax isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2020
* USD 358,679.00

The Sahel region of North Africa experienced dramatic swings in precipitation
patterns over the latter half of the 20th century, with devastating impacts on
food security during the droughts of the 1970s and 1980s. Looking ahead,
projections of future climate change in the Sahel show little agreement, with
some climate models predicting significantly wetter conditions in the 21st
century and others suggesting drying, leaving great uncertainty as to the
impacts of climate change on this sensitive region. This project aims to improve
understanding of controls on North African climate by reconstructing regional
climate changes over the last 1 million years using deep-sea sediments located
off the west African coast. This long-term sampling of climate variability will
reveal the region's response during multiple ice age cycles, including periods
when the high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere were substantially warmer and
colder than at present and periods when North Africa was much wetter and drier
than at present. By systematically documenting North Africa's response during
this range of climatic conditions, the results will provide important new
opportunities to test climate models' ability to accurately represent past
climate variability in the region. The project will employ recently developed
tools to reconstruct windblown dust emissions from the Sahara desert (a tracer
of winds and aridity), the carbon isotopic composition of fossil leaf molecules
in the sediment (a tracer of vegetation on the continent), and the hydrogen
isotopic composition of the same leaf molecules (a tracer of monsoon strength.)
This dataset will enable a better understanding of what has driven climate
change in the past, and what this will mean for future change in North Africa.
The project will also include public outreach projects to offer education about
the impact of climate change in North Africa, and it will provide training and
career development for a female postdoctoral researcher and multiple
undergraduate researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present understanding of
African climate evolution over the Plio-Pleistocene is based in large part on a
benchmark set of marine records of the accumulation rate of windblown dust that
provide some of the only continuous data spanning thousand to million year
timescales. Now, 25 years after the initial publication of these records, recent
advances in hydroclimate reconstruction offer the opportunity for a new
generation of insights into North African climate. Constant flux proxies (230Th,
3He) allow fundamental improvements in the accuracy of fluxes by minimizing the
effects of lateral advection and age model uncertainties; as a result, dust
fluxes can be compared through time and space with much greater confidence.
Additionally, the carbon and hydrogen isotope composition of terrestrial leaf
waxes (n-alkanes) have been established as hydrological proxies that can offer
independent insights into monsoon precipitation and vegetation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, these methods have received only limited
application to periods prior to the last glacial cycle, precluding rigorous
exploration of the drivers, timing and amplitude of North African climate change
over the Pleistocene. This project will use measurements of dust flux
(determined by 230Th- and 3He-normalization) and leaf wax isotopes (dD, d13C) to
reconstruct changes in the mean state and variability of African climate over
the last 1.1 Ma. This interval includes periods with broad variations in orbital
parameters, ice volume, and high-latitude temperatures, including maximum high
latitude warmth during so-called "super-interglacials", low-amplitude ice age
cycles during the "luke-warm" interglacials, and times of especially high and
low eccentricity. By pairing high-fidelity dust fluxes with complementary data
reflecting land cover and hydrology, the project will offer detailed insights
into the nature of past changes in this water-stressed monsoonal region and will
test specific hypotheses relating to the roles of high-latitude temperatures and
local insolation in driving past hydrological changes. The project will offer
new opportunities for testing climate models used to forecast future changes in
the region by providing robust records of the response of North African climate
to a wide range of forcings and boundary conditions. This dataset will also
enable improved testing of hypotheses relating changes in the mean state and
variability of African climate to human evolution.