* 1502180
* Berkovich Spaces, Tropical Geometry, Combinatorics, and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Matthew Baker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 240,000.00

This research project is primarily concerned with work in number theory, a
branch of mathematics with important applications to cryptography and coding
theory. The work also features connections to graph theory, a research area with
applications to the study of large-scale networks such as the internet. The
project will have a number of broader impacts, including support for high
school, undergraduate, and graduate research. The PI is currently supervising
two Ph.D. students from Georgia Tech and one Ph.D. student from UC Berkeley, in
addition to one undergraduate research student and two high school students,
each of whom is working on projects related to this project. The PI also has
been involved in a number of mathematical outreach activities, including an
online course on Number Theory and Cryptography for gifted high school students,
and he writes a popular math blog. These activities will be continued in this
project, integrating ideas from the current research whenever feasible. The
project will also contribute to the dissemination of mathematical ideas through
conference organization and publication of proceedings.

The primary intellectual merit of the project is that it will increase our
understanding of Berkovich spaces, tropical geometry, combinatorics, and complex
dynamics, and unearth new relationships between these different areas of
research. Berkovich spaces -- the modern incarnation of the pioneering early
twentieth century work of Kurt Hensel on "p-adic numbers" -- have in recent
years found applications to numerous areas of mathematical research, including
algebraic geometry, number theory, and complex dynamics (where they can be used
to study fractals such as the Mandelbrot set). Berkovich spaces are also
intimately connected with tropical geometry, a relatively new and very active
area of research with applications to number theory, algebraic geometry,
statistics, biology, and physics. One can think of tropical geometry as a
simplified model classical algebraic geometry in which the set of common
solutions to a system of polynomial equations is replaced by the set of common
solutions to a much simpler system of linear inequalities. Surprisingly -- and
rather mysteriously -- the tropical simplification remembers much more
information about the original solutions than one might originally expect. The
investigator's previous work involved unexpected new applications of Berkovich
spaces and tropical geometry, and this project will build on and significantly
advance that work.