* 1502877
* P2C2:Collaborative Research: A Speleothem Study of the Paleoclimatology of the Yucatan Peninsula: Testing Modes and Causes of Variability in the North American Tropics
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Stephen Burns, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2018
* USD 148,124.00

This project's goal is to reconstruct low latitude precipitation variability,
from interannual to orbital time scales, to better understand hydrological
responses to meso and large-scale atmosphere and ocean dynamics, external
forcing, and feedbacks in the Yucatan Peninsula (YP). The mechanisms proposed
for driving suborbital scale climate regimes in the region include ENSO,
tropical cyclogenesis and shifts in precipitation associated with movements of
the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), but available paleoclimate records
are contradictory in terms of causal factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
could potentially improve rainfall sensitivity estimates that would represent an
empirical assessment independent of models. Current international climate model
estimates of precipitation changes in the region by the end of this century vary
over a significant range (-50% to +9% relative to today). The project would also
support an underrepresented minority early-career scientist and provide an early
experience in research to several undergraduate students. In addition, the
research team will produce educational materials and exhibits for a general
audience in Spanish and English language versions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will use speleothems from caves of the YP to reconstruct the
character of hydrological variability in the region during the Holocene, the
last glacial interval, marine isotope stage (MIS) 5, and MIS 7 to 9. In
particular, the team will make quantitative reconstructions of precipitation
changes based on delta-18Oxygen isotopes in stalagmites. In combination with
available lacustrine records from the YP, local speleothem records may provide a
unique opportunity to quantitatively reconstruct the precipitation to
evaporation balance in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative high-
resolution Holocene and Late Pleistocene precipitation records will: 1) provide
quantitative estimates of past rainfall variability; 2) test the relationship
between rainfall variability and shifts in mean ITCZ; 3) investigate the role of
ENSO, tropical sea surface temperatures and cyclones in driving climate regimes
in the YP; and 4) provide estimates of the sensitivity of tropical
hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will leverage an active
collaboration with the Rio Secreto Reserve, a commercial enterprise that leads
~50,000 tourists through a large, partially submerged cave system on the east
coast of the YP for education and outreach aims. The cave system of Rio Secreto
represents an ideal cave system for reconstructing precipitation changes from
stalagmites in the region extending approximately 300,000 years before the
present.