* 1502856
* Design of Molecular Gels with Exceptional Structural, Dynamic and Mechanical Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,01/31/2022
* Richard Weiss, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2022
* USD 627,569.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Richard G. Weiss of Georgetown
University is developing 'molecular gelators' (small molecules that aggregate
into 3-dimensional networks which immobilize large amounts of a liquid) with
special properties, such as the ability to transform reversibly into free-
flowing liquids. A primary objective of this research is to develop fundamental
relationships between the shapes and functionalities of structurally simple
molecular gelators and the properties of their gels. To do so, two fundamental
scientific questions are being addressed: "What constitutes an efficient
molecular gelator?" and "How can the gelator structures be designed to provide
materials with rather unique structural and mechanical properties?" The results
from this research are expected to contribute information that is important to
both basic and applied science and to fill current large gaps of understanding
between molecular structure and self-assembly that lead to a wide range of self-
organized materials in addition to gels. Several of the gels may be useful in
applications that include art conservation, oil recovery, and food chemistry.
Another very important impact is the training of young scientists, including
those&lt;br/&gt;in under-represented groups and from developing countries.
Students at all levels--postdoctoral to high school- are given opportunities to
become integrated within the scientific community by attending and presenting
their research results at conferences and by interacting directly with students
in other collaborating labs throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
gelators selected are commercially available (e.g., ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid, Ethomeen surfactants, and polyethylenimines) or naturally occurring (e.g.,
sphingosine, glucamine, and 12-hydroxystearic acid) molecules. Alternatively,
the gelators are easily synthesized from related molecules. Solvents that are
most appropriate complements to the gelators are pre-selected using Hansen or
other parameter sets that dissect liquid properties. The gels are designed to
provide 'exceptional' properties, such as high degrees of thixotropy with
variable recovery rates after destructive shear, gel-to-gel transitions
initiated by thermally and photochemically induced changes of the molecular
packing within gel fibers, and isothermal sol&lt;-&gt;gel transitions induced by
adding or removing a neutral triatomic gas (such as CO2). Several spectroscopic,
thermodynamic and kinetic techniques are available for characterizing the
structural/functionality relationships for this study.