* 1502882
* Zoombinis: The Full Development Implementation Research Study of a Computational Thinking Game for Upper Elementary and Middle School Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2020
* USD 2,127,636.00

The Logical Journey of the Zoombinis implementation research study examines the
development of computational thinking for upper elementary and middle grades
students. Computational thinking is the set of ideas and practices considered
vital for computer science skills and has been attracting increased attention
over the past several years in K-12 education. This project leverages an
existing game by embedding tools for studying patterns of students' decision-
making and problem solving in the environment. This allows researchers to
understand how students learn about computational thinking within a tool that
bridges informal and formal learning settings to engage a wide variety of
students. The project will also develop tools and resources for classroom
teachers. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research examines
three questions. First, what strategies do players develop during Zoombinis
gameplay that may provide evidence of implicit computational thinking? Second,
how can teachers leverage implicit knowledge of computational thinking developed
in Zoombinis to improve formal (explicit) learning? Third, how can a large-scale
commercial game be used for broad and equitable improvement of computational
thinking? The research uses and develops educational data mining techniques to
assess students' learning in conjunction with pre-post computational thinking
assessments (external to the game), teacher interviews, classroom observations,
and case studies of classroom use. The goal is to understand both students'
learning of computational thinking and how to bridge the formal and informal
learning via classroom implementation of the Zoombinis game.