* 1502472
* Collaborative Research: Carbonation of Serpentinite in the San Andreas Fault: How Fluid-rock Interactions Impact Aseismic Creep
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2016
* David Goldsby, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2016
* USD 44,735.00

It is well established that some segments of the San Andreas Fault reveal
frequent earthquakes of small magnitude, occasional earthquakes of moderate
magnitude, and aseismic creep. Other segments feature no aseismic creep, but
rare fatal ruptures, such as the 1857 and 1906 earthquakes. The high rates of
aseismic creep along the San Andreas Fault north of Parkfield are best explained
by the low shear strength of abundant hydrothermally altered Coast Range mantle
rocks. While serpentine, the dominant mineral of hydrated mantle rock, is
mechanically too strong to allow the observed high displacement rates, there is
a growing recognition that talc plays a key role in weakening the San Andreas
Fault. Yet the mechanisms, conditions and consequences of talc formation in the
San Andreas Fault remain controversial. The hypothesis to be tested in this
project is that the high creeping rates of up to 28 mm/yr between Cholame Valley
and San Juan Bautista are controlled by the reaction of carbon dioxide-rich
fluids with serpentine to form mechanically weak talc and magnesite (soapstone).
In addition, it is hypothesized that prolonged interaction of soapstone with
carbon dioxide-rich fluids causes the formation of mechanically much stronger
and velocity-weakening quartz (or opal) and magnesite, promoting micro-
earthquakes in a nominally weak serpentinite. To test both hypotheses this
project will merge petrographic results with fluid-inclusion analysis and
friction experiments to determine: 1) mineral replacement reactions, 2)
formation conditions, and 3) geomechanical characteristics of progressively
carbon dioxide-altered Coast Range rocks cropping out between Cholame and San
Juan Bautista. Finally, three-dimensional time-dependent seismicity data along
the SAF north of Parkfield will be analyzed to examine its correlation with
mineralogical zoning.

California has endured fatal, high-impact earthquakes, which claimed hundreds of
lives and caused billions of dollars of damage; hence there is a critical need
to understand how fluid-rock interactions influence the mechanical properties of
the San Andreas Fault system. This project explores a new idea that might
explain why certain portions of the fault exhibit aseismic creep whereas other
portions a characterized by earthquakes. Ultimately, this study of carbonation
of serpentinite will promote a deeper understanding of the seismicity and
earthquake deformation cycles in one of the most densely populated regions of
the United States.