* 1502786
* P2C2: P-E Land-C: Terrestrial Mediation of Carbon Cycle Response Through the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Gabriel Bowen, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 293,014.00

This award to the University of Utah will support field, laboratory, and
modeling studies to constrain the role of terrestrial biogeochemical change in
modulating the environmental and climatic evolution of the Paleocene-Eocene
thermal maximum (PETM). The PETM is a well-documented geological episode of
carbon-cycle induced global change that had major repercussions on Earth's
environmental and biotic systems. Although a general understanding of the causes
and nature of PETM change has been established, a number of anomalous
characteristics of the event, including its long duration, high apparent climate
sensitivity, and rapid termination, remain unexplained. This project will
determine whether changes in the terrestrial critical zone, including carbon
storage in land plants and soils, formation of inorganic soil carbonate, and
burial of organic and inorganic carbon in continental sedimentary rocks,
occurred during the PETM and contributed to the pattern of global change
observed during the event. Field studies and lab analyses will document critical
zone carbon storage changes at sites in the western USA and Spain and
reconstruct local environmental conditions that accompanied these changes. New
computer model components will be developed and applied to evaluate the degree
to which the observed changes were globally significant and the patterns of
global climatic and carbon cycle change that they would have induced, thus
providing a more comprehensive understanding of the PETM event. This new
information will be incorporated in educational materials, targeted at the
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school levels, that communicate the role of
the carbon cycle coupled Earth system change over geological and human
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental ecosystems store a vast amount of
carbon, which is potentially easily transferred to or taken up from the
atmosphere, affecting global climate. The response of these systems to global
change represents a major source of uncertainty in projections of future
environmental conditions, as well as a fundamental unknown in our understanding
of the geological record of past climate. This work will test ideas about how
carbon storage changes as global climate warms, developed based on the study of
modern ecosystems, through a focused study of one of the best-documented
episodes of rapid climatic warming in the geologic record. The results will
improve our understanding of the role of terrestrial carbon cycle feedback as a
mediator of global change, advancing our ability to interpret the paleoclimate
record and project future changes in Earth's climate.