* 1502151
* Geometry, Genetics and Development
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Eric Siggia, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,041,978.00

Stem cells (SC) have the potential to revolutionize medicine by facilitating the
regeneration or replacement of damaged tissues. Crucial for the use of hSC in
medicine is control over inter-cell communication, since those pathways are the
ones responsible for making patterns and integrating the fate of a cell with its
environment. In this project the PI will develop quantitative models of how
spatial patterns arise and evolve in populations of stem cells. The predictions
of these models will be tested experimentally. The understanding of the spatial
patterns formed by stem cells will be used to understand cell-cell communication
and how cells interact with their environment that is very important in biology,
medicine, and bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently an assay was
developed for differentiating hSC on micropatterned surfaces, that generates the
precursors to ectoderm, mesoderm, endoderm, etc. tissues in a spatial
arrangement that recapitulates the embryo. This assay permits easy time lapse
imaging of stem colonies while the cells signal to each other, move, and acquire
distinct patterns of gene expression. Cells can be engineered to produce
specific signals on demand and then mixed with naive cells and the emergent
patterns followed over time. The relevant signals are generally present at too
low a level to be observed directly, so a complex modeling procedure is needed
to infer them from the response of the receiving cells. Critical for the success
of any modeling in this area are succinct representations for the activity of
the hundreds of genes that pattern an embryo. Modern mathematics provides the
template for such models, and a separate project will test their application to
the development of an organ in the nematode C.elegans. Through a collaboration,
this project has access to many hSC lines with fluorescent tags on the genes
that mediate cell signaling, and Physicists learn how to derive such lines
themselves. Image processing systems developed in house are integrated with
experiments to ask whether quantitative and predictive models formulated with
only a few variables and guided by geometry are feasible. The goal is an
algorithm to select among the infinite combinations of signaling molecules,
their concentrations, and the time and duration of their application, the most
efficient way to derive any desired cell or tissue from pluripotent cells.