* 1502951
* P2C2:Collaborative Research:  Data-Model Comparison of Holocene Pacific Hydroclimate Variability on the Hawaiian Islands Using Geochemical Records and SynTraCE-21 Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Oliver Elison Timm, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2019
* USD 240,000.00

The objective of this award is to reconstruct changes in regional hydroclimatic
conditions during the Holocene from sites on the Hawaiian Islands to investigate
how these changes might be related to variations in the dominant modes of
climate variability over the Pacific. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
the project is to explore how the North Pacific circulation responded to
external forcing and what caused low-frequency variations of the mean climate
state and changes in the high-frequency variability around the Hawaiian Islands.
This goal will be addressed by using newly derived hydro-climate paleoclimate
data and existing transient paleoclimate model simulations from SynTraCE-21. The
development of new proxy data is an essential step towards filling the gap
between tropical marine paleoclimate records and archives from the surrounding
continents. This project will aid in a greater understanding of storm track
strength and location, as well as providing support for post-doctoral scholars
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hawaiian Islands are a good site
for this research because they are located under the descending branch of the
Hadley circulation, a region that offers insights into the tropical-extra-
tropical climate connection and has the potential to provide new insights into
extra-tropical storm activity. The results from this model-data comparison could
be a critical component in assessing the confidence in the reconstruction of the
North Pacific climate during the mid-Holocene.