* 1502755
* Tools for Teaching and Learning Engineering Practices: Pathways Towards Productive Identity Work in Engineering
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2022
* Angela Calabrese Barton, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,307,460.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. Identifying with engineering is critical to help students pursue
engineering careers. This project responds to this persistent large-scale
problem. The I-Engineering framework and tools address both the learning problem
(supporting students in learning engineering design) and the identity problem
(supporting students in recognizing that they belong in engineering).
I-Engineering will support identity development as a part of learning two core
practices in engineering: 1) defining problems and 2) designing solutions. In
particular, the I-Engineering framework and tools will help middle grades
teachers and students engage in the engineering design process using meaningful,
authentic and often youth-driven contexts. The project will ground this work in
two engineering design challenges: 1) safe and green commutes and 2) portable
energy, both of which exemplify engineering for sustainable communities. The
objectives are to: 1) To develop research-based understandings of how to support
identity development among middle school students from underrepresented
backgrounds in the context of learning engineering. 2) To develop and refine a
framework and tools (I-Engineering) in support of student learning and identity
development in engineering with a focus on sustainability. 3) To collaborate
with grades 6 and 7 teachers to implement and refine I-Engineering for classroom
use. 4) To study whether the I-Engineering framework/tools support identity
development in engineering among middle school students from underrepresented
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws upon design-based
implementation research to develop and test the I-Engineering framework and
tools among students and teachers in grades 6 and 7. Using social practice
theory, how aspects of the learning environment shape identity development will
be identified, yielding information on the impact of the instructional tools
generated. The research questions are grounded in two areas: supporting identity
development in engineering, understanding how students progress in their
engineering development and patterns across implementation of the I-Engineering
resources. Studies will shed light on mechanisms that support identity
development in engineering, how that might be scaffolded, and how such scaffolds
can transport across context. The mixed-method student- and classroom-level
studies will allow for empirical claims regarding how and under what conditions
youth from underrepresented backgrounds may progress in their identity
development in engineering. The research plan includes student case studies
drawing on task-based interviews, observations and student work and classroom
studies using observations, student and teacher interviews, an engineering
identity survey, student work and formative assessments of engineering
practices. I-Engineering will reach over 500 students and their teachers in
schools that serve predominantly underrepresented populations. The project team
will disseminate the findings, framework and tools in support of teaching
engineering practices, and promoting understanding of the importance of identity
development in broadening participation.