* 1502008
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Temporal Sampling and DNA Metabarcoding to Test the Climate Variability Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* W. Chris Funk, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,331.00

The Climate Variability Hypothesis (CVH) proposes that the range of temperatures
species can tolerate increases with the annual range of temperatures they have
experienced over evolutionary time. Climate variability increases with latitude
and thus it is expected that temperate species will have wider thermal
tolerances, higher dispersal ability, and wider distributions than tropical
species. Researchers previously asked if temperate mountain stream insects from
Colorado have larger elevation range sizes than tropical species from Ecuador;
however, range sizes could only be estimated for common species and specimens
could only be collected once. To strengthen this work, stream insects will now
be sampled over time (temporal sampling) and a DNA approach will be used to
identify all species (common and rare). Temporal sampling will allow researchers
to track species' elevational positions as they drift from higher to lower
elevations over time. Because the flow of water constantly pushes larvae
downstream and temperate larvae spend more time in stream, temperate zone larvae
are expected to drift farther downstream during development than tropical
species. This work will allow researchers to detect previously overlooked rare
species. These advances strengthen an already extensive test of the CVH by
incorporation of species movement and rare species into estimates of
distributions of elevation range sizes. Results of this work will provide
information about how natural selection resulting from climate variability
influences species dispersal ability and range sizes with general implications
for understanding speciation and the evolution of biodiversity.

Larval aquatic insects will be collected 6 times over a yearlong period from
streams located along transects from ~1500-3500m in the Colorado Rocky Mountains
and the Ecuadorian Andes (11 sites at each latitude). On each sampling date at
each site, insects will be collected for 5 minutes from all microhabitats within
a 100m stream reach using a D-frame net. Samples will be preserved in ethanol
and insects will be separated from sediment and detritus. For each sample, all
insect tissue will be homogenized and DNA will be extracted and purified using
commercially available kits. The animal DNA barcoding gene, Cytochrome c Oxidase
subunit I (COI), will be PCR amplified. Full-length DNA barcodes will be
generated by shotgun sequencing and assembly of COI amplicons using next-
generation sequencing on an Illumina platform. DNA barcodes will be queried
against a regional reference library to determine the composition of samples,
re-estimate elevation range sizes for taxa, and compare range sizes and
dispersal ability among latitudes.