* 1502917
* RUI: P2C2--Assessing the Influence of Extreme Rainfall Events on Australian Stalagmite Reconstructions of Tropical Cyclone Landfalls and the Indo-Australian Summer Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Rhawn Denniston, Cornell College
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 149,601.00

This award generally aims to use cave systems and speleothems as natural
archives of environmental conditions related to tropical cyclones and variations
in ocean and atmospheric conditions. This research is important because it will
help expand the scientific understanding of the nature and timing of past
tropical cyclone activity, especially during periods of varying regional (i.e.,
Indo-Pacific sea surface temperature and Pacific temperature gradients) and
extra-tropical (i.e., Northern Hemisphere temperature) climatic conditions.
Since tropical cyclones are responsible for the majority of extreme rainfall
events in some regions, an improved assessment of their dynamics can aid in
developing models of long-term water budgets and storm-related risks. Investing
in understanding tropical cyclones has significant economic and social returns
in terms of saved lives and protected property. Furthermore, this award will
advance research and education at a primarily undergraduate institution thereby
providing an early experience for students in the conduct of research.

Specifically, the research project will involve the installation of instruments
to monitor meteorological, chemical, and hydrologic conditions at three caves
spanning a near-coastal transect across northwestern Australia. Environmental
variables (e.g., temperature, relative humidity, barometric pressure) in each
cave will be integrated with meteorological and rainwater data (including
rainfall amounts and stable isotopic compositions) collected at each site, along
with the oxygen isotopic ratios of plate-grown spelean carbonate. These data
will help develop a holistic understanding of cave responses, both hydrologic
and isotopic, to extreme rainfall events such as those that characterize many
tropical cyclones.