* 1502588
* Collaborative Research: Partitioning early Holocene Laurentide v. Antarctic ice melt from high-resolution reconstruction of sea-level rise and glacial isostatic adjustment modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Torbjorn Tornqvist, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2020
* USD 390,211.00

Sea-level rise is a defining issue for the future of densely populated low-lying
coastal regions. Within this context, the fate of the remaining large ice sheets
is arguably the primary concern. Therefore, numerous studies over the past few
decades have focused on the retreat of ice sheets during the end of the last ice
age, 20,000 to 7,000 years ago. The North American and Antarctic continents
collectively account for up to 80% of total ice melt, but the amount and timing
of their contributions is not well known. Resolving this is important because
the location of meltwater input is likely to have major implications for ocean-
atmosphere circulation across the globe. The period between 12,000 and 7,000
years ago that witnessed about half (the last ~60 m) of the total sea-level rise
is particularly poorly studied, despite the fact that the Earth's climate was
roughly comparable to that of the present-day. Thus, this time interval could
serve as a useful analog for the future. The present project will reconstruct
the rate of sea-level rise in the Mississippi Delta during this period with
unprecedented resolution. Combining this new record with state-of-the art
computer models of ice sheets and the solid earth, it will be possible to
calculate the relative contribution of North American v. Antarctic ice sheets to
global sea-level rise during this time interval. The project will support a
postdoctoral scholar as well as undergraduate students, and also contain
numerous outreach activities. This includes instruction and field demonstrations
at a New Orleans urban farm that educates local youth leaders on sustainable
food production. Educational materials will be provided for high school teachers
throughout Florida and for an exhibit on sea-level rise in the Tampa Bay-St.
Petersburg area. Finally, all new sea-level data will be publicly released
through the NOAA-WDC Paleoclimatology database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty
about the meltwater contribution from different ice sheets during the last
deglaciation is particularly well reflected by the sea-level history during the
early Holocene, where recent end-member estimates of the Laurentide Ice Sheet
(LIS) contribution to global sea-level rise between 11 and 7 ka vary from ~20 to
30 m sea-level equivalent. This difference corresponds to about 1.5 times the
volume of the present-day Greenland Ice Sheet. Possibly even larger
uncertainties exist about the retreat history of the Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS).
Ice-sheet volumes during this time window are equally poorly constrained. The
Mississippi Delta is uniquely suited to produce a highly detailed early Holocene
relative sea-level (RSL) record, extending to ~9.5 ka and possibly older.
Wherever conventional approaches (AMS 14C dating of plant macrofossils extracted
from basal peat) are not feasible, ramped pyrolysis 14C dating of brackish
wetland paleosols, a novel geochronological technique, will be used to obtain
sea-level index points of sufficiently high resolution. The new early Holocene
RSL record will be combined with a synthesis of lower resolution records from
across the globe, with the primary goal to determine the rate of RSL rise and
its spatial variability from 7 to 10 ka. Glacial isostatic adjustment modeling
that considers a large suite of ice-sheet histories will be used to correct RSL
records for viscoelastic and rotational effects. The residual signal should
provide new information on the contribution from the LIS and AIS to early
Holocene sea-level rise, due to their distinctly different sea-level
fingerprints. Specific questions that the work will answer include: (1) Was the
early Holocene sea-level rise predominantly smooth or was it punctuated by
distinct sea-level jumps akin to (and possibly larger than) those around the 8.5
to 8.2 ka time window? and (2) What was the relative contribution of the LIS v.
AIS to early Holocene sea-level rise, in particular during the time interval
from ~9.5 to 8 ka?