* 1502891
* Collaborative Research: P2C2: Water Isotopes in Peat Mosses as Proxies for Understanding Climate and Atmospheric Circulation Changes in Southern Patagonia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Zicheng Yu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2019
* USD 187,729.00

This award to Lehigh and Brown Universities will develop and test a powerful
technique to reconstruct atmospheric circulation patterns and moisture
trajectories using two water isotopes from peat mosses. The research will
generate important climate records that will potentially transform our
understanding of climate dynamics of the last 1000 years in the relatively
understudied southern hemisphere. This approach is also applicable over longer
time scales in this geographic regions, as well as other places Sphagnum moss
can be found. The new climate records from under-studied southern Patagonia will
provide a benchmark data set with which to evaluate the climate models that are
used for projecting future climate change. The project will train graduate and
undergraduate students at both institutions in the application of a state-of-art
technology in innovative interdisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will use isotope records to document and understand climate and
atmospheric circulation changes in the last millennium using a novel dual water
isotope approach and systematic modern calibration from single species peat
mosses (Sphagnum) as preserved in peat bogs in southernmost Patagonia (southern
South America). The investigators will carry out calibration sampling and
analysis to span large latitude and precipitation gradients in southern
Patagonia. The isotope records will be derived from the existing peat cores at
Lehigh University. In addition to using oxygen and hydrogen isotope time series
from cellulose and lipids for ?conventional? paleoclimate interpretations, the
team will explore the use of derived deuterium excess (delta-excess) as a tracer
for moisture source region conditions and moisture trajectories. This innovative
use of dual (O and D) isotopes would provide powerful information regarding past
atmospheric circulation and mechanisms of observed climate changes.