* 1502537
* Workshop: Exploring Quantitative Approaches to Clinical Cancer Data; February 13-18, 2015, Princeton, New Jersey
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Sung Poblete, Entertainment Industry Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2015
* USD 198,000.00

The past five to fifteen years have seen remarkable advances in the technologies
applied to biological problems. This has resulted in quantitative measurements
of genomes, RNA species, protein functions and modifications, and epigenetic
regulation of cellular functions. Extremely large databases of information have
been assembled using these new technologies. Among the most rapid areas of
biology to apply these technologies has occurred in cancer research.
Quantitative based analysis is becoming increasingly important to understand the
causes, pathways, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of cancer. Commonly,
biologists and clinicians lack the extensive skills in mathematics, physics,
computer science, and chemistry that are required for the sophisticated levels
of analysis that are needed to extract useful information from these large
datasets. Quantitative researchers from an array of disciplines have entered the
field of biology to explore these basic science challenges, but they often have
little or no prior training in the field of cancer biology, and little
understanding of the important biological questions in the field. The benefits
of collaboration between these two groups are starting to be addressed and
observed in cancer research, but the pace and full promise of synergistic
collaboration remains a challenge.

SU2C will bring together theoretical physicists, mathematicians, and computer
scientists with strong backgrounds in biological research and clinical
oncologists, two groups whose research fields do not traditionally intersect, in
order to develop a research project integrating mathematical and computational
approaches and clinical cancer research. SU2C will organize an Ideas Lab to
bring these researchers to a residential research setting for a multi-day
exchange of ideas, methods, and knowledge, to develop such integrated research
projects. The goal is to assemble 3 to 4 teams of clinical oncologists and
quantitative scientists to address important problems or questions that arise
from clinical cancer research data. These approaches will be articulated in
short preliminary proposals by teams or groups of scientists at the Ideas Lab.
The proposals will then be refined and additional members of a team may be asked
to participate. The proposals may then be submitted for possible funding from
public and private sources. Thus, the Ideas Lab has both an intellectual and
potential practical set of outcomes, resulting in the best ideas and
quantitative approaches being explored employing clinical research data.

Bringing together highly accomplished individuals from the two groups outlined
above, for the purpose of jointly educating both groups and developing research
projects at the convergence of quantitative and clinical cancer research, can be
expected to lead to the development of novel approaches to fundamental science
questions in cancer research. This effort has the potential to create a new
field of research that can address our understanding of disease origin,
progression, diagnosis, prognosis, treatment and the outcome of disease in
patients. This, in turn, has the potential to lower the costs to society of
developing effective therapeutic treatments, of enhancing quality of life and
the outcome for cancer patients. The types of benefit that may be realized
include the possibility of: 1) refining the technologicaltools to generate
robust quantitative biological data; 2) capturing and representing high
dimensional genomic data using rigorous mathematical approaches - these
representations can help to identify markers to stratify patients and to
identify potential therapeutic targets; 3) integrating different types of large
scale cancer data; 4) generating tools to identify potential therapeutic targets
in large datasets beyond recurrence of single gene alterations; for instance,
identifying synergistic activities between different genes using large scale
genomic data, and 5) providing quantitative testable models about the evolution
of tumors using genomic data; in particular, reconstructing the evolutionary
history of tumors from longitudinal and cross sectional genomic data.