* 1502640
* RTG: Data-Oriented Mathematical and Statistical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Rodrigo Platte, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,143,368.00

The need and desire to analyze copious volumes of disparate data result in
significant challenges. This RTG (Research Training Group) program will create a
research environment and associated curricular elements that will engage U.S.
citizen and permanent resident trainees in activities that will foster an
understanding of the roles that statistics, computational mathematics, and
applied harmonic analysis play in addressing data-oriented problems and
appreciation of the synergies that can manifest when ideas from these areas,
which are often studied by separate groups of students with little crossover,
are brought to bear simultaneously. Durable impact is sought at ASU through
cultivation of crosscutting faculty collaborations and curricular innovations
intended to stimulate long-term strength in rigorous, integrated data-oriented
mathematical and statistical research. Aggressive dissemination of innovative
elements of the program will seek to provide a model for modern integrated data-
oriented mathematics training for other institutions, and we will launch the
careers of young researchers who will carry this
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on the following three
problem areas. (i) Closed-loop design of experiment for efficient data
acquisition: Traditional approaches to collection and analysis of data are
essentially "feed-forward" in nature, for example, data are collected, numerical
algorithms are used to process it (e.g., for compression or to transform it in
some other way), and statistical methods are ultimately employed for inference.
Statisticians have long recognized the appeal of sequential design of
experiments in which the nature of a sample is not fixed in advance, rather
depends on previously observed samples. Recent and ongoing technological
advances have led to measurement devices possessing many degrees of freedom that
enable manipulating the nature of the measurement, often electronically and in
real time. In this context, sequential design of experiments takes on a
fundamental importance in throttling back otherwise unmanageable data torrents.
Instead of collecting all the data all the time, a feedback strategy can be used
to acquire only the most important new data for the task at hand based on what
has already been observed; (ii) Data driven non-classical numerical
approximation tools: A central problem in sensing and model simulation is
recovery of characteristic features of a function, signal, image, or operator
from a set (frequently these days a very large set) of collected data. In almost
all such situations, the data set constitutes an incomplete and noisy
description of the system. Classical numerical methods mostly use a limited
system model as well data interpolation or approximation to extract pertinent
model information and features. Deducing crucial features in large volumes of
data calls out for new methods that are readily adaptable to model improvements
and inclusion of appropriate prior or statistical information on provided data;
(iii) Approximation for statistical inference: Traditional methods in
approximation theory and their numerical realizations seek to reconstruct
functions from measurements with fidelity described by a metric on a function
space. Our RTG has particular expertise with problems where the data are not
direct samples of the underlying function (e.g., they may be measurements of
some transformed version of the function) and also where the objective is to
reconstruct specific features of the function rather than the function itself.
Earlier collaborations among the RTG PIs has led to the use of both overcomplete
representations (e.g., frames) and statistical ideas in this vein of research.