* 1502005
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Specialized Teeth and Jaws in Early Mesozoic Ray-Finned Fishes and Their Impact on Widespread Niche Differentiation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Hans-Peter Schultze, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,434.00

The ray-finned fishes (e.g., trout, clownfish, seahorse, bass) are the most
diverse group of vertebrates on Earth today and display a vast array of physical
differences with regard to body shape, skull and jaw morphology, and tooth
specializations. Ray-finned fishes have a long evolutionary history, and this
study focuses on two extinct groups of fishes that lived during the Early
Mesozoic (250-190 million years ago): the disc-shaped, deep-bodied dapediids and
the torpedo-shaped, primitive redfieldiids. These two groups of fishes provide
an ideal contrast (e.g., deep body versus narrow body, differences in jaws) for
testing hypotheses of the impact of specialization of tooth and jaw anatomy and
morphology. The researches will compare this body shape contrast with the diet,
habitat preference, behavior, and niche specialization of the fish. The project
will study fossils from the Early Mesozoic, a volatile time in Earth's history
with global tectonic events changing the geography of the planet and shaping the
diversity of organisms in different ecosystems. This research will increase our
understanding of how these two groups of extinct fishes have adapted to occupy
different ecological spaces and exploit different food sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will utilize state-of-the-art two-
and three-dimensional digital imaging techniques, such as micro-computed
tomography (CT) scanning. These tools will measure jaw and cranial anatomy and
morphology as well as tooth microwear, in well-preserved redfieldiid and
dapediid fossils. Using these data the investigators of this project will be
able to address hypotheses about how tooth and jaw morphology relate to
ecological niche space and evolutionary history. This project will provide
graduate and undergraduate training in morphological and morphometric
techniques, and data obtained from this study will be catalogued in online data
repositories.