* 1502417
* P2C2: Late Holocene Changes in the SPCZ from Algal Lipid D/H in Lakes Across Oceania
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Julian Sachs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2018
* USD 424,268.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The tropical water cycle influences the global
climate. Over the last 30 years it has undergone remarkable changes. Rainfall
has increased in the regions of the tropics that normally receive lots of rain,
and decreased in the drier regions. This was accompanied by a poleward expansion
of the tropics in both hemispheres that has led to an expansion of desert
regions over continents. Although tropical rainfall is poorly represented in
many climate models, simple physical arguments and a wide range of models
suggest these trends are likely to continue under global warming scenarios. It
is unknown at this point whether the current changes in tropical rainfall are
outside the range of natural variations of the pre-industrial climate. This is
because rainfall data over the vast tropical oceans, which is derived primarily
from satellites, is limited to the last 35 years. Such a brief weather record is
insufficient to establish whether the recent changes in rainfall are anomalous.
By extending the record of rainfall in the tropical South Pacific from the
current 35 years to 2000 years, this project will produce the data necessary to
assess whether rainfall changes over the last 35 years are unusual, and if so,
whether they can be attributed to the buildup of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere. They will also provide the data necessary to determine which climate
models are able to accurately reproduce tropical rainfall patterns, and
therefore which models are likely to provide the most reliable
forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In order to place
recent changes in rainfall over the tropical South Pacific Ocean into a longer-
term context, this project will produce quantitative reconstructions of rainfall
throughout the South Pacific Convergence Zone (SPCZ) that span the last 2,000
years. The hydrogen isotope ratio (2H/1H, or D/H) of
(3&amp;#946;,4&amp;#945;,5&amp;#945;,22E)-4,23- dimethylergost-22-en-3-ol,
dinosterol, will be measured in sediment cores from 8 islands across the modern
SPCZ region. Dinosterol is synthesized almost exclusively by certain genera of
dinoflagellate microalgae. Owing to the inverse relationship between D/H ratios
in rain and rainfall rates in the tropics, the so-called "amount effect," we
find that D/H ratios of dinosterol (&amp;#948;Ddino) in 21 surface sediments
throughout the SPCZ region are highly correlated with rainfall rates according
to the relationship &amp;#948;Ddino=-16.6(±2.45)*P-180(±15.3) [R2=0.71, N=21],
where P is the rainfall rate in mm/day. A Monte Carlo analysis of errors
indicates that rainfall rate estimates with 0.3 mm/day uncertainty are possible
using this technique. Sediment cores from the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Wallis
&amp; Futuna, and Fiji, representing 4 of the 5 study regions have already been
collected. New cores from lakes in Samoa and American Samoa will be collected as
part of this project. Initial results indicate a 2.6 mm/day increase in rainfall
in the Solomon Islands, on the western side of the SPCZ, and a 1.1 mm/day
decrease in Wallis and Futuna, on the eastern side of the SPCZ, during the
transition from the Medieval Warm Period 1,000 years ago to the Little Ice Age
600 years ago.