* 1502294
* Collaborative Research: A Software System for Research in Algebraic Geometry, Commutative Algebra, and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Michael Stillman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2021
* USD 475,671.00

Macaulay2 is a free computer algebra software system dedicated to the
qualitative investigation of systems of polynomial equations in many variables.
The computations it can perform have uses in many fields of mathematics and
science, from algebraic geometry to genomics. The research to be done in this
project extends the computational methods built into Macaulay2. The project will
enable new collaborations between Macaulay2 software developers from the
research community and scientists from physics and biology as well as pure
mathematicians. Experimental results found with Macaulay2 have helped in the
formulation, development, and solution of many conjectures. Through the
improvement of computational tools, the proposed research will impact many
fields of mathematics and science.

The project has two main aspects. First, it addresses the infrastructure of
symbolic computation as a research tool supported by Macaulay2. This includes
the implementation of new features, bug fixes, user support, further
documentation, and multiplatform releases of new versions that will maintain and
develop Macaulay2 as a major tool used for research in a broad range of fields.
Secondly, research done under this project will develop better algorithms for
some key computational problems, such as computing the cohomological and
topological invariants of algebraic varieties, and will develop applications to
string theory, supersymmetry, and discrete models of biological networks.