* 1502616
* Mechanisms of Transition Metal Catalyzed Reactions in Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Robert Grubbs, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Robert H. Grubbs of the California Institute of Technology to
carry out fundamental studies on olefin metathesis catalysts based on the
element, ruthenium. Olefins (organic compounds containing carbon-carbon double
bonds) are a key linkage in many important organic compounds that are used for
pharmaceuticals, commodity chemicals and polymeric materials. Olefin metathesis
is a reaction that consists of breaking and rearranging carbon-carbon double
bonds in organic molecules. The olefin metathesis reaction has revolutionized
the synthesis of organic molecules relevant to natural and unnatural products
for treatment of diseases such as hepatitis C and AIDS, as well as the synthesis
of specialty materials. Professor Grubbs is studying ways to make the catalysts
more reactive and selective than any previous catalysts. The broader impacts of
the research could be wide ranging in terms of furthering the role of olefin
metathesis in chemical science, advancing commercial uses of olefin metathesis,
and training and educating students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Grubbs research
group is performing synthetic, mechanistic, structural, and reactivity studies
of newly designed catalysts for the olefin metathesis reaction. The present
generation of catalysts is highly active but tends to give a mix of different
isomers. Over the past several years, considerable progress has been made in
developing catalysts for the synthesis of Z-isomers of olefins in high yield and
stereoselectivity, but to make a catalyst that selectively makes the E-isomer
has proven to be more difficult. The strategies used to develop Z-selective
catalysts are being modified, with guidance from theoretical modeling, to design
new complexes with the goal of reaching an E-selective system. The geometry of
the substituents on the metallacycle controls the geometry of the double bond
produced in the reaction. In the Z-selective catalyst, chelated ligand systems
force the metallacycle and the N-heterocyclic carbene ligand together so that
all the subsitutents on the intermediate metallacycle are forced to one side of
the metallacycle. In the present work, Professor Grubss is using the same design
strategies to form ligand arrays that force the substituents trans to each other
in the metallacycle so that the resulting olefin will be trans (E). In addition
to the applications of the E-selective catalysts, the pathway to them will test
and broaden the mechanistic model for the factors that control catalyst
selectivity and activity.