* 1502452
* Partnership to the Existing New England Vascular Plant Network for Collections at the New York Botanical Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Barbara Thiers, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 147,731.00

The New York Botanical Garden's William and Lynda Steere Herbarium (NY) proposes
to join the existing Thematic Collections Network (TCN) entitled, Mobilizing New
England Vascular Plant Specimen Data to Track Environmental Changes. The goal of
this project is to mine data from preserved plant specimens in order to support
studies of the nature and consequences of environmental change in the New
England region over the last three centuries. The New York Botanical Garden will
contribute approximately 150,000 digitized specimens to the 1.3 million
specimens that will be digitized at other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data generated through this project will be of immediate
use to scientists who study climate and land-use change, and will provide a
better understanding of how global changes will impact the distribution of
native and introduced plant species in the future. The project will provide
career-relevant management training for a recent college graduate, and will
provide employment and job experience for college undergraduates, exposing these
young people to an aspect of environmental science not commonly taught in
universities. Citizen scientists will be invited to participate in this project
by helping to transcribe label data, georeferencing, and scoring specimens for
phenological state. This award is made as part of the National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).