* 1502927
* Glacial-Interglacial Changes in Central Tropical Pacific Sea Surface Temperature
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jean Lynch-Stieglitz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2019
* USD 341,919.00

Paleoclimate data sets can be used to help validate and improve the climate
models that are used to predict future change. Of particular use have been data
from the Last Glacial Maximum, a time with lowered atmospheric carbon dioxide,
reasonably well understood forcing, and potentially broad data coverage.
Accurate estimates of sea surface temperature are also essential if data from
the geologic record is to be used to constrain equilibrium climate sensitivity
-- defined as the global mean temperature response to a doubling of atmospheric
carbon dioxide. Studies have shown that the connection between climate
sensitivity and Last Glacial Maximum temperature is strongest in the tropics,
where greenhouse gas forcing dominates the temperature signal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While Last Glacial Maximum temperature in the Western and
Eastern Tropical Pacific is constrained by multiple sea surface temperature
proxies, there is little existing data in the Central Tropical Pacific. Past
estimates are highly uncertain and suggest little temperature change in this
region, a result that is incompatible with reconstructions from climate models
forced with Last Glacial Maximum boundary conditions. A series of sediment cores
has recently been collected from the Line Islands Ridge in the Central Tropical
Pacific, spanning a range of latitude from the equator to 7 degrees North. The
PIs propose here to measure Mg/Ca ratios in surface dwelling planktonic
foraminifera in order to reconstruct temperature changes over the last glacial
cycle. Temperature reconstructions from cores collected over a range of latitude
and water depth will help to assess the uncertainty in the new sea surface
temperature estimates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen isotope ratios in surface
dwelling planktonic foraminifera from the same set of sediment cores show an
increased North-South gradient during glacial times. The PIs will use the Mg/Ca
temperature proxy to determine if this corresponds to an increase in the North-
South gradient in sea surface temperature. This data will be used to better
understand how Tropical Pacific atmospheric and ocean circulation responded to
glacial boundary conditions will aid in the understanding of the mechanisms for
climate change in the tropics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will make
the data available to the climate modeling community, and the age model
information and the inferences about the physical circulation generated as part
of this project will serve as a useful base for other investigations using this
set of sediment cores. Funding also supports education and mentoring of members
of groups that are under-represented in science.