* 1502293
* Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* James Brown, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 13,615.00

This award provides support for participation in three conferences on number
theory held at institutions in the Southeast in 2015 and 2016. The 24th Palmetto
Number Theory Series meeting will be held at Emory University in Atlanta, GA in
September 2015, and the 25th Palmetto Number Theory Series meeting will be held
at Clemson University in Clemson, SC in December 2015. The 29th Southeast
Regional Meeting on Numbers will be held in the spring of 2016. These
conferences are open and free to all participants, who include mathematicians of
all levels: undergraduates, graduate students, post-docs, and junior and senior
faculty. The meetings provide a valuable opportunity for regional graduate
students and for faculty at primarily undergraduate institutions, who may have
few or no other opportunities for professional travel. The meetings will
continue to attract a demographically diverse participant base, including women
and members of other groups underrepresented in mathematics. More details for
the 2016 29th Southeast Regional Meeting on Numbers, including exact dates, a
list of speakers, the location, and registration information will be posted on
the conference websites as it becomes available:

http://www.math.sc.edu/~boylan/seminars/pantshome.html
http://www.math.clemson.edu/~kevja/SERMON/

Each of the conferences features several invited talks, given by number
theorists based outside the region, ranging from prominent researchers to
graduate students. Speakers will be chosen to represent a broad range of active
research interests within number theory. Each meeting will also feature
contributed talks given by participants from within the region. The primary goal
of these meetings is to provide the number theory community in the Southeast the
opportunity to hear about recent research in number theory. The meetings attract
prominent number theorists based outside the region, and provide regional
mathematicians, particularly graduate students and junior faculty, with an
opportunity to speak about their research. The meetings inspire collaboration
and broaden the scope of existing research interests within the general subject
of number theory.