* 1502651
* RTG: Research Training Group in Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2024
* Elham Izadi, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will provide training through research involvement for students and
postdoctoral associates in the areas of algebra, algebraic geometry, and number
theory. These are some of the oldest branches of mathematics. Current research
in these areas is a fascinating mixture of the old and the new: the study of
longstanding challenging problems using very modern techniques that intertwine
viewpoints from all three areas. Geometry flowered in the third and fourth
centuries BC with the study of conic sections by the Greeks; more recent
approaches related these geometric objects to quadratic equations. Algebraic
geometry is the more general study of geometric objects using polynomials.
Number theory is also a very old subject with a history that predates even that
of geometry; it is now closely related to algebraic geometry via the study of
polynomials with integer coefficients. Research in these fields has had a wide
range of applications from elementary particle physics to cybersecurity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Training Group will help to communicate the
excitement of these research areas to students and to foster new research among
faculty, postdoctoral associates, and students. The focus of this project is to
involve undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates
in common research. The investigators plan to achieve these goals by running a
colloquium series, by offering topics courses to students, by running a yearly
workshop and a yearly conference, and by organizing reading courses among
students and postdoctoral associates on topics of current interest.