* 1502774
* GEM: Experimental Identification of Plasma Wave Modes in Vicinity of KH Vortices and in Plasma 'Mixing' Regions in Low Latitude Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Katariina Nykyri, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 12/31/2017
* USD 179,670.00

Space is not empty but is filled with energetic electrons and ions that blow
outward from the Sun carrying with them solar magnetic field lines. The
dangerous levels of energy and momentum, contained in this medium, constantly
bombard the Earth. Though the Earth's magnetic field acts as a shield deflecting
most of this medium around the Earth, some small fraction makes its way through
the Earth's magnetic shield (called the magnetopause) and, even this small
amount can power space storms at high altitudes in the space surrounding the
Earth. How this happens is an important problem because severe space storms can
negatively impact a variety of technologies upon which our interconnected
society relies. Most recently, the potential of extreme space weather events to
disrupt power grids over global scales with cascading disruption of a large
variety of critical social infrastructures has been the subject of national and
international attention. It is commonly accepted that primary mechanism to
deliver solar wind energy into the magnetosphere is the joining of the Earth's
magnetic field lines with the Sun's through the process of magnetic merging.
However, another route has recently come to light though the exact details and
relative importance are not yet known. Large amplitude low frequency plasma
waves are commonly observed just inside the magnetopause in the vicinity of
mixed populations of heated and cold ions and Kelvin-Helmholtz waves. Kelvin-
Helmholtz waves are waves generated on the magnetopause surface by the solar
wind blowing past. Current theories suggest that these surface waves couple to
internal waves along magnetic field lines (called kinetic Alfven waves) at the
plasma and field gradients associated with the magnetopause. These waves are
able to heat ions within the magnetosphere. This process, in effect, transmits
energy from the solar wind into the ion populations within the magnetosphere.
However, there has been no experimental confirmation yet that the observed low
frequency waves in this region are indeed kinetic Alfven waves. This proposal
introduces a novel data analysis technique that is able to identify the modes of
the observed plasma waves. If successful this represents a major step forward.
The science topic addressed here has parallels with the problem of solar coronal
heating; therefore advances will also be of interest to the solar and
astrophysics communities. A graduate student will receive training and mentoring
while working on this project and undergraduate REU students will participate in
the project over the summer months. Finally the PI is herself an early career
female physics professor who will be able to continue her research program at
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University as a result of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a newly demonstrated novel
technique to experimentally determine the dispersion relation and thus identify
the wave modes of large-amplitude plasma waves frequently present in the low
latitude boundary layer. This technique requires two Cluster spacecraft with the
appropriate separation to observe a plasma wave in a region of mixed plasma
populations or K-H waves in the vicinity of the magnetopause. Observations of
electric and magnetic fields by the two spacecraft are used in the construction
of the dispersion relation, which allows identification of the particular plasma
wave mode. The technique has been successfully for one case. Identifying a
significant number of such events where the above conditions are met introduces
considerable risk into the success of the project but if successful, the rewards
are high.