* 1503884
* RCN: Learning from Indigenous community-based researchers engaged in science around the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Lene Kielsen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 548,352.00

This award supports a Research Coordination Network (RCN) of Indigenous scholars
and researchers from local communities across the Arctic. Arctic scientific
research in and about communities depends in large part on collaborations,
especially with local scholars and researchers, many of who are Arctic
Indigenous people. The approach of this RCN stresses the interest and need for
local and Indigenous researchers to meet in their homelands and design research
network activities in locally and culturally relevant ways. This approach
acknowledges that local Arctic Indigenous people are highly underrepresented in
science, as are their practices and knowledge. This RCN recognizes this
disparity and will document shared and best practices for collaboration and
knowledge co-production between Arctic communities and scientific researchers to
share with the broader Arctic scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RCN steering committee (SC) members are Indigenous men and women, including
Elders, from communities and organizations across the Arctic. SC members also
include visiting scientists and academics (both Indigenous and non-Indigenous)
who work in collaboration with the community-based researchers. The network SC
members are Shari Fox Gearheard (PI), Univ. of Colorado; Lene Kielsen Holm (Co-
PI), Greenland Institute of Natural Resources; Henry Huntington (Co- PI),
Huntington Consulting; Juha Feodoroff, Sevettijärvi, Finland; Veikko Feodoroff,
Skolt Sámi Village Committee, Finland; Bruce Forbes, Univ. of Lapland; Niore
Iqalukjuak, Kangiqtugaapik, Nunavut; David Iqaqrialu, Kangiqtugaapik, Nunavut;
Angunnguaq Josefsen, Kapisillit, Greenland; Petr Konstantinov, Yakutia, Russia;
Evgenii Khudi, Yamal, Russia; Vittus Nielsen, Qoorngoq, Greenland; George
Noongwook, Savoonga, Alaska; Margaret Opie, Barrow, Alaska; and Florian
Stammler, Univ. of Lapland. These researchers work in a variety of contexts,
including collaborative research with visiting scientists, community-based and
community-initiated research and monitoring programs, and projects of all sizes
that employ both Indigenous knowledge as well as western scientific
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this network are
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Exchange research expertise, experiences, and
approaches from the different members of the network;&lt;br/&gt;2) Document
those experiences and approaches that the members identify as "best practices"
for community-based research in Indigenous communities (noting these locally,
but also where these are shared across the different communities
represented);&lt;br/&gt;3) Establish easily accessible means for network members
to stay in contact between in-person meetings, sustain the network, and to
welcome in new members (e.g. social media, regular meetings);&lt;br/&gt;4)
Collaborate with and exchange expertise with other existing networks and
organizations interested in Indigenous knowledge and Indigenous leadership in
Arctic research and education, specifically the current "Facilitating Indigenous
Research, Science, and Technology (FIRST)" RCN and the network member
organizations including the Skolt Sámi Village Committee and Skolt Cultural
Foundation, the Arctic Centre at the University of Lapland, Piqqusilirivvik
Inuit&lt;br/&gt;Cultural School and Nunavut Arctic College, and the Iñupiat
Heritage Center;&lt;br/&gt;5) Interact with graduate students, youth, and early-
career scientists through their participation in network meetings, exchange at a
major conference, and visits by network members to classes and student groups to
share perspectives on working with Arctic Indigenous communities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The RCN will hold in-person workshops in Arctic locations so that
network members have the opportunity to connect with one another in places that
matter to them, giving context to the hosts' experiences and allowing the
visitors to see directly and in situ what their hosts' research means to them
and their communities. The project team's previous work has demonstrated that
direct community-community exchange is ideal for maximizing knowledge and
cultural exchange and facilitating true local leadership of meetings and
research in their own ways, using their own approaches and methods. Early
discussions within the RCN Steering Committee members indicate such approaches
will include travel on the land, demonstration of and participation in
traditional activities (e.g. herding, hunting, crafts-making), sharing of food,
meetings between Elders and youth, and informal and formal discussions - i.e.,
the proposed RCN will not rely solely on standard scientific-style workshops or
table-based meetings. Rather, exchanges and discussions will also happen while
doing, and while respecting and learning about activities and ways of life in
the homelands visited.