* 1503322
* Wild Discoveries, Zooming into the Scientific Method
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Jonathan Miot, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 01/31/2018
* USD 199,089.00

There is a critical need to develop and deliver research experiences to a
greater number of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
interested undergraduates earlier in their collegiate careers. At the same time,
there is a need to identify pedagogical approaches that are most efficacious at
fostering learning in STEM focused courses. This project will focus on both of
these entwined needs through the design, development, and implementation of an
entry level research course, as well as the assessment of three different
instructional approaches. The University of Florida in partnership with Santa Fe
College (both located in Gainesville, Florida) will develop a new research
methodology course that will provide first- and second-year college students
from both schools the opportunity to participate in authentic scientific
investigations. While implementing this course, the project will do research to
determine the optimal course delivery platform for stimulating student learning
and satisfaction. The three pedagogical approaches to be examined are:
traditional lecture, online-only, and an emerging pedagogy known as the flipped
classroom. Throughout the course, students will attend talks (through one of
these three approaches) and then apply what they have learned by studying animal
behavior of both domestic animals housed at the University of Florida, and
exotic animals housed at the Santa Fe College Teaching Zoo. A web-based animal
observation platform to facilitate the students' ability to record behavioral
data will be launched. Significant effort will be made to recruit
underrepresented (minorities, women, low-income and first-generation) students
to partake in the course through existing institutional programs. Thus, the
examination of three pedagogical approaches, the engagement of first and second
year STEM undergraduates in scientific research, and the development of a
research methodology course will contribute to the overarching goal of improving
undergraduate teaching and learning as stated in the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education (IUSE) program,

This project is founded in constructivist and experiential learning ideals
centered on the creation and delivery of a one-semester research education
course. It will expose students to the basic tenants of research requiring them
to develop, test, analyze and report on self-derived research hypotheses. To
facilitate students' ability to collect data, learners will be randomly assigned
to observe and record animal behaviors in person, or over an interactive web
site where students can remotely control cameras. A comparison of the two data
collection methods will occur in order to examine their facility to engage a
large cohort of students in active research and for the students' ability to
identify behaviors accurately. Evaluation criteria will include student learning
outcomes, ability to think critically, ability to comprehend and apply the basic
tenants of research, and perceptions of science based on classroom and research
experience platforms. The educational research agenda will include the random
assignment of students to the different instructional delivery approaches over
the six semesters, use of mixed model ANOVA using SAS MIXED procedure with a
post hoc Tukey's HSD, and other data analytics. The project will conduct a
rigorous formative and summative evaluation to assess the total impact these
efforts have on gains in students that participate in the Wild Discoveries
course, as either remaining in, or declaring a STEM major after participating in
this experience, as well as its potential to support instructional change in
many STEM-focused courses. Ultimately, in addition to the local benefits in
terms of recruitment and persistence in the sciences to the approximately 540
students who will be enrolled in the Wild Discoveries course during the initial
launch, future students will benefit as well. Moreover, the learning materials
and web-based platform developed with this course will be transferable to other
collegiate and K-12 programs throughout the nation.