* 1503949
* Information Security and Assurance for Technology Leadership and Innovation
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2023
* Anton Dahbura, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 2,212,933.00

The Johns Hopkins University Information Security Institute (JHUISI) proposes to
add four new cohorts of graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R)
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program in cybersecurity. JHUISI offers a Masters
of Science in Security Informatics (MSSI) program focusing on immersive
educational experience and often combining expertise in other areas such as
healthcare or project management. The MSSI program and associated dual-degree
programs are based on an integration of courses, labs, research projects, and
internships stemming from the various academic cultures represented the Carey
School of Business, Bloomberg School of Public Health, School of Medicine,
Krieger School of Arts and Sciences, and Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced
International Studies at the Johns Hopkins University. These partnerships
developed a unique interdisciplinary framework supporting educational cross-
training in cybersecurity technologies relative to various application areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SFS students will complete the MSSI degree program with an
option to earn a dual degree in Computer Science, Applied Math and Statistics,
Health Sciences, or National Security Studies. These dual masters programs have
proven to be valuable for various federal agencies. In particular, the project
provides exposure to the increasingly critical field of healthcare security to a
new generation of cybersecurity professionals. The relevance of this area is
underscored at the federal and state health infrastructures by mandates to
broaden utilization of information technology in the delivery of healthcare
while protecting the security and privacy of health information exchanges and
on-line databases. SFS students will help with the critical challenge of
establishing trusted national healthcare information networks to unify health
and medical computing infrastructures, streamline healthcare monitoring and
delivery, and accelerate research and dissemination of health and medical data
while assuring that privacy is systemically protected. The project will conduct
a focused outreach to assure diversity by leveraging existing partnerships with
HBCUs and MSIs.