* 1503910
* Collaborative Research: Impact of subglacial discharge on turbulent plume dynamics and ocean-glacier heat and mass transfer
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Roman Motyka, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 181,273.00

Recent and on-going retreat of many Northern hemisphere marine-terminating
glaciers is contributing significantly to sea level rise. It is driven by poorly
understood processes occurring at the ice-ocean interface, such as subglacial
discharge into the ocean, turbulent plume dynamics, submarine melting, and
iceberg calving. These processes are (1) inherently interdisciplinary, requiring
expertise in both glaciology and oceanography and (2) difficult to observe,
requiring innovative field techniques and careful site selection. This project
will address the relationship between subglacial discharge, turbulent plume
dynamics, and submarine melting through a comprehensive field campaign at
LeConte Glacier, Alaska, supplemented by a state-of-the-art modeling effort. The
field site is ideal because it spans a wide range of forcings on daily to
seasonal time scales and because the near-terminus fjord environment is
accessible year round. A successful project will provide a unique data set and
improved models for projecting contributions to future sea level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project, at the interface of
the the fields of glaciology and oceanography, provides support for an early-
career principal investigator (PI) (Amundson) from a predominantly undergraduate
institution (University of Alaska Southeast) and an additional early career PI
at University of Oregon. More mature PIs at Oregon State University and
University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus will mentor the younger team members,
promoting workforce development. Additional workforce development will be
promoted through interaction with high school students and at the participating
universities. The team of PIs will entrain select students from a local Alaska
high school to participate in aspects of the field work and engage with the
school to integrate their observations into the curriculum. The project will
also provide support for the training two graduate students and a post-doctoral
scholar. The associated mentoring plan is very good. Outreach to the general
public will be enhanced by leveraging the PIs? home institutions? activities.
The PIs will continue established interactions with the National Park Service
and the US Forest Service. These include public lectures, as well as training
for interpretive rangers who can reach a broad cross-cut of the public. Finally,
they will develop a brochure concerning their work to further enhance their
public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
parameterization of a plume, driven by subglacial discharge, as it interacts
with the face of a marine-terminating glacier. This is a goal that has been
endorsed by the international community. It will be accomplished by conducting
three intensive field campaigns to&lt;br/&gt;i. sample the upwelling plume
directly with manned and autonomous vessels,&lt;br/&gt;ii. measure the
downstream impact of the plume on near-terminus fjord
circulation,&lt;br/&gt;iii. determine subglacial discharge and submarine melt
rates, and&lt;br/&gt;iv. survey associated changes in glacier terminus
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Subglacial discharge and ambient water properties in the
proglacial fjord will be monitored throughout the project in order to
provide&lt;br/&gt;i. important context for the intensive field campaigns,
and&lt;br/&gt;ii. a range of parameter space to be explored by a turbulence-
resolving hydrodynamic plume model.&lt;br/&gt;Data from the intensive field
campaigns will be used to validate the plume model, which will then be used to
explore the wider range of parameter space that is provided by long-term
measurements. The latter will allow investigation of the impact of submarine
melting on glacier dynamics over seasonal timescales.