* 1503659
* Digitization PEN: Integration of data from the Triplehorn Insect Collection with the Southwestern Collections of Arthropods Network.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Norman Johnson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 173,901.00

This project will capture and disseminate data on the geographic distribution,
species diversity, and life history for two important indicator groups of
animals: the darkling beetles and ground beetles. These data will be acquired
from collections made over the past 70 years from Texas to southern California
by faculty and staff of the Ohio State University. Information will be
transcribed from the individual labels on 80 thousand specimens and uploaded
into publicly accessible databases. The project is a partnership with an
existing project, the Southwestern Collections of Arthropods Network (SCAN), and
will more than double the available data for these targeted groups of beetles.

Dramatic changes in the American Southwest over the past century has resulted in
greater pressure for resources, particularly water. Past and future changes will
be visible as alterations in the community of plants and animals of the region.
This project seeks to add data that fills critical gaps in the SCAN TCN project
for two families, Tenebrionidae and Carabidae, of beetles. These data will be a
major contribution to monitoring and assessing environmental changes in the
region and their effects on biological diversity. This award is made as part of
the National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting
from this award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).