* 1503583
* Partnership to the New England Vascular Plant Network for the University of Maine Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Christopher Campbell, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2017
* USD 68,407.00

Data from Maine fills an important gap in the study of environmental changes in
New England. The state comprises about half the total area of New England,
extending about 2.5 degrees north and 3 degrees east of the rest of New England.
Plant specimens in the University of Maine Herbarium record both the spatial and
temporal distribution of species over the past 170 years. These specimens, along
with associated data, inform the study of environmental changes in Maine and New
England. In this project the University of Maine Herbarium will complete the
databasing of specimen records and generate high-quality digital images of
55,000 plant specimens. These digitized data will contribute to the
accomplishment of the research and outreach goals of the New England Vascular
Plant Network.

High quality images of herbarium specimens can be used to study shifts in the
abundance, distribution, and reproduction of plants, as influenced by
environmental change, document the number of populations of rare plants and the
introduction and spread of invasive plants. They can also be used to gather
information indicative of plant response to change, and train the public and
professionals in techniques of plant identification, structure and developmental
changes over time. The project will directly train undergraduates and members of
an amateur botanical society. This award is made as part of the National
Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing
Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this
award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).