* 1503080
* RAPID: Extraction of Robot Use Cases for the Ebola Epidemic
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Robin Murphy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2015
* USD 19,356.00

This project will work with national and international medical and disaster
professionals to extract formal use cases for ground, aerial, and marine robots
for medical response and humanitarian relief to the Ebola (and future)
epidemics. A set of detailed use cases is urgently needed to meet the challenges
posed by the epidemic and to prepare robotics for assisting with future
epidemics. The robotics community cannot provide robots without understanding
the needs and engineering mistakes or mismatches will both be financially costly
and delay the delivery of effective solutions. This is a rare opportunity to
work with responders as they plan for a deployment of more than 3,000 troops
plus Centers for Disease Control workers, and a possibly greater number of
volunteers through non-governmental organizations such as Doctors Without
Borders. The project outcomes will allow robotics companies to confidently pre-
position/re-position products and to incorporate the findings into R&amp;D
investment strategies. The categorization of problems will guide academia in
future research and to use as motivating class projects. The effective use of
robots will provide responders with tools for the short term and will provide
achievable expectations of robotics technology in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is no comprehensive statement of the
missions that robots can be used for during a medical event and general mission
descriptions (e.g. we need a robot to transport bodies) do not capture the
design constraints on a robot. Prior work has shown that not understanding the
operational envelope, work domain, and culture results in overly expensive
robots that cannot be adopted. Robotics has not been considered by health
professionals for the entire space of a medical event (hospitals, field
medicine, logistics, security from riots), nor has the disaster or medical
robotics communities been engaged with epidemics. This project will provide the
fundamental understanding of how robots can be used for medical disasters and
will design a formal process for projecting robotics requirements. It will
benefit safety security and rescue robotics by expanding research from
meteorological, geological, and man-made disasters to medical disasters and
surgical robotics and telerobotics by pushing the boundaries of how robots are
used for biosafety event.