* 1503615
* RUI:  Interdisciplinary Studies of Atomic and Molecular Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert Forrey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

Hydrogen and carbon monoxide are the two most abundant molecules in most
astrophysical environments and are also important components in many industrial
processes. The ability to model these diverse environments requires a
quantitative understanding of the underlying quantum mechanics for many possible
interactions involving these molecules. The theoretical calculations performed
in this project would provide atomic and molecular collision data which is
expected to improve the capability of kinetic models to make reliable
predictions. The project would advance knowledge in fundamental and applied
areas of physics, chemistry, and astrophysics. The project is designed to
integrate research, teaching, and educational outreach and to provide excellent
opportunities for undergraduates to begin training for science and engineering
careers.

Molecule formation and collisions will be investigated for a variety of atomic
and molecular systems using rigorous quantum mechanical methods. These systems
will include atomic and molecular hydrogen interacting with other atoms and
diatomic molecules (e.g. carbon monoxide). Theoretical calculations will address
problems of astrophysical interest using a full-dimensional quantum mechanical
formulation in an effort to gain insight into the most important mechanisms.
Approximations will be tested and implemented as needed for the development of a
full database of state-to-state rate coefficients. Kinetic models will use the
data to explore non-equilibrium behavior for conditions required by the
astrophysical environments. The dynamical studies will include atomic and
molecular collisions at temperatures ranging from ultracold to ~ 10,000 K.
Broader impacts of the project will include molecular dissociation and atomic
desorption processes for metallic-hydride systems of interest to industry.