* 1503600
* A Novel Hardware Architecture to Time-Reverse Electromagnetic Signals with Low Cost
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Mingyu Lu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 159,679.00

Time-reversal technique is capable of focusing waves in space and time. It has
the potential to enable a wide range of revolutionary apparatuses, as shown by
extensive prior research. Particularly, "time-reversal of acoustic signals" has
been successfully implemented for underwater communication and sonar. However to
date, no practical systems for "time-reversal of electromagnetic signals" have
been reported; the major pertinent bottleneck is the expensive/bulky hardware
required by time-reversing electromagnetic signals. This research proposes a
novel frequency-domain architecture to time-reverse electromagnetic signals with
low cost. It is expected to fundamentally resolve the "high-cost difficulty"
associated with "time-reversal of electromagnetic signals," and in turn, to
accomplish an efficient and robust hardware solution to space-time focusing of
electromagnetic waves. This project's outcome can be readily employed in
numerous challenging applications such as wireless communication in extreme
environments, high-resolution imaging radars, tracking of wireless sensors/tags,
and medical diagnosis. The proposed research will make constructive impacts on
the science and engineering curriculum at West Virginia University Institute of
Technology. The proposed research activities will support both graduate and
undergraduate students and provide them with excellent research opportunities in
the areas of electromagnetic modeling, antennas, microwave circuits, and
wireless systems. Existing collaborations with local high school districts
enables high school students/instructors to participate in the proposed research
activities and gain practical engineering experiences. This project is intended
to impact both research and educational aspects of local industries by providing
novel system/circuit solutions for wireless systems, supplying exceptionally
well-trained students, and organizing industrial seminars, short courses, and
workshops. Research findings of this project will be disseminated by the means
of journal publications, conference presentations, patents, project webpage,
newspapers, and radio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes a novel
architecture to time-reverse wideband microwave signals with low cost. It
exploits detour in the frequency domain to avoid high-speed analog-to-digital
conversion in time, via three steps: (i) "Fourier transform," to obtain discrete
spectrum of the input signal; (ii) "Digital signal processing," to carry out
complex conjugate operation for the spectral samples obtained in Step (i); and
(iii) "Inverse Fourier transform," to synthesize the time-reversed signal using
discrete continuous-wave elements. This novel time-reversal architecture is
comprised solely of common semi-conductor components like oscillators,
multipliers/mixers, band-pass-filters, amplifiers, and switches. As a result, it
embodies a compact and low-cost system-on-a-chip implementation. Its success
would establish an efficient and robust hardware solution to space-time focusing
of electromagnetic waves. Specifically, this research has the following three
major tasks: first, prove the feasibility of time-reversing microwave signals
with inexpensive circuitries; second, investigate antennas with large bandwidth
and omni-directional pattern; and third, demonstrate space-time focusing of
electromagnetic waves by integrating the circuits from the first task and
antennas from the second task