* 1503315
* PBS NewsHour STEM Student Reporting Labs: Broad expansion of youth journalism to support increased STEM literacy among underserved student populations and their communities
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Leah Clapman, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2019
* USD 2,943,309.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DR-K12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project scales up the PBS NewsHour Student Reporting Labs (SRL),
a model that trains teens to produce video reports on important STEM issues from
a youth perspective. Participating schools receive a SRL journalism and digital
media literacy curriculum, a mentor for students from a local PBS affiliate,
professional development for educators, and support from the PBS NewsHour team.
The production of news stories and student-oriented instruction in the classroom
are designed to increase student learning of STEM content through student-
centered inquiry and reflections on metacognition. Students will develop a deep
understanding of the material to choose the best strategy to teach or tell the
STEM story to others through digital media. Over the 4 years of the project, the
model will be expanded from the current 70 schools to 150 in 40 states targeting
schools with high populations of underrepresented youth. New components will be
added to the model including STEM professional mentors and a social media and
media analytics component. Project partners include local PBS stations, Project
Lead the Way, and Share My Lesson educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
study conducted by New Knowledge, LLC will add new knowledge about the growing
field of youth science journalism and digital media. Front-end evaluation will
assess students' understanding of contemporary STEM issues by deploying a web-
based survey to crowd-source youth reactions, interest, questions, and thoughts
about current science issues. A subset of questions will explore students'
tendencies to pass newly-acquired information to members of the larger social
networks. Formative evaluation will include qualitative and quantitative studies
of multiple stakeholders at the Student Reporting Labs to refine the
implementation of the program. Summative evaluation will track learning
outcomes/changes such as: How does student reporting on STEM news increase their
STEM literacy competencies? How does it affect their interest in STEM careers?
Which strategies are most effective with underrepresented students? How do youth
communicate with each other about science content, informing news media best
practices? The research team will use data from pre/post and post-delayed
surveys taken by 1700 students in the STEM Student Reporting Labs and 1700 from
control groups. In addition, interviews with teachers will assess the curriculum
and impressions of student engagement.