* 1503044
* Commutative algebra: homological and homotopical aspects
* MPS,DMS
* 08/31/2014,05/31/2018
* Srikanth Iyengar, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2018
* USD 258,701.00

This is a proposal in commutative algebra from the point of view of cohomology
and homotopy theory, with strong connections to representation theory of finite
dimensional algebras. Many of the proposed topics of research are inspired by
homotopy theory, which also serves as a source of intuition, and of techniques,
for dealing with them. Broadly speaking, the recurrent theme in the project is
the interplay of three topics: commutative algebra; differential graded algebras
and modules; and triangulated categories. While differential graded algebras and
triangulated category methods have long been used successfully in commutative
algebra, the PI and his collaborators, among others, have been adapting
classical constructions and methods from commutative algebra (for example, local
cohomology, and derived completions) to the context of differential graded
algebras and triangulated categories, with striking returns in the
representation theory of finitely dimensional algebra, notably, group algebras,
and in commutative algebra itself. This proposal seeks to further develop these,
and in new directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of rather diverse algebraic
structures---this means, loosely speaking, not directly involving any notions
from calculus like continuity or rate of change---have been developed in
mathematics to model phenomenon in the (physical) world. Two examples
particularly relevant to this proposal are groups and their representations,
that are remarkably well-adapted to capture phenomenon involving symmetry, and
rings, especially those that arise as rings of functions on various geometric
objects like manifolds or solution sets of polynomial equations. However, it was
only a few years ago that it was realized that if we enhance a ring by the most
primitive structure from calculus, namely, a derivative, then it becomes
possible to uniformly capture much of the information encoded in these various
algebraic structures. Interestingly, these still rather mysterious hybrid
structures, called differential graded algebras, emerged as important tools in
algebraic topology already in the early 1950s. Differential graded algebras can
be seen as bridges that relate various algebraic and geometric contexts in
mathematics and mathematical physics. This has had the effect that methods
developed in one field have profoundly influenced a host of others, and new
connections among them have been discovered. Differential graded algebras are,
in general, rather complicated, but there are interesting classes that appear to
be amenable to methods developed in commutative ring theory, a classical topic
with a large and well-developed body of tools and techniques. The broad aim of
this proposal is to investigate differential graded algebras from this
perspective. Besides deepening our knowledge of them, the proposed research is
expected to have impact on commutative algebra, representation theory, and
related fields.