* 1503462
* An Origami Paper-Based Bacteria-Powered Battery for On-Chip Biosensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Seokheun Choi, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 294,539.00

The research will design and optimize a paper-based, bacteria-powered battery
that can be integrated into paper-based microdevices to power on-board
components. Paper has distinct advantages for fluid manipulation and
analytical/clinical testing in applications such as point-of-care and point-of-
use testing, particularly in low-resource settings. The proposed paper-based
biobattery fuses the art of origami and the technology of Microbial Fuel Cells
(MFCs) to generate power from microbial metabolism such that one drop of
bacteria-containing liquid can deliver energy to next-generation paper-based
systems. Every environment like soiled puddles or sewage has liquids that
contain microorganisms that are sufficient for operating paper-based
biobatteries. The proposed research therefore potentially has great social and
economic impacts. It will enable low-cost diagnostic/analytical biosensors
optimized for use under the most challenging environmental conditions. The
project will address scientific education as the research outcomes will be
shared through conferences and journals, and integrated into post-secondary
courses as well as K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
advance the potential of paper battery to be fully integrated in paper-based
microfluidic systems to power on-board components. The proposed origami
technique will provide a series/parallel connection method for paper-based
bacteria-powered batteries to produce a targeted power output that, upon adding
a drop of bacterial-containing liquid will simply operate by capillary force
through 3-D microfluidic pathways within the paper layers. For operation, the
battery stack will be unfolded to expose all air-cathodes to the air, thereby
maximizing their cathodic reactions. The goals of the research include gaining
in-depth understanding of bacteria?s potential within a paper matrix and gauging
bacterial ability to provide rapid electricity generation. The scope of
investigation includes validating design footprints and bacterial combinations,
when optimized will create a novel energy conversion technology based on paper.
The potential benefits of bacteria-powered battery design include 1) a viable
alternative power source for interfaced, paper-based analytical/diagnostic
devices, 2) develop powered paper-based biosensing assays in easy-to-use
packages, 3) increase fundamental understanding of bacterial transport and
associated extracellular electron transfer mechanisms through a paper matrix,
and 4) origami technique will establish and validate a platform precedent for
battery stacks to be connected either in series or in parallel.