* 1503399
* An Efficacy Study of the Learning and Teaching Geometry Professional Development Materials: Examining Impact and Context-Based Adaptations
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Nanette Seago, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,808,325.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. There are few examples of research that demonstrates causal impacts of
professional development on teachers' knowledge and practice and student
learning. This study will examine the impact of the Learning and Teaching
Geometry (LTG) professional development for secondary mathematics teachers on
the teachers' knowledge and classroom instruction, as well as on their students'
learning. As the nation invests vast resources in the professional development
of teachers to meet new curriculum and instruction challenges, exploring the
efficacy of professional development is important to understand how best to
direct those resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a cluster randomized design,
the project will sample from 132 teachers (66 per condition) from 28 middle and
high schools to participate in a 2-year implementation of the LTG professional
development, facilitated by highly trained facilitators to study the efficacy of
the materials. The project will monitor the fiedity of implementation of the LTG
using a professional development session logging tool and Facilitator Interview
Protocol. Outcome measures include measures of teacher knowledge, teaching
practice, and student learning of geometry. Analyses will include two- and
three-level hierarchical linear models to estimate the effects of participation
in the LTG professional development and growth over time.