* 1503097
* GEM: Magnetotail Reconnection Signatures at Lunar Orbit
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Andrei Runov, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 02/28/2021
* USD 292,698.00

Earth's magnetic field encloses it in a protective cocoon, called the
magnetosphere, deflecting most of the solar wind around it. The solar wind is a
stream of charged particles and magnetic fields blowing outward from the Sun,
which varies in intensity with solar activity. Because of its interaction with
the solar wind, the magnetosphere is compressed on the dayside and extended in a
long "magnetotail" on the nightside. The stretched magnetotail field lines store
energy extracted from the solar wind. This energy is released by a process
called magnetic reconnection, the subject of the present study, during which
magnetic energy is converted into plasma flows as well as heating and
energization of plasmas within the Earth's magnetosphere. Magnetic reconnection
occurs at two locations: one in the near-tail at a distance of 15-30 Earth radii
and the other in the distant tail at 100-200 Earth radii. The near-Earth
reconnection is explosive, creating high-energy charged particles that are
responsible for the dynamic auroras in the upper atmosphere but also for damage
to Earth-orbiting satellites. Near-Earth reconnection is largely associated with
space weather events called magnetic storms and substorms. In contrast, the
distant tail reconnection (about which much less is known) is envisioned to be
steadier. It is not understood how the two reconnection sites interact. Of major
importance for the present study, fast plasma flows are produced moving both
Earthward and tailward from each of these reconnection sites. A satellite at
lunar orbit (~60 Earth radii) between the two sites has the important advantage
of being able to detect tailward flows from the near-Earth site, and earthward
flows from the distant tail site. Thus the connection between the two, and the
impact on magnetotail conditions of each, can be investigated from the same mid-
tail vantage point. New insights into magnetic reconnection from the suggested
study are valuable for research in planetary magnetospheres, as well as
astrophysical and laboratory plasmas. The suggested work will provide important
training for graduate students. It also includes public outreach and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the goals described above, the
proposers will analyze observations from the Artemus (Acceleration,
Reconnection, Turbulence, and Electrodynamics of the Moon's Interaction with the
Sun) satellites in lunar orbit at ~60 Earth radii using case and statistical
studies to investigate the occurrence rates of reconnection outflows from both
near- and distant-tail reconnection sites, their variations over a range of
space weather conditions (quiescent to magnetic storming), the timing between
them (i.e., which site activates first), as well as consequences to the mid-tail
space environment, such as transient electric field enhancements, changes in the
magnetic field geometry, and enhancements in high-energy particle fluxes.