* 1503446
* KAUST-NSF Research Conference on Electronic Materials, Devices and Systems for a Sustainable Future at
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Durgamadhab Misra, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 12/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

Proposal NO: 1503446&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Title: KAUST-NSF Research
Conference on Electronic Materials, Devices and Systems for a Sustainable Future
at&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description:
An international research conference on electronic materials, devices and
systems for a sustainable future will be held at the King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia during February 14-16,
2015. The NSF award will support the travel expenses for six excellent junior
faculty members, postdocs and graduating students in addition to four professors
of various levels form the United States to attend this international research
conference. This conference is the second of this kind and the first conference
was held in 2014 at KAUST on Research on Electronic Materials, Devices and
Systems for a Sustainable Future. The purpose of the 2015 international
conference is to continue the positive momentum garnered from the 2014 assembly
of the global scientific community at a common stage to steer discussion towards
scientific and engineering research progress in the area of sustainable future
for the benefit of mankind. The US participants will constitute women, minority
and underrepresented groups. There will be a session on Bright Minds where
minority group member(s) including but not limited to women, African-American,
Hispanic, will be engaged. Two women professors, Prof. Diana Huffaker of
University of California, Los Angeles and Prof. Jackie Ying (MIT/A*STAR) have
confirmed their participation in a special session on Women In Science and
Engineering (WISE). In addition, numerous local women engineer, scientists,
students and researchers including participants from women- only Effat
University (Jeddah) and Umm Ul Qura University (Makkah). KAUST has a little over
40% women student population and 10% faculty population and many of them are
participating in the conference. Researchers from the neighboring countries of
Saudi Arabia will also participate in this international conference. This
international conference provides an important incentive for participating
graduating students, postdocs and junior faculty in the formation of scientists
to be leading technological developments in the new millennium. The intrinsic
educational value of the symposium is that it will expose the students to the
cutting edge research in electronic devices, materials and systems including
electromechanical systems, as the speakers constitute an international body of
luminaries in these fields. This is a great opportunity for graduate students to
make additional contacts with industrial, academic and especially KAUST
researchers. This international event, therefore, will contribute significantly
to the society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The proposed
international conference will gather world leading researchers, mid-career and
rising stars, and the KAUST research community to exchange ideas and to foster a
collaborative platform to pursue fundamental and applied research in the area of
electronic devices, materials and systems focusing on sustainable future. The
objective and goal of this conference is to highlight and to bridge the gap
between the complementary growth of electronics and information technology and
to explore what more can be done to use such pervasive technologies for
sustainable future. Disciplines like (i) chemical and biological science and
engineering; (ii) Environmental science and engineering; (iii) marine science;
(iv) electrical and computer engineering; and (v) material science and
engineering will be covered. Sensors, smart devices, energy harvesting, storage,
and cyber-physical systems will be some of the important topics that are planned
to be discussed in the conference. Some of the tangible outcomes are: a)
Establishing a culture of sustainability-focused high-tech research; b)
Attracting bright young minds from all over the world for exchange of ideas; c)
Promoting science-engineering education and research through collaboration; d)
Promoting the participation and contribution of women in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;This conference will be jointly funded by CCSS/EECS/ENG
and ISE-Global Venture Fund