* 1503653
* Collaborative Research: Influence of natural ice microstructure on rheology in general shear: in-situ studies in the Alaska Range
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Robert Hawley, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 218,881.00

Understanding the loss of ice from glaciers and ice sheets, and the resulting
sea-level rise, is of critical importance. Both the Greenland and Antarctic Ice
Sheets, as well as mountain glaciers, discharge primarily though rivers of ice;
understanding what controls the type of flow that occurs in these rivers of ice
is therefore central to understanding and predicting sea-level rise. Among the
least-understood factors that are thought to be important in affecting ice flow
is internal strength of the ice near the sides of a flowing glacier. This
viscous strength, in turn, may be affected by the micro-scale structure of the
ice crystals in the glacier. The investigators propose to examine these
relationships in detail on Jarvis Glacier, in the eastern Alaska Range, with the
ultimate goal of being able to represent the effects of microstructure in
numerical models of glacial flow.

To do this, the investigators will first use surface velocity measurements,
knowledge of the glacier geometry derived from ground penetrating radar, and
numerical modeling to identify a site for drilling. They will then collect
surface-to-bed cores across lateral and vertical flow gradients. Velocity and
temperature measurements derived from the boreholes will complement the surface
measurements and allow the investigators to produce a more sophisticated three-
dimensional numerical model to test the sensitivity of flow patterns to the
mechanical structure within the study area. They will compare the microstructure
(e.g., grain size distribution, crystallographic fabric) in the ice cores to the
in-situ and modeled velocities and temperatures. Although experiments suggest
that variations in the intensity and orientation of the crystallographic fabric
can result in up to a ten-fold difference in flow strength, there are very few
in-situ observational studies of the microstructural architecture of streaming
ice; most studies of ice microstructure come from ice divides, where flow rates
are slowest. At the end of this project, the investigators aim to have
determined (1) the degree to which fabrics formed in the study area are
predictable based on ice kinematics, and (2) the relationship among measured
crystallographic orientation fabric intensity, grain size, temperature, and ice
viscosity as calculated through numerical models. A correlation between fabric
and viscous strength would suggest that remote sensing techniques such as radar
and seismic anisotropy could become an even more powerful method for identifying
the rheological structure of ice. Alternatively, the lack of a strong link
between viscous strength and fabric indicates that other factors exert
significant control on the rheological properties. Therefore, the results of the
proposed project, whatever the correlation between microstructure and viscous
strength, should improve quantitative understanding of the physical laws
governing streaming ice and improve future predictions of ice mass balance. The
project would support and involve both graduate and undergraduate students. The
project's numerical models will be developed into a publicly available web-based
graphical user interface for use by other researchers and in the classroom.