* 1503629
* Arithmetic Manifolds, Automorphic Forms, Exponential Sums, and L-Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Djordje Milicevic, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2019
* USD 135,000.00

This project features two lines of research at the interface of mathematical
analysis, the study of continuous change, and number theory, the study of
properties of integers borne out of the notion of divisibility. The finer
distribution of prime numbers, such as whether they end in certain blocks of
digits more often than others, is captured by highly structured oscillating
sequences known as Dirichlet characters, which give rise to the associated
L-functions. This project will prove analytic results about certain special
values of L-functions and sums of the values of Dirichlet characters, and it
will specifically investigate the impact of the underlying modulus being
composed of many smaller factors on these results and on the tools available to
prove them. As a prototype of the other class of objects to be studied, signals
and motions (such as light waves or vibrations of a string) are often much
better understood when viewed as combinations, or superpositions, of simple
periodic motions. The wave-like functions that analogously serve as building
blocks of analysis on other spaces are known as eigenfunctions and are central
in disciplines ranging from spectral geometry to quantum mechanics. This project
will investigate the behavior of rapidly oscillating eigenfunctions on spaces
with a rich set of symmetries that are arithmetic in nature, in particular how
pronounced are their extreme values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
centers around two principal themes, that of extremal behavior of high-energy
eigenfunctions on arithmetic manifolds and that of the depth and smooth aspects
in analytic number theory. On certain arithmetic manifolds with a specific
geometric and functorial structure, the joint eigenfunctions (Hecke--Maass
eigenforms) exhibit power growth, which is neither generically expected nor
predicted by physical models. The PI will seek out extremal growth and
investigate in detail the sup-norm and restriction norm problems on several
specific classes of arithmetic manifolds to inform general conjectures and
understanding of the phenomenon of concentration of mass on arithmetic
manifolds, the precise structure that drives it, and its place within the
framework of the correspondence principle of quantum mechanics. In number-
theoretic problems involving characters and automorphic forms of large level,
the depth and smooth aspects, which are concerned with highly powerful or
factorable conductors, play a very distinctive role. The structural impact of
the powerful or factorable structure on nonvanishing, subconvexity, and moments
of L-functions, as well as exponential sums involving p-adically analytic
fluctuations will be studied using non-archimedean analysis, analytic number
theory, and spectral theory.