* 1503250
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the interactive effects of sensory response and signal function on the evolution of signal diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2014,10/31/2017
* Manuel Leal, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 10/31/2017
* USD 197,450.00

A fundamental challenge of modern Zoology is to understand why, in some cases,
large numbers of similar-appearing animal species have formed, and continue to
coexist, in relatively limited geographical areas. This study will examine the
role of communication in facilitating species boundaries in communities of
Anolis lizards. Male Anolis lizards utilize a visual communication signal that
consists of the display of a colorful throat fan called the dewlap. Each species
has a different color and/or pattern on its dewlap that helps to maintain
species diversity by allowing lizards to easily detect, recognize and mate with
members of their own species, and avoid interbreeding and unnecessary
competition with other similar species. The dewlap?s effectiveness depends
strongly on light conditions in each habitat, and on the neural responses of the
Anolis visual system. This study will focus on lizard communities on the islands
of Jamaica, Hispaniola and Puerto Rico. It will employ techniques from physics,
optical engineering, neuroscience, behavioral biology, anatomy, and computer
modeling to learn how lizard visual systems detect and discriminate between the
colors and patterns found on the dewlaps of different species, and how
differences in habitat light influence these capabilities. This project includes
a strong educational outreach component. High school, undergraduate and graduate
students will actively participate in all aspects of the research and a special
effort will be made to include groups underrepresented in sciences. Findings
will be communicated to the public via popular articles, public presentations,
and web-based modules that allow interested individuals to explore the
interactions between the physical properties of light, visual physiology, and
ecological conditions. By explaining the role of effective communication in the
maintenance of reproductive boundaries between species, the project will provide
information that is critical for conservation efforts aimed at preserving
biological diversity through habitat preservation and reconstruction.