* 1503069
* Collaborative Research: P2C2: Quantitative Reconstructions of Holocene Precipitation Changes Across Central America
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Matthew Lachniet, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2018
* USD 9,753.00

This project will develop a quantitative assessment of past precipitation
changes on decadal to centennial time-scales for the arid Pacific coast regions
of Central America. Identifying the potential changes in water resource
availability for this drought sensitive region in response to future climate
change is a top priority for scientists and policy makers. For example, millions
of people living in the 'dry corridor' of Central America have recently been
affected by drought conditions triggered by anomalous Pacific Ocean sea surface
temperatures. To put recent drought scenarios into a longer-term perspective,
reconstructions of past precipitation amounts will be developed using lake
sediment geochemical records and lake and climate model simulations. The results
of this project will allow for better modeling, forecasting and mitigating of
future drought and water availability dynamics in Central America in response to
a changing climate. This data will contribute directly to the efforts of the
SynTraCE-21 working group, which is one of the PAst Global changES working
groups tasked with conducting proxy data model comparisons. This work will
contribute to their objectives of better understanding the response of the
climate system to external/internal forcing, as well as model behavior and
limitations. Along with the U.S. scientists supported by this grant,
independently supported scientists from Nicaraguan and Mexican universities are
involved in the project, as is a PhD student from Oxford
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop detailed quantitative
reconstructions of past precipitation amounts along a transect through the "dry
corridor" of Central America (Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua).
Previous work has documented millennial-scale shifts in climate across Central
America that are consistent with expectations from solar insolation forcing;
however, superimposed on these longer-term trends are shorter-term variations
that are better explained by sea surface temperature and atmospheric variability
in the Pacific and Atlantic basins. Hence, a more rigorous understanding of the
range of possible precipitation changes resulting from mean-state variations in
the global ocean-atmosphere system is needed to understand the drivers of
hydroclimatic shifts in the Circum-Caribbean region. Stable isotope
(&amp;#948;18O) records from open and closed-basin lake sediment cores (dated
using radiocarbon methods) will be interpreted using state-of-the-art isotope
mass-balance models to reconstruct Holocene rainfall amounts at near-annual to
decadal-scale resolution. Elemental geochemistry combined with ostracod species
identification and &amp;#948;18O measurements will provide supporting proxy
data. This project will develop new lake sediment records to compare to both
proxy-reconstructions and climate model simulations of tropical Pacific and
Atlantic ocean-atmosphere variability in order to further evaluate the relative
importance of these systems in driving past rainfall changes. It is anticipated
that different mean state changes of the El Ni√±o-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) combined to drive either a synchronous or (at
times) anti-phased pattern of precipitation across the Circum-Caribbean region.
Interpreting the open- and closed-basin lake records using mass-balance models
and will offer a robust means identifying past changes in the tropical
hydrologic cycle; while analysis of climate model simulation output will provide
a physical basis for explaining these changes. Furthermore, the paleoclimate
data produced by this research will provide a benchmark for testing the veracity
of climate model hindcasts and will therefore provide a basis for parameter
refinement in climate model simulations of the future.