* 1503980
* Collaborative Research: Development of Learning Progressions for Biochemistry - Concept Linkage through the College Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Adele Wolfson, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 100,526.00

Biochemistry and the courses that precede it in the college curriculum are
foundational for careers in many sciences and related professional pathways.
This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education project will focus on research to
define the essential concepts and principles that students must understand to
successfully navigate from general chemistry to organic chemistry to
biochemistry, and to map the paths that undergraduate chemistry and biochemistry
students may take in developing expertise. By recruiting students from two very
different institutions (a highly selective liberal arts college and a large
state university) to participate in the research, the findings will be relevant
for a wide range of college students. In addition, the project will build a
community of college instructors who are committed to developing tools to help
students learn key concepts at the appropriate levels in the courses they teach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To define learning progressions in general chemistry and
organic chemistry that allow for sophisticated understanding of concepts in
biochemistry, researchers at Wellesley College and the University of South
Florida will design, conduct, and analyze responses to semi-structured
interviews with faculty who teach the relevant chemistry and biology courses, as
well as with 100 undergraduate students from beginning to advanced level. The
researchers will select two to three essential concepts to be expanded into
learning progressions through the courses, including identification of lower and
upper anchors. Later in the project, a survey will be developed based on
findings of the interviews. The survey will be administered to larger numbers of
students, and the responses will be analyzed to refine the learning
progressions. This research is expected to contribute to understandings of how
students transfer knowledge from one course to another, and what types of
connections can be made across courses to assist student learning. It will also
promote faculty collaboration across chemistry, biology, and biochemistry
courses and disciplines.