* 1503878
* Active microwave nanodevices based on nonlocal spin injection
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Sergei Urazhdin, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 344,934.00

As the scientific and engineering communities search for new information
technologies capable of overcoming the current limitations of electronics in
power, speed, and integration, devices exploiting both the electron's charge and
spin degrees of freedom are being explored. The proposed research will
investigate a new type of devices termed nonlocal spin valves, where the charge
and spin flows are efficiently separated. The proposed device structure
radically optimizes the operational characteristics, enabling efficient
generation of microwave signals for information transmission and processing,
while minimizing the negative effects of electrical current. The proposed
research will explore the relationship between geometry and operational
characteristics, and the possibility to incorporate these devices into nanoscale
circuits that integrate signal generation, transmission, and manipulation.
Several undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the modern
methods of fabrication and characterization of novel nanodevices using advanced
techniques as well as gaining knowledge in fundamental and practical concepts of
spintronics and materials science. Special emphasis will be placed on the
outreach to the general public, through the Elementary School Science Day,
annual Atlanta Science Festival, and Physics/Astronomy Open House, and by
providing research experience for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of spin-based electronics
(spintronics) is motivated by the potential of reduced energy dissipation in
devices that do not require charge flows, but in practice spintronic devices
usually utilize large electrical currents that result in significant dissipation
and even damage to devices. This research project will explore and develop
nanoscale magnetic microwave oscillators driven by pure spin current produced by
nonlocal spin injection in a magnetic heterostructure. Optimization of the
structure will enable device operation at modest driving currents, while
minimizing Joule heating and the effects of Oersted field on the spectral
characteristics. The separation of the charge and the spin flows in the proposed
device provides an unprecedented flexibility of the geometry, which will be
exploited to optimize the spectral characteristics and efficiency, incorporate
devices into nanoscale spin wave (magnonic) circuits, and achieve synchronized
operation of multiple devices. The goal will be augmented by additional focus on
the fundamental properties of the dynamical magnetization states at nanoscale,
to address the mechanisms that enable auto-oscillation of nanomagnetic systems
driven by spin currents.