* 1503898
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biotic control of resource retention in arid lands: testing the fungal loop hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Jennifer Rudgers, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,630.00

Plants and microorganisms cycle carbon and nitrogen between the atmosphere and
the biota to drive the activities that they need to survive and reproduce. The
role of plants and microbes in these cycles are well-understood in mesic (moist)
environments but are unresolved in drylands. In arid regions, plants and
microbes usually grow for only brief periods following rainfall events. During
dry times, resources like carbon or nitrogen can be lost from the ecosystem and
returned to the atmosphere, and therefore unavailable for organisms when the
next rain comes. One mechanism for conserving resources occurs when direct
exchanges between plants and microbes make water and nutrient use more
efficient. For example, fungi in roots provide water and nitrogen to plants and
receive carbon from plant photosynthesis. The proposed research will test they
hypothesis that in arid lands, thread-like soil fungi connect plant roots to
microbe-encrusted soils to more efficiently transfer and retain nutrients. This
study will improve our capacity to predict the effects of climate changes on
plant-microbe interactions. Results from this study will be shared with land
managers so that restoration activities protect or manipulate the soil fungi to
improve production and reduce degradation to arid lands. Workshops will be
designed for school children and the public to increase understanding of the
unique features of organisms in arid lands.

In arid lands, producers (plants and biological soil crusts) are spatially
separated with patchy distributions and are temporally separated due to
differential responses to soil moisture, and thus resources released by one may
be lost before being accessed by the other. The fungal loop hypothesis proposes
that plants and biocrusts are functionally coupled by fungi that transfer water
and nutrients between them, reducing resource loss. Observations support the
hypothesis, but experimental manipulations of fungi have not yet been conducted.
This dissertation work directly tests the mechanisms and ecological effects of
fungal connections between plants and biocrusts. First, to determine whether
fungal connections between plants and biocrusts exist and if they enable more
efficient resource transfer than physical processes, mesh will be used to
inhibit root or fungal connections. Experiments using stable isotopes (N, C)
will compare transport rates via fungi to rates via physical processes alone.
Second, connection (mesh) and plant/biocrust removal treatments will be imposed
to test whether fungal connections affect a) the individual performance of
plants and biocrusts, b) net plant-biocrust interactions, and c) resource
retention. These experiments will be replicated under two precipitation regimes
to determine if the fungal loop shows context-dependency with respect to water,
one of the resources driving production in arid lands. Understanding the
conditions that enable efficient resource cycling will refine predictions on the
drivers of productivity and resource dynamics in arid lands. Proposed
improvements will determine which fungal taxa occur in biocrusts, rhizospheric
soil, and within roots and how these fungi are affected when fungal connections
with plants or biocrusts are intact or inhibited and under different watering
regimes. Stable isotope probing will be used to identify which fungal taxa are
active (versus dormant), and therefore most likely to drive resource transfers
between plants and biocrusts. The primary goal of stable isotope probing is to
identify fungal taxa involved in the fungal loop. Connecting fungal identity and
diversity to resource transfers among producers is essential for understanding
the mechanisms of resource cycling in arid ecosystems.