* 1503714
* Assessing the Distribution and Variability of Marine Mammals through Archaeology, Ancient DNA, and History in the North Atlantic.
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2023
* Brenna Frasier, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2023
* USD 557,970.00

This project seeks to understand prehistoric and historical Norse uses of
whales, seals and walruses in the North Atlantic and Eastern Arctic over the
course of the Middle Ages, from 800-1500 CE (Common Era). Evidence from Arctic
and North Atlantic historical and literary sources and archaeological sites
reveals frequent use of marine mammals by prehistoric hunters and scavengers and
Norse settlers, but details about the uses of whale, seal, and walrus are
unquantified, broad and approximate. These northern regions are critically
important ecosystems to current North American economies and interests. They
were home to the world's earliest whaling industries and support ongoing sealing
and whaling traditions. However, we know almost nothing about the origins and
scale of whale, seal, and walrus use in these once fertile waters. Given the
complexity of marine food webs in regions like the Atlantic and Arctic Oceans,
reconstruction of preindustrial or 'pristine' maritime ecosystems is critical in
modern restoration efforts and for the preservation and sustainable use of fish
and mammal populations today. Without clear knowledge of ancient and early
historic marine mammal populations, we cannot gauge what healthy marine mammal
populations would look like today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fourteen-member
research team, from the disciplines of humanities, history, archaeology,
biology, genetics and others, aims to investigate the deep history of whale,
seal, and walrus use in the Eastern Arctic and North Atlantic. This research
will span the first settlements of the Faroes, Iceland and Greenland in the
Viking Age (beginning around 800 CE), through the Medieval Warm Period (circa
1000-1250), and concluding with the Little Ice Age at the end of the Middle Ages
(1300-1500). In addition to assessing the social, cultural, and economic
importance of marine mammal use among Norse populations, the research study uses
cutting-edge genetic and chemical analyses to provide a far better understanding
of marine mammal populations in the Arctic and North Atlantic before the major
changes resulting from industrial-scale hunting beginning in the sixteenth
century. Evidence from houses, burials, and trading sites, from current
archaeological excavations and museum collections, as well as histories, sagas,
maps, illuminated manuscripts and other traditional sources of knowledge, are
combined with scientific approaches to ancient animal bones and the genetic
stories that they can tell. This project will build interdisciplinary
connections across the social and natural sciences, will bring together
researchers and students from six countries and eleven academic institutions and
museums, and will employ the most current technologies and scholarship in
genetics, biology, digital humanities, and zooarchaeology. The research team
hopes to uncover new evidence about the marine animals that populated medieval
seas, and the manners in which medieval Icelanders, Greenlanders, and others
encountered and exploited these mammals. The project team will produce scholarly
articles, translations, new genetic and zooarchaeological data sets, will
participate in academic conferences and public presentations, and will design
both curricular and museum materials to communicate our results to a broader
audience. Undergraduate and graduate students will be guided through
transdisciplinary research collaborations in the US and abroad. Finally, the
team scientists think that their results may also aid colleagues in the natural
sciences in reconstruction of ancient seas, climates, animal populations, and
environmental change, with direct application to major issues of future
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks answers to
fundamental questions about medieval marine mammal exploitation, focusing on
Norse uses of whales, seals and walruses in the North Atlantic prior to 1500 CE.
In a region dominated by charismatic Arctic megafauna, where modern industrial
whaling was born and where current whaling and sealing attract global attention,
the prehistory and early history of marine mammal use remain unclear in its
scale and purpose. The researchers' transdisciplinary approach employs Local and
Traditional Knowledge (LTK), digital humanities, environmental histories, and
innovative technologies of genetic analysis to new and existing sea mammal
archaeofaunal assemblages to produce a holistic long-term perspective on the
social, cultural, and economic history of marine mammal use in medieval northern
Europe. This research spans the first settlements of the Faroes, Iceland and
Greenland in the Viking Age and the Medieval Climatic Optimum, through the
Little Ice Age onset in the high Middle Ages and Early Modern periods. The
length of the project survey period (+ 700 years) will result in samples across
a broad range of time and space, which allows the science team to contextualize
newly-generated aDNA marine mammal data across several documented periods of
major climate change in the North Atlantic and
Subarctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also provide a far better
understanding of marine mammal dynamics in these regions prior to the major
changes resulting from industrial-scale hunting impacts beginning in the
sixteenth century. The project utilizes: 1) a new integration with the rich
medieval written record for Iceland aided by digital and environmental
humanities approaches; 2) a greatly expanded zooarchaeological database created
since the International Polar Year (IPY) by the North Atlantic Biocultural
Organization (NABO) research cooperative; 3) newly expanded capabilities in
ancient DNA (aDNA) analysis, allowing species-level identification on a wide
range of otherwise unidentifiable sea mammal bones; 4) new data management and
visualization tools providing more effective cross disciplinary communication
and wider public engagement through cooperation with the National Snow and Ice
Data Center (NISDC) and NABO project management system; and 5) facilities for
wide transdisciplinary dissemination of results through the Integrated History
and Future of People on Earth (IHOPE) program as part of the Future Earth global
change initiative. This project will build capacity for scientific collaboration
and data management, dissemination, and visualization, while improving species-
level identification, exceeding current capabilities of simple morphometric
analysis or collagen fingerprinting of sea mammal bones from archaeological
contexts and museum collections. In addition, it offers the promise to create
important new bodies of evidence for a range of scholarly disciplines across a
broad temporal and geographical series of case
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the proposed project's use of extant data
sets - textual, archaeological, biological - may provide an innovative new model
for transdisciplinary analysis of premodern marine mammal use that can be
applied across the North Atlantic and circumpolar Arctic. The researchers hope
to establish a historical baseline of marine mammal use that reveals a more
complete economic and ecological portrait of the Norse North Atlantic. Through
collaborations with North Pacific and Western Arctic colleagues, the research
team's work will complete a circumpolar perspective of prehistoric and early
historic marine mammal exploitation. By answering fundamental questions of
marine mammal use, this research has the potential to provide context or
evidence for lost genetic diversity among key marine species, now under pressure
from both natural and human drivers of environmental change. This integrative
approach, including collaboration of scholars and students from twelve
institutions across North America and Europe, also provides new models and
innovative methodologies for transdisciplinary research in the social sciences
and humanities, with direct application to major issues of future
sustainability.