* 1503573
* SusChEM: New Functional Inorganic Materials: Fluoride-Carbonates for Deep UV NLO Applications and Multiferroic Fluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2018
* P.Shiv Halasyamani, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 09/30/2018
* USD 508,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;New materials (chemical compounds) are at the
core of new technologies, such as fuel cells, blue-ray DVD players, smart
phones, and lasers. The challenge lies in not only discovering a new material,
but also understanding its technological properties. If technologies are to be
advanced, the discovery and understanding of new materials are critical. This
research project involves the design, discovery, and crystal growth of new
materials for advanced technologies. Specifically, the research team is focused
on laser applications and magnetic-electronic phenomena. With the former, the
aim is to discover materials that enable lasing technologies in the ultraviolet
- critically needed for advanced technologies and devices. With the latter the
team is designing materials wherein magnetic and electronic properties may be
tuned to create fundamentally new devices and technologies. Thus, the research
project involves the synthesis and discovery of new materials, their crystal
growth, and an understanding of their technological properties through advanced
laboratory characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, this research project involves
the design, synthesis, structure, functional property characterization, and
structure-property relationships of new functional inorganic materials:
fluoride-carbonates for deep-ultraviolet non-linear optical applications and
multi-ferroic fluorides. An ongoing challenge in inorganic solid-state chemistry
is the 'rational design' of new materials - to design and synthesize precise
stoichiometries that will exhibit specific, and ideally, technologically
important properties. Meeting this challenge not only requires synthetic
expertise, but also a deep understanding of the various bonding and crystal
chemistry requirements for the desired physical property. An aim of the proposed
research is to further this understanding by not only synthesizing new
materials, but also developing structure-property relationships. The research
team aims to synthesize new acentric fluoride-carbonates for deep-ultraviolet
non-linear optical applications and multiferroic fluoride materials. In addition
to bulk phase synthesis, the growth of large, centimeter size, crystals is
planned. Crystal growth methods include top-seeded solution growth and Bridgman.
The materials will be characterized structurally by X-ray diffraction (powder
and single crystal), and physical property measurements will include,
thermogravimetric analysis, differential scanning calorimetry, second-harmonic
generation and magnetoelectric measurements.