* 1503161
* Precision Math: Using Interactive Gaming Technology to Build Student Proficiency in the Foundational Concepts and Problem Solving Skills of Measurement and Data Analysis
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Hank Fien, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,999,816.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

Strong knowledge of measurement and data analysis is essential to ensure
competiveness of the nation as a whole and full access to educational and work
opportunities for all students. Despite this importance, a considerable number
of U.S. students, particularly students from poor and minority backgrounds,
struggle with these two areas of mathematics. The purpose of this 4-year
Research and Development project, Precision Mathematics (PM): Building Student
Proficiency in the Foundational Concepts and Problem Solving Skills of
Measurement and Data Analysis, is to improve student mathematics achievement by
developing a mathematics intervention focused on key measurement and data
analysis skills. The PM intervention will be designed for first and second grade
students who are experiencing mathematics difficulties. To increase student
mathematics achievement, the intervention will include: (a) a technology-based
component that will provide students with individualized instruction and (b)
hands-on activities that will offer opportunities for students to interact with
their teacher and peers around critical measurement and data analysis concepts.
Primary activities of the project will include intervention development, pilot
testing, data analysis, and intervention revision. One primary benefit of PM is
that it will provide struggling learners with meaningful access to critical
concepts and skills identified in the Common Core State Standards Initiative.
Another benefit is that will be designed to serve as a foundation for students
to understand more advanced mathematical concepts introduced in the later
grades. PM has the potential to address a concerning gap in U.S. education. To
date, intervention research focused on measurement and data analysis is scant.

Proficiency with measurement and data analysis is essential for obtaining
occupations in the STEM fields. A primary aim of this project is to develop PM,
a mathematics intervention designed to teach key concepts of measurement and
data analysis to at-risk 1st and 2nd grade students. Comprising the intervention
will be technology-based and collaborative problem-solving activities. At each
grade, the intervention will provide 20 hours of instruction focused on topics
identified in the Common Core State Standards. A primary aim of the project is
to develop the intervention using a design science approach, including a mix of
qualitative and quantitative research methods that will guide iterative testing
and revision cycles. A second primary aim is to test the promise of the
intervention to improve student mathematics achievement. Rigorous pilot studies
(i.e., randomized controlled trials) will be conducted in 1st and 2nd grade
classrooms involving over 700 at-risk students. Within classrooms, students will
be randomly assigned to treatment (PM) or control conditions (business as
usual). Two research questions will be addressed: (a) What is the potential
promise of the intervention when delivered in authentic education settings? (b)
Based on empirical evidence, are revisions to the intervention's theory of
change necessary? Tests of main effects of intervention effects will be
conducted using analysis of covariance models, adjusting for pretest scores.
Generated findings are anticipated to contribute to the knowledge base on early
STEM learning for at-risk learners.