* 1503881
* I-Corps:  Large-Area 'eta6-Functionalized' Graphene Sheets with Preserved Lattice for Semiconductor Applications and Industry
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Vikas Berry, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Homes, smartphones, electronic devices and vehicles are equipped with a variety
of sensors to detect temperature, humidity, pressure, air-quality, medical
diagnostics, touch, light, water-level, hot-surface, and oxygen levels. A cost-
effective, highly sensitive platform with versatility to be incorporated into
diverse systems for sensing different stimuli is important. This I-Corps team
has built a cost-effective, high-sensitivity sensing-element with functionalized
single-atom-thick graphene, which can be applied to produce a wide variety of
sensors. Further, the team also developed a process to produce graphene based
high frequency electronic devices via the same mechanism. The technology is
expected to have a significant economic impact in the sensors and semiconductors
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphene is an ultrasensitive, ultrathin
substrate with the ability to detect a single molecule. To incorporate this
property into working sensors, the graphene functionalization is important.
However, this is a major challenge since to preserve the superior electronic
properties of graphene, its functionalization must retain its planar lattice
(for high mobility) and its carbons' sp2 hybridized state (for high carrier
density). To achieve these goals, the I-Corps team has developed a sensor base
where the ?à?{conjugated system of graphene is functionalized, while retaining
its lattice integrity and superior sensitivity. Further, the group has developed
a process to grow graphene directly on a dielectric substrate. Functionalized
graphene will benefit from enhanced specificity and will facilitate atomic layer
deposition of gate-oxide (currently a major challenge) for fabrication of high
speed field effect transistors.