* 1503451
* Conceptual Model-based Problem Solving: A Response to Intervention Program for Students with Learning Difficulties in Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Signe Kastberg, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2020
* USD 502,141.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3-year exploratory project, Conceptual Model-
based Problem Solving: A Response to Intervention Program for Students with
Learning Difficulties in Mathematics, will develop a cross-platform mathematics
tutoring program that addresses the problem-solving skill difficulties of
second- and third-grade students with learning disabilities in mathematics
(LDM). While mathematics problem-solving skills are critical in all areas of
daily life, many students with LDM do not acquire key math concepts such as
additive and multiplicative reasoning in a proficient manner during the early
school years. In fact, about 5-10% of school-age children are identified as
having mathematical disabilities which might cause them to experience
considerable difficulties in the upper grades and experience persistent
academic, life, and work challenges. Despite the proliferation of web-based
mathematical games for early learners, there are very few programs or tools that
target growth in the conceptual understanding of fundamental mathematical ideas,
which is essential in enabling young students with LDM to perform proficiently
in mathematical and everyday contexts. COMPS-A is a computer-generated
instructional program focusing on additive word problem solving; it will provide
tutoring specifically tailored to each individual student's learning profile in
real time. COMPS-A will also make the reasoning and underlying mathematical
model more explicit to them, and the tool's flexibility will facilitate group or
one-on-one instruction in regular classroom settings, in other sessions during
or after the school day, and at home. COMPS-A addresses a significant practical
issue in today's classrooms by providing individualized and effective RtI
intervention programs for students with LDM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COMPS-A
program represents a mathematical model-based problem-solving approach that
emphasizes understanding and representation of mathematical relations in
algebraic equations and, thus, will support growth in generalized problem-
solving skills.COMPS-A will achieve the following objectives: 1) Create the
curriculum content, screen design, and a teacher's manual for all four modules
in the area of additive word problem solving; 2) Design and develop the cross-
platform computer application that can be ported as a web-based, iPad, Android,
or Windows app, and this flexibility will make the program accessible to all
students; and 3) Conduct small-scale single subject design and randomized
controlled trial studies to evaluate the potential of COMPS-A to enhance
students' word problem-solving performance. The following research questions
will be resolved: (1) What is the functional relationship between the COMPS-A
program and students' performance in additive mathematics problem solving? (2)
What is the teacher's role in identifying students' misconceptions, alternative
reasoning, and knowledge gaps when students are not responsive to the
intervention program? (3) What are the necessary instructional scaffolds that
will address students' knowledge gaps and therefore facilitate the connection
between students' conceptual schemes and the mathematical models necessary for
problem solving in order to promote meaningful understanding and construction of
additive reasoning? A functional prototype of the COMPS-A will be developed
followed by a single-subject design study with a small group of students with
LDM to field-test the initial program. Finally, a pretest-posttest, comparison
group design with random assignment of participants to groups will then be used
to examine the effects of the two intervention conditions: COMPS-A and business
as usual. An extensive dissemination plan will enable the project team to share
results to a wider community that is responsible for educating all students and,
especially, students with LDM.