* 1503483
* Collaborative Research:RAPID: A hyper-thermal anomaly in the Florida Reef Tract: An opportunity to explore the mechanisms underpinning patterns of coral bleaching and disease
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Laurie Richardson, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2016
* USD 177,913.00

Coral reefs are among the most biologically diverse and economically important
ecosystems on the planet. However, coral reefs are in a state of global decline
due to effects of climate change, disease outbreaks, and other stressors. Mass
coral bleaching events, a breakdown of the association between corals and their
symbiotic algae, are predicted to become more frequent and severe in response to
climate change, and it is expected that subsequent disease outbreaks will become
more common. Beginning in August 2014, nearly all coral species in the Florida
Reef Tract have undergone severe bleaching, in some cases followed by coral
mortality and/or disease outbreaks. This widespread, thermal-induced event
presents a unique time-sensitive opportunity to explore the mechanisms
underpinning the patterns of coral bleaching, disease, and recovery. The
mechanisms linking patterns of bleaching, disease, mortality, and recovery
remain relatively unexplored. This research will explore the influences that
genotype combinations of host polyps, their algal symbionts, and associated
bacterial have on bleaching/disease likelihood and recovery/mortality
predisposition of coral specimens. By providing a mechanistic understanding of
the processes that underlie coral bleaching and subsequent recovery this
research will contribute to measures in support of preserving this invaluable
natural resource. The study will further involve students from diverse
backgrounds as well as provide project internship opportunities for high school
students. A web based radio blog will disseminate project results and other
relevant developments to the broad audiences &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass coral
bleaching events are predicted to become more frequent and severe in response to
climate change, and it is expected that subsequent disease outbreaks will become
more common. The lack of a baseline genetic datasets for coral holobionts prior
to previous natural bleaching events has hindered our understanding of recovery
patterns and physiological tolerance to thermal stress, also known as coral
bleaching. An extensive pre-thermal stress baseline of genotypic identity of
coral hosts, Symbiodinium, and associated bacterial community offers a unique
opportunity to analyze changes associated with current bleaching event along the
Florida coastline and to document holobiont compositions most and least
resistant/resilient to bleaching and disease. Repeated sampling of the same
coral colonies will allow the investigators to compare holobiont composition
before, during and after bleaching of both healthy and diseased individuals.
This bleaching event is a time-sensitive natural experiment to examine the
dynamics of microbes (Symbiodinium and bacteria) associated with affected
colonies, including their potential influence on disease susceptibility and
resistance of reef corals. This effort would constitute the first time that high
throughput sequencing of coral, Symbiodinium endosymbiont, and the coral-
associated bacterial community genotypes are together used to explain patterns
of disease, recovery, and mortality following natural bleaching. This study will
likely change the way investigators study emerging wasting diseases of keystone
species that define marine benthic communities.