* 1503917
* Three Dimensional Computer Simulations of Maxwell Equations and Snow Microstructures for Active and Passive Microwave Observations of Snow on Sea Ice in a Changing Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Leung Tsang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 283,627.00

Snow cover plays a key role in Arctic sea ice processes, and it has thinned
significantly in recent decades. In winter, it insulates sea ice from cold air
temperatures, slowing sea ice growth. In spring-summer, snow albedo exerts a
control on solar heat absorbed by the sea ice and underlying ocean, impacting
ice melt processes. Thus, snow thickness, distribution, and density, can
moderate the recovery of the sea ice pack or exacerbate its loss. Airborne and
satellite remote sensing are used to monitor snow depth over sea ice.
Interpretation of the remotely sensed microwave signals requires accurate models
of how the microwaves interact with the snow. This project will develop
electromagnetic models that relate the microwave signatures quantitatively to
physical parameters of snow. It will contribute to STEM workforce development by
providing support for the training of a graduate student. The computer code for
the model will be made publicly available and provide a resource for the Arctic
science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will improve the
extraction of snow parameters from airborne and spaceborne observations through
the modeling of the interaction between snow particles and electromagnetic waves
in the microwave region. In particular, the project will generate 3D simulations
of the solution to Maxwell's equations in the presence of 3D snow
microstructure. Results will be applied to the analysis of active and passive
microwave remote sensing data of snow over sea ice. Three-dimensional computer
simulations of microstructures of snow that resemble that of real snow will be
performed on High Performance Computing (HPC) systems to compute scattering and
emission of snow covering sea-ice. The use of large scale high performance
computations will permit the simulations to be run over relatively large spatial
domains.