* 1503627
* Single-Molecule Magnets: Internal Degrees of Freedom and Quantum Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Enrique del Barco, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 458,893.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop the necessary
experimental and educational tools for the study, understanding and
dissemination of the quantum dynamics of nanometer sized molecular magnets under
a broad range of experimental conditions. The control of quantum properties of
nanoscale materials has led to the appearance of new emerging technologies, such
as quantum information and computation processes. Nanoscale molecular systems
have great potential for ultra-high density integration and quantum information
processing, which are technologies that base on the fundamental properties
studied in this project. The proposed research is strongly integrated with a
series of educational activities. Several graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained at the interface between inorganic chemistry and fundamental and
applied physics, and exposed to a large, interdisciplinary and international net
of collaborations that the principal investigator has established over many
years. In addition, the research supports an initiative led by the principal
investigator to create new Minor and B.A. degrees in Nanoscale Science and
Technology at UCF, which are built around three new nano-courses where the
project's research will be showcased. The courses are offered as Service-
Learning courses and designed to promote the early involvement in science of
K-12 students in participating middle schools in the Orlando metropolitan
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
consolidate an integrated experimental and educational framework for the study,
understanding, and dissemination of knowledge that details the magnetic
properties of single-molecule magnets under a broad range of experimental
conditions. The specific scientific goals are: a) to understand the role played
by internal degrees of freedom in the quantum tunneling of magnetization in
molecular nanomagnets, and, b) to study the nature of the light-matter
interaction in SMMs in the weak and strong coupling regimes, with the goal of
achieving quantum coherent control over the molecular spin in view of
application in quantum information, molecular spintronics and related emerging
technologies. The project goals base on an expansion of pulse EPR spectroscopy
extending down to low temperatures (~100mK), achieved with the use of high-
sensitivity microstrip resonators (including high quality factor superconducting
coplanar waveguide resonators), is expected to enable measurements of
decoherence rates with a sensitivity two orders of magnitude smaller than those
attained in previous studies. Indeed, the experimental setup resulting from this
project allows the investigation of the three primary sources of decoherence,
e.g., dipolar, nuclear and vibronic. Diminishing and controlling sources of
decoherence in molecular nanomagnets may enable the large number of gate
operations demanded by quantum algorithms and quantum error correction
protocols. In addition, their intrinsic magnetic molecular anisotropy makes
molecular nanomagnets natural systems of interest for the emerging field of
molecular spintronics. &lt;br/&gt;The research project is strongly integrated
with a series of educational activities designed to train graduate and
undergraduate students at the interface between inorganic chemistry and
fundamental and applied physics, and exposed to a large, interdisciplinary and
international net of collaborations that the PI has established over many years.
The proposal strategizes plans to continue an involvement of underrepresented
groups in research at all levels, as illustrated in a strong record of
activities undertaken by the PI that promote diversity in the laboratory. In
addition, the research supports an initiative led by the principal investigator
to create new Minor and B.A. degrees in Nanoscale Science and Technology at UCF,
which are built around three new nano-courses where the project?s research will
be showcased. The courses are offered as Service-Learning courses and designed
to promote the early involvement in science of K-12 students in participating
middle schools in the Orlando metropolitan area.