* 1503206
* Student-Adaptive Pedagogy for Elementary Teachers: Promoting Multiplicative and Fractional Reasoning to Improve Students' Preparedness for Middle School Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Ron Tzur, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,999,881.00

The project develops a teacher professional development intervention to support
student-adaptive pedagogy for multiplicative and fractional reasoning. The idea
is that classroom instruction should build on students' current conceptions and
experiences. The context for the study is grades 3-5 teachers in Aurora Public
Schools. It focuses on students from urban, underserved and low-socioeconomic
status populations who often fall behind in the elementary grades and are left
underprepared for middle grades mathematics. It includes a summer workshop and
academic year follow-up including teacher collaboration. The project provides
tools for capitalizing on successful, school-based research for promoting
teachers' buy-in, adoption, and sustaining of student-adaptive pedagogy. The
project also includes measurement of student understanding of the concepts. An
extensive plan to share tools and resources for teachers and instructional
coaches (scalable to district/state levels) and of research instruments and
findings, will promote sharing project outcomes with a wide community of
stakeholders (teachers, administrators, researchers, parents, policy makers)
responsible for students' growth. This is a Full Design &amp; Development
project within the DRK-12 Program's Learning Strand. The Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to implement and study a
professional development intervention designed to shift upper-elementary
teachers' mathematics teaching toward a constructivist approach, called student-
adaptive pedagogy (AdPed), which adapts teaching goals and activities based on
students' conceptions and experiences. The project focuses on multiplicative and
fractional reasoning--critical for students' success in key areas of middle
school mathematics (e.g., ratio, proportion, and function). The project seeks to
design an instrument for measuring teachers' implementation of AdPed, a clinical
interview rubric for students' multiplicative reasoning and then an analysis of
teachers' content knowledge and the implementation of AdPed following the
professional development. The research design is rooted in an innovative,
cohesive framework that integrates four research-based components: (i) a model
of mathematics learning and knowing, (ii) models of progressions in students'
multiplicative and fractional reasoning, (iii) a model of teaching (AdPed) to
promote such learning, and (iv) a mathematics teacher development continuum.
Capitalizing on successful preliminary efforts in the Denver Metro area to
refine a PD intervention and student-adaptive tools that challenge and transform
current practices, the project will first validate and test instruments to
measure (a) teacher growth toward adaptive pedagogy and (b) students' growth in
multiplicative reasoning. Using these new instruments, along with available
measures, the project will then promote school-wide teacher professional
development (grades 3-5) in multiple schools in an urban district with large
underserved student populations and study the professional development benefits
for teacher practices and student outcomes. The mixed methods study includes
classroom-based data (e.g., video analysis, lesson observations, teacher
interviews) and measures of students' multiplicative reasoning specifically and
mathematical understanding generally.