* 1503794
* Making Grades Meaningful - Standards-Based Grading for Engineering Project Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Adam Carberry, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 248,893.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project will help improve the
process through which student progress in engineering courses is measured and
evaluated. The project will investigate the use of standards-based grading in
undergraduate engineering project courses. Standards-based grading directly
measures the quality of students' development towards achieving well-defined
course objectives. This approach addresses the need in higher education to
assess actual student learning relative to specific rigorous competencies. This
collaborative project will bring together faculty at a diverse set of
institutions: Arizona State University, Elizabethtown College, Loyola Marymount
University, and Purdue University to engage a community of undergraduate
engineering faculty teaching project courses as a focused first effort to
implement standards-based grading in the undergraduate engineering curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standards-based grading has been implemented in K-12
learning environments but no formal studies have been conducted to date that
evaluate this grading system in higher education. To address this gap, the goals
of this educational research effort are to: formally establish the structure and
components of a standards-based grading system for engineering project courses;
assess the effects of standards-based grading in engineering project courses;
and establish a collaborative network of scholars committed to implementing and
advancing standards-based grading within engineering education. This project is
based on exploratory results of a series of pilot studies implementing
standards-based grading in engineering courses that found improvement in both
affective and cognitive student behaviors. This project will use qualitative and
quantitative methods to build on the foundation established in the pilot
studies. Faculty and students will provide insights into the impact that
standards-based grading has on associated value, engineering design self-
efficacy, and academic achievement. This work will provide information about how
a standards-based alternative to traditional score-based grading can improve
undergraduate engineering education. The project includes efforts to communicate
the results of this work to the broader STEM education community.