* 1503109
* EAGER: Calibration of novel FRET based force sensors in vitro
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Frederick Sachs, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 03/31/2017
* USD 99,890.00

PI: Hua, Zonglu Susan Proposal Number: 1503109

Mechanical force is one of the major determinants of tissue organization during
its development and remodeling. During tissue development, cells experience
numerous mechanical forces from shape change of the surrounding tissues. These
forces not only modify the morphology, but also regulate genetic programs,
affecting phenotype and genotype of newly generated tissue, and are thus a
significant component of epigenetics for engineering tissues and organs. To
date, our understanding of force transmission pathways has been limited due to
lack of tools to measure the forces in specific proteins in live cells. The
investigators' group has developed a unique set of genetically coded
fluorescence force sensors and demonstrated that they can measure forces in
specific proteins in real time during tissue development and remodeling. When
calibrated, these molecular force measurement tools will open significant
opportunities to study force signaling and transduction in cells under a variety
of conditions.

The overall objective of this EAGER grant is to calibrate forces in newly
developed fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based sensors in vitro
to make them quantitative. The approach utilizes a novel molecular method to
directly measure the force in FRET probes in individual actin filaments in
vitro. A flexible needle will be used to measure and exert forces on the
filament with fixed ends, and simultaneously, FRET ratio will be recorded using
fluorescence microscopy. This research is expected to generate the first force
calibration curves for FRET probes in their natural configuration as expressed
in cells. This result will be an important addition to the development of a
force sensor 'toolbox' to directly report temporal and spatial force gradients
in cells and tissues. Importantly, this research should provide new techniques
for calibration of these probes. With regard to educational broader impacts, the
investigators propose a unique program on Education through Experimentation, or
E2E. The idea is to create a tangible educational tool for STEM activities that
can be repeated long after the grant is over. This one-year EAGER grant will
serve as a pilot run on this novel E2E idea.