* 1503671
* Partnership to the Fossil Insect Collaborative for Collections at the University of California Museum of Paleontology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Diane Erwin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 81,541.00

The University of California, Berkeley Museum of Paleontology (UCMP) will join
the Fossil Insect Thematic Collections Network (TCN) dedicated to understanding
the impacts of environmental change on insect diversity and evolution using
paleontological data. The project will expand the TCN's current geographic
coverage providing researchers and the public with web-accessible digitized
images and specimen records of approximately 4,900 Cenozoic insects that lived
during times of significant climate change. These specimens include insects in
amber, a rare insect assemblage from the Great Basin, and Ice Age insects from
southern California's Rancho La Brea and McKittrick tarpits.

Addition of these specimens to the Fossil Insect TCN will enhance datasets for
analyzing how these climatically-sensitive organisms have responded to abrupt
environmental changes throughout Earth history, and the implications of climatic
warming on present-day biodiversity. Students at UC Berkeley will perform the
digitization while learning about the value of natural history collections and
their relevance to science. Project data will enhance UCMP's K-16 teacher-
student science education programs, global public outreach, and Internet
resources. Input from local communities will assist in developing "DigIt", a
mobile application for researchers, teachers and students, members of industry,
government agencies, and the public. This award is made as part of the National
Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing
Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this
award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).