* 1503865
* Determining C-H Activation Reaction Mechanisms of Nonheme Iron Catalysts with Ultrafast Multi-Dimensional Multiple-Mode Vibrational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Junrong Zheng, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Junrong Zheng of Rice University to elucidate
details of the C-H activation mechanism catalyzed by Fe-containing organic
molecules, by studying signatures of the reaction intermediates. The structures
of key intermediates are being investigated by a broadband multiple-dimensional
multiple-mode vibrational spectroscopy method being developed for these purposes
in the Zheng group. An outreach program developed by Professor Zheng is allowing
local high school students the opportunity to participate in this research and
that projects associated with fundamental molecular events underneath daily
phenomena are being designed for high school students to inspire their interest
in fundamental physical sciences. Graduate and undergraduate students are being
actively mentored and involved in all aspects of the research and education
plan. Animated cartoons will be developed to demonstrate basic chemical and
physical principles for kids.

This project focuses on the structural determinations of the intermediate
oxidants of the nonheme catalyst Fe(S,S-PDP), resolving the disagreement about
its C-H activation mechanism. The intermediates can be paramagnetic and
transient in liquids and difficult to be resolved by traditional techniques. To
meet the challenge, novel ultrafast vibrational spectroscopic methods are being
developed to resolve the in situ structures of these transient species with an
ultrafast temporal resolution. Organic syntheses of various reagents and
catalysts and theoretical calculations are being conducted to reach a
comprehensive understanding of the reactions. The broader impacts of this work
include bringing a deeper understanding of many C-H activation reactions
catalyzed by heme and nonheme molecules, and developing a novel method that can
resolve many molecular structures in both inorganic and organic chemistry that
are difficult for traditional techniques.