* 1503456
* Strategies for Leading Classroom Discussions Aimed at Core Ideas and Scientific Modeling Practices
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* John Clement, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2018
* USD 387,268.00

The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) have set goals for students to
learn scientific models as disciplinary core ideas in addition to scientific
reasoning practices and cross cutting ideas. Given these advances in national
standards, educators are now asking for details about: (a) strategies for
teaching the core disciplinary ideas; (b) how to teach the components of
scientific thinking practices; and (c) how to integrate those practices with the
teaching of core ideas. This project will use video case studies to identify key
strategies used by exemplary teachers to guide class discussions toward these
goals. The project will study teachers in the areas of high school mechanics and
electricity, and middle school life sciences, and is designed to develop the
constructs and language that will enable us to describe key discussion leading
strategies. Clarified descriptions of the strategies will be disseminated to
teachers via a website on discussion leading strategies for building models as
core ideas, and accompanied by real classroom examples.

In order to organize the strategies, the project will also combine the results
of the classroom case studies with findings from studies of thinking processes
in scientists to develop an integrated theoretical framework for model based
learning and teaching in science. The theoretical framework will serve as a
guide for organizing instruction, integrating research findings, and sequencing
strategies for teacher educators and curriculum developers. The framework will
start from practices in the NGSS standards for modeling and add detail by
identifying smaller practices and supporting teaching strategies at four
different time scale levels--from 5-second engagements with mental simulations,
to the use of minutes-long constructive reasoning processes, to larger modeling
cycles lasting roughly 10 minutes to hours, to model construction modes that can
last 15 minutes to days. A simplified version of the theoretical framework will
give a way to introduce teachers to strategies in an organized manner, one level
at a time. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.