* 1503662
* Puzzles, Quantum K-Theory, and Other Topics in Schubert Calculus
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Anders Buch, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 297,000.00

This research project concerns several open questions in the general area of
enumerative geometry. The motivating goal in this subject is to determine the
number of geometric figures of a fixed type that satisfy a list of conditions.
These conditions could involve that the figures contain given points, meet other
figures, or have tangents with specified properties. Surprisingly, while it can
be extremely difficult to determine the precise list of solution figures that
satisfy the conditions, it is often possible to predict the number of such
solutions. The search for formulas for the number of solutions to enumerative
problems has uncovered deep and beautiful combinatorial structures that are of
interest in numerous fields, including geometry, combinatorics, representation
theory, complexity theory in computer science, and mirror symmetry in physics.
The PI will engage both graduate and undergraduate students in his research with
the aim of recruiting new talent to mathematics in general and to enumerative
geometry in particular. The PI is currently the thesis advisor of one Ph.D
student, and two additional students have recently completed their Ph.D degrees
under his supervision. The PI has supervised projects in the Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) program at Rutgers University in 7 out of the past 8
summers. The awarded research grant will enable him to continue this activity.
The PI will also develop computer software to facilitate research in his area,
and he will help organizing conferences and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much
information about the enumerative geometry of subvarieties in a flag manifold is
encoded in its cohomology ring, as well as in more general cohomology theories.
A major goal in Schubert calculus is to obtain formulas for the multiplicative
structure constants of this ring with respect to its basis of Schubert classes.
The PI will attempt to prove a positive combinatorial formula that expresses the
cohomological structure constants of any three-step flag variety as the number
of puzzles that can be created using a list of puzzle pieces. The Gromov-Witten
invariants of a flag manifold X count the number of rational curves that meet
general Schubert varieties in X when this number is finite. When infinitely many
curves meet a general configuration of Schubert varieties, the collection of
these curves form a moduli space called a Gromov-Witten variety. Gromov-Witten
varieties in turn define K-theoretic Gromov-Witten invariants that are encoded
in the quantum K-theory ring of X. The study of this ring provides a useful
benchmark for our understanding of the singularities and rationality properties
of Gromov-Witten varieties and related spaces. The PI will attempt to answer
several open questions about positivity and finiteness properties of quantum
K-theory. The methods to be used in this project come from geometry and
combinatorics, with computer experiments as a central tool.