* 1503689
* Collaborative Research: A Field Campaign to Promote integration Between the Sea Ice Observational and Modeling Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Donald Perovich, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* diane mcknight
* 09/30/2017
* USD 75,608.00

The impacts of changing sea ice are being felt today on the shores of northern
Alaska, including in Barrow, Alaska, where much of the local residents' everyday
lives revolve around sea ice and its conditions. This grant will hold a course
in Barrow to bring together researchers who model sea ice with those who study
it in the field. It will entrain researchers at different stages of their
careers, in order to build interdisciplinary teams. Participants in the course
will receive an accelerated program on sea ice observations and models and meet
colleagues for future collaborative interdisciplinary activities. The course
will help direct future sea ice research by integrating observational and
modeling efforts. The group will also develop a white paper on future priorities
and activities in arctic system science as it relates to sea ice; and hold a
session at a major meeting focused on building bridges between the sea ice
observing and modeling communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will also
engage with the local Barrow community in outreach activities that will include
community presentations on models, predictive capabilities, and the future
outlook for sea ice. Barrow also provides an excellent opportunity for the
scientists to listen and learn from local residents who have a tremendous
understanding of sea ice, of the ongoing changes, and of the impact of those
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic has undergone dramatic change and
numerical models project this to continue for the foreseeable future. Perhaps
the most striking change is the decline in sea ice cover and the possibility of
ice-free summers within this century. Understanding the mechanisms behind sea
ice loss and its consequences for the larger Arctic and global systems is of
critical importance if we are to anticipate and plan for the future. One
impediment to progress in this area is a disconnect between the observational
and modeling communities. While there is a strong group of researchers observing
arctic sea ice and another strong group modeling it, these two groups have
remained largely distinct. This grant will support a field course for a one-week
introduction to sea ice observations and models based in Barrow, Alaska. Barrow
affords easy access to a range of sea ice conditions, excellent logistics, and
is a community impacted by the changes in arctic sea ice. The course will
include a mix of modelers and observers, drawing researchers from different
career stages. Each day there will be field observations on the shorefast sea
ice, as well as presentations about the treatment of sea ice in large-scale
models and practical sessions to provide hands-on experience with running models
and analyzing model output. There will be discussions of remote sensing tools
and products. Additional time will be targeted for discussions about future
directions of sea ice research and how to better integrate modeling and
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a tremendous opportunity to improve
our ability to observe and understand the ongoing changes in the arctic sea ice
cover, and to project future changes through a deeper connection between
observations and models. The course proposed here will remedy some of the
knowledge gaps within the sea ice research community. Observers will gain new
insight on the issues regarding the treatment of sea ice in large-scale models,
improving their ability to formulate observation strategies and networks.
Modelers will gain new appreciation for the heterogeneous complexity of sea ice
and its importance for coupled interactions. This will result in better-informed
methods to address questions of understanding arctic change and improved
integration and synthetic approaches to studying sea ice and its role in the
arctic system.