* 1503255
* Playing with the data:   Developing digital supports for middle school science teachers using game-based formative assessment
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Seth Corrigan, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,818,793.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use cycles of
design-based research to build new knowledge about how to facilitate teachers'
interpretation and use of digital game-based formative assessment data. The
research will also inform the revision and expansion of Playfully, an existing,
online data-reporting dashboard that can be used with multiple digital games.
The project is a collaboration between researchers at Education Development
Center Inc.'s Center for Children and Technology (EDC|CCT) and the assessment
and game development teams at GlassLab. The research and development teams will
engage in a three-year partnership with 60 middle-grade science teachers working
in diverse school settings in different parts of the country. The aim of the
project is to refine an online formative assessment platform that utilizes data
from a video game designed to teach argumentation at the middle school level. It
provides rigorous research on the design features of data tools and associated
materials available to teachers to inform their ongoing instruction (i.e.,
formative assessment tools) when using game-based
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of the results of this project
will include practical, evidence-based suggestions for supporting middle school
science teachers' use of digital games for assessment, and for the design and
implementation of data dashboards. Key audiences include educational game
designers, game-based assessment developers, formative assessment experts, and
leaders in middle grade science teaching and learning.