* 1503605
* Problems in Commutative Algebra:  Free Resolutions, Multiplicities, and Blowup Rings
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Bernd Ulrich, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 05/31/2020
* USD 185,000.00

This project is in commutative algebra, an area of pure mathematics with close
ties to algebraic geometry. Commutative algebra deals, in a wider sense, with
the qualitative study of systems of polynomial equations in several unknowns.
Solutions of such systems play an important role in many areas of science and
engineering, hence the proposed research has applied aspects as well. One of its
objectives is to devise numerical criteria for when the solution sets of
different systems of equations are "alike," another one aims at constructing
systems of equations that have a given geometric object, like a curve or a
surface, as its solution set. This second problem is also relevant for
applications in geometric modeling and computer-aided design. A third goal of
the project is to further develop a fundamental tool in algebra, called "free
resolutions." Free resolutions are a method to study complex algebraic
structures by means of a possibly infinite sequence of simpler objects, namely,
matrices.

In more technical terms, the topics of this project are equisingularity theory,
the implicitization problem for Rees algebras, algebraic properties of
multiplier ideals, the extension to local rings of results and techniques that
are inherent to the graded setting. To be more specific, a general goal in
equisingularity theory is to devise fiberwise numerical criteria for when a
family of analytic spaces is topologically trivial, is Whitney equisingular, or
satisfies other equisingularity conditions. With Kleiman and Validashti the PI
proved that a family of isolated singularities is Whitney equisingular, and
hence topologically trivial, if a newly defined generalized multiplicity, the
epsilon multiplicity, is constant across the family. Now the PI plans to examine
which stronger equisingularity conditions the constancy of the epsilon
multiplicity implies. A related, fundamental problem is to understand
singularities whose Jacobian module has epsilon multiplicity zero.
Equisingularity conditions are closely related to numerical criteria for
integral dependence of modules, and the PI wishes to devise such a criterion
based on intersection numbers. A classical problem in elimination theory is to
determine the defining ideals of Rees algebras, which gives, in particular, the
implicit equations of graphs and images of rational maps between projective
spaces. The PI plans to work on this problem for regular maps parametrizing a
surface or, more generally, for rational maps with codimension three base locus.
In recent joint work with Corso, Huneke, and Polini, the PI introduced the
notion of distance in free resolutions over local rings and used it to study
integral closures of ideals. Now the PI proposes this notion as a substitute for
the shifts in graded free resolutions, in order to extend known results from the
graded to the local case -- such as criteria for the Cohen-Macaulay and
Gorenstein properties of associated graded rings and bounds for the Loewy length
of modules having finite projective dimension. Another of the PI's goals is
tostudy algebraic properties of (Mather-Jacobian) multiplier ideals on singular
varieties and to determine which ideals can be realized as multiplier ideals.