* 1503057
* Visual Access to Mathematics: Professional Development for Teachers of English Learners
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Mark Driscoll, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 07/31/2021
* USD 3,095,218.00

The demands placed on mathematics teachers of all students have increased with
the introduction of college and career readiness standards. At the same time,
the mathematics achievement of English Language Learners (ELLs) lags behind that
of their peers. This project addresses a critical need, developing professional
development materials to address the teachers of ELLs. The project will create
resources to help teachers build ELLs' mathematical proficiency through the
design and development of professional development materials building on visual
representations (VRs) for mathematical reasoning across a range of mathematical
topics. The project will study how to enhance teachers' pedagogical content
knowledge that is critical to fostering ELLs' mathematical problem solving and
communication to help support fluency in using VRs among teachers and students.
To broaden the participation of students who have traditionally not demonstrated
high levels of achievement in mathematics, a critical underpinning to further
success in the sciences and engineering, there will need to be greater support
for teachers of these students using techniques that have been demonstrated to
improve student learning.

The project will use an iterative design and development process to develop a
blended learning model of professional development on using VRs with a 30-hour
face-to-face summer institute and sixteen 2-hour online learning sessions.
Teachers and teacher-leaders will help support the development of the
professional development materials. A cluster randomized control trial will
study the piloting of the materials and their impact on teacher outcomes. Thirty
middle schools from Massachusetts and Maine serving high numbers of ELLs, with
approximately 120 teachers, will be randomly assigned to receive the treatment
or control conditions. Using a two-level random intercepts hierarchical linear
model, the study will explore the impact of participation in the professional
development on teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching and instructional
practice. The pilot study will also explore the feasibility of delivering the
professional development model more broadly. It builds on prior work that has
shown efficacy in geometry, but expands the work beyond a single area in
mathematics. At the same time, they will test the model for feasibility of broad
implementation.

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.