* 1503793
* Discovery-Based Student Learning with the Haystack 37-m Radio Telescope
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Lynn Matthews, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 249,662.00

This project will support the development of a national program of undergraduate
STEM education through hands-on access to a world-class astronomical instrument.
The program will expose students to a broad range of core science and
engineering topics and techniques by means of direct participation in real-world
research. The potency of curiosity-driven learning will be exploited to educate
and motivate both future researchers and students destined for careers in
industries that depend on core STEM competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project funds a 2-year pilot study to implement student research projects at the
37-meter radio telescope of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Haystack
Observatory. During this pilot, a cost-effective remote observing capability for
the antenna will be developed and tested, opening up access to the telescope to
a diverse body of students from institutes of higher learning. Participation in
this program will expose students and instructors to current problems in
astronomy and astrophysics and allow the establishment of linkages between basic
physics, mathematics, and engineering concepts and their application to solving
real-world problems. Tutorials, instructional materials, and data reduction
tools will be developed and improved with feedback from students and
participating instructors. The student research carried out under this program
will produce scientific data capable of advancing diverse areas of astrophysics,
including astrochemistry, star formation, and stellar evolution. Examples of
specific project topics include hydrogen recombination line spectra and
astronomical masers. This program will provide an avenue to carry out original
research to a wide range of students, including those at two-year colleges and
non-research universities who do not presently have access to such
opportunities. It will also provide an innovative means for college and
university instructors to incorporate discovery-based research into STEM
curricula. Educators of underrepresented groups have been recruited to
participate, starting with the development and testing stages. Development work
carried out under this project will provide opportunities for STEM students in
the Research Experience for Undergraduates program.