* 1503129
* Intermediate Water Records of Radiocarbon and Temperature from Deep-sea Corals since the LGM
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jess Adkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Intermediate waters in the modern ocean play an important role in global heat,
salt, and nutrient transports, and have been at the heart of many explanations
of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and the deglaciation. Antarctic Bottom Water
(AABW) is crucial in setting the pCO2 of the past but because it upwells and
sinks at virtually the same temperature, it is not capable of driving
significant poleward heat transport. Intermediate waters, on the other hand,
contain a large component of subtropical waters that must cool before sinking to
sub-thermocline depths. Here temperature contrasts can be large between source
waters and sinking waters giving rise to globally significant heat
transports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will monitor the radiocarbon
content and temperature of intermediate waters from the LGM through the
deglaciation in the North Atlantic, using existing deep sea coral samples
collected from the New England Seamounts. The research team will measure the
U-series ages, radiocarbon content, and clumped isotope composition of the
fossil corals to constrain the characteristics of intermediate waters over the
past ~25,000 years. This time series will help constrain the role of
intermediate waters in glacial and deglacial climate change. Models have
predicted, and a few studies have found, intermediate depth warming during
Heinrich Stadial 1 (HS1), and the resulting data will be uniquely suited to
investigate the rate and heat content of the intermediate circulation since the
last glacial period. Funding supports the training of a PhD student, as well as
outreach via public lectures and short videos on the links between the oceans
and climate.