* 1503409
* AEESP Proposal and Career Workshop: Environmental Engineering and Science: At the Nexus; Location: Yale University, CT; Date: June 13-16,2015
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Jordan Peccia, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

1506883&lt;br/&gt;Peccia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AEESP Proposal and Career
Workshop: Environmental Engineering and Science: At the Nexus;
&lt;br/&gt;Location: Yale University, CT; &lt;br/&gt;Date: June
13-16,2015&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AEESP Research and Education
Conference is the flagship event for members of the Association of Environmental
Engineering and Science Professors (AEESP). The main purpose of the conference
is to exchange information on novel research and educational activities. This
conference also serves as a venue for professional networking, and the
preparation of early-career faculty and students. The 2015 AEESP Research and
Education Conference was awarded to Yale University in New Haven, CT. The
Conference will be held June 13, 14, 15 and 16, 2015. The conference attendance
of ~450 people is expected, including 250 graduate student attendees. The
conference aims to increase participation through incorporation of professional
practitioners in workshop activities, holding workshops for traditional
undergraduate institutions, conducting a workshop session to promote U.S.-China
collaborations, publishing selected research presentations in the Journal of
Environmental Engineering Science. A post-conference report that contains
highlights and findings from the Conference will be published in the quarterly
AEESP newsletter and will be disseminated through other appropriate channels
(web site, e-mail distribution). We will strive to obtain a balance of male and
female participants as workshop organizers and panelists and invited NSF CAREER
workshop attendees. Plenary sessions will have a significantly stronger
education component, while keynote speakers will focus on broadening the fields
impact. Workshops specifically target graduate student and junior faculty
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference theme is: "Environment
Engineering: At the Nexus" and reflects the growing recognition that a narrow
focus on individual environmental problems may lead to solutions with unintended
consequences, causing other environmental problems. To address these themes,
this conference starts with a Grand Opportunities workshop to identify and
present challenges and opportunities in Environmental Engineering for the 21st
century. In addition to faculty and student development, the Sunday workshops
and panels focus on teaching methods and international collaboration required to
meet these challenges. Plenary lectures and conference sessions will provide a
dedicated forum for environmental scientists and engineers to develop and share
cutting edge research and new environmental engineering approaches.