* 1503511
* Developing Teachers' Capacity to Promote Argumentation in Secondary Science
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* William Sandoval, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,770,500.00

This project will produce insights into the challenges teachers face in
modifying their teaching in the substantial and complex ways demanded by the
Next Generation Science Standards. This project will develop and study a program
of professional development to help middle and high school science teachers
support their students to learn to argue scientifically. The program includes
strategies for organizing science activities to create contexts where students
have something to argue about and teaching practices that promote sustained,
productive argumentation among students. Results will document what aspects of
these new practices teachers find easier and more difficult to implement, and
how challenges are influenced by the urban schooling contexts in which project
teachers work. The project will also further our understanding of how site-based
professional development can be structured to support teacher learning and
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a longitudinal study of a
cohort of 30 secondary science teachers from an urban school district in
California. The professional development (PD) program will be organized around
intensive summer institutes followed by 2 school-based lesson study cycles each
year, facilitated by trained coaches. The PD work will be carried out over three
years. All PD sessions will be recorded for interaction analysis to identify
variations in coaching and teacher participation and the influences of such
variation on teacher learning. Repeated measures of teachers' conceptions of
argumentation will be given over 3 years as a measure of teacher learning. An
observation protocol will be developed and used to measure teacher talk and its
change over time. A sub-sample of teachers' classrooms will be video recorded to
produce a longitudinal record for interaction analyses to link teacher talk to
patterns of student argumentation. The third year of the project will add
measures of student learning and link them to variations in teacher practice.
The final year of the project will produce retrospective analyses that link
pathways in teacher learning to features of the PD program and teachers'
participation. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.