* 1503860
* Collaborative Research: Subgrid-scale Models for Large-eddy Simulation of Cloud Formation and Evolution
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Fotini Chow, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 399,999.00

Clouds are important to the earth's energy balance and a regulator of both
climate and weather. The estimation of cloud formation, cloud cover,
precipitation, etc., for both climate and weather prediction is accomplished
with numerical simulations. Despite computational advances and for the
foreseeable future, simulations of the real atmosphere for weather and climate
prediction will feature results in which a significant fraction of the energy,
heat and vapor fluxes, etc., will not be resolved and must be modeled. This
project's goal is to develop, validate and make available to the community
improved and more physically realistic turbulence models for the subgrid- and
subfilter-scales in moist-atmosphere large-eddy simulation (LES) simulation
codes, in collaboration between UC Berkeley, Stanford University, and NCAR
scientists.

Two new subgrid-scale (SGS) model sets (one using dynamic methods and one using
a linear, algebraic model) will be developed for all elements of a cloud
simulation, i.e., momentum, heat, water's liquid and vapor phases, graupel, the
prognostic equations in the microphysics, etc. These SGS closures have improved
mean fields and higher-order statistics in previous boundary layer simulations,
but have yet to be applied to clouds. The SGS models will be constructed within
the explicit filtering and reconstruction framework, which reduces numerical
errors and provides a more physical representation of turbulent stresses.

Intellectual Merit: The project aims to provide significantly improved models
for the unresolved fields (including momentum, heat, water vapor, liquid, and
other scalar fluxes), to yield deeper understanding of the physical processes
being modeled, and to validate those models in test case simulations of
realistic clouds. The other goal is to clarify the validity of using such
subroutines in the Terra Incognita [TI] / Gray Zone of atmospheric simulations,
i.e., the zone of grid resolution in which flow features such as convective
thermals are partly resolved and partly sub-grid. This zone is becoming an ever
greater challenge as numerical simulations cover more and more length scales.
The role of SGS closures in the Terra Incognita is still largely unexplored,
particularly in the case of clouds. Building upon prior research on SGS
modeling, the research will (1) create new SGS equation sets for the moist
atmosphere, (2) apply them in a priori tests and then (3) carry out simulations
of field-scale situations covering clear convective boundary layers, trade-wind
cumulus with and without precipitation, shallow cumulus, and deep convection.
These simulations will be set up to assess the performance of the equation sets
for their accuracy and efficiency and to assess model performance in the TI (or
Gray Zone).

Broader Impacts: There are two domains of broader impacts. First, successful
completion of this work will yield improved predictions of cloud generation and
evolution in the simulations. Because the code on which the work is based is
widely used internationally, this will be a major benefit to the community.
Given that accurate prediction of cloud formation and behavior is a critical
element in weather and climate prediction and, in particular, rainfall, the work
has the potential for significant impact across the weather domain. Previous
experience suggests that the new SGS models will be easily transported to other
codes as well, which will further broaden the impact of this work. Second, this
project aims through its collaboration with NCAR to give broad and high quality
training to a postdoctoral researcher, who will benefit from the exposure to the
modeling expertise at Berkeley and Stanford and the modeling and microphysics
expertise at NCAR. In addition, a Stanford undergraduate student will work on
the project to complement the work of the postdoctoral researcher.