* 1503144
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Modalities and Time-scale of Climate Variability During the Late Holocene in Southwestern North America
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Matthew Lachniet, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2019
* USD 185,684.00

This award generally aims to integrate high-precision age-dated 5,000 year-old
speleothems with isotopic and chemical data from various environmental proxies
in the southwestern United States. This study will focus on climate modulators
that impact regional hydrologic cycles on differing time-scales. These
modulators include the inter-annual varying El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO),
the decadal and multi-decadal Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and the Atlantic
Multi-Decadal Oscillation (AMO), and solar variability which may act across
varied time-scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This region was chosen for the study
because it has well-documented hydrologic sensitivity to climate forcing and
modulation. The western United States has a long history of climate induced
social disruption, dating back to pre-history. Understanding these natural
changes will help contribute to a possible predictive capability of future
changes in the hydrologic cycle. Such a predictive capability would be a
societal benefit to the United States in that it could result in better resource
planning and management. A further benefit of the project is the support of a
graduate student at a minority serving university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speleothems from regional caves provide an opportunity to
observe possible changes in the modalities of these climate modulators over the
long term and have demonstrated their fidelity to isotopic, chemical and
physical climate proxies that are radiometrically datable using advances in
uranium-series based chronometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
specifically collect and evaluate data from two sites with different seasonal
hydrologic cycles with the aim of isolating the seasonal component of observed
changes and the responsible climate variables. For example, the North American
Monsoon (NAM) is modulated by changes in the AMO. This seasonal delineation is
important because it could help solve the puzzle of the change in coherence
between the NAM and other recently documented Northern Hemisphere monsoons.