* 1503609
* NeTS: Small: Towards Real-Time Video Streaming in the Internet of Underwater Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Tommaso Melodia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 03/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The prospect of an 'Underwater Internet' has raised significant interest among
the general public because of its potential in facilitating many commercial,
scientific, and military activities at sea. Still, in spite of the increased
attention by the research community in the last few years, underwater networks
are still in their infancy. Current state-of-the-art underwater acoustic
technology can support mostly point-to-point, low-data-rate, and delay-tolerant
applications. This project is attempting to advance the state of the art in
underwater networking by investigating two fundamental issues. First, it is
developing technology to communicate over short-range links at higher
transmission rates than available today. Second, it is developing technology to
integrate the newly-designed acoustic communication technology with the Internet
to guarantee interoperability with existing networks. The new capabilities will
be demonstrated by focusing on video streaming application scenarios for
underwater surveillance. The project will integrate research and education by
establishing cross-listed graduate/undergraduate courses on acoustic networking
and its applications, activities to reach out to underrepresented communities,
and pursuit of technology transfer activities in this field.

The project proposes a paradigm shift in how information is carried over short-
range acoustic links, by developing novel carrierless transmission and multiple
access techniques. Short, properly designed/shaped pulses are transmitted in the
ultrasonic spectral regime following an adaptive time-hopping pattern with a
superimposed spreading code of variable length. The effect is nearly seamless
physical/MAC layer integration, and potential for highest data rate
communication by properly optimized spreading sequences. Secondary -yet
important- benefits of the proposed approach are low cost and weight oscillator-
free transducers and excellent receiver interference suppressing capabilities.
Integration with the Internet is being pursued by means of an adaptation layer
that acts as an interface between higher-layer protocols and the underwater
links by performing header compression, packet fragmentation, and creation of a
virtual common broadcast space.