* 1503454
* Collaborative Research: TRUmath and Lesson Study: Supporting fundamental and sustainable improvement in high school mathematics teaching
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Alan Schoenfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 06/30/2020
* USD 792,062.00

Given the changes in instructional practices needed to support high quality
mathematics teaching and learning based on college and career readiness
standards, school districts need to provide professional learning opportunities
for teachers that support those changes. The project will build a coherent and
scalable plan for providing these opportunities in high school mathematics
departments, a traditionally difficult unit of organizational change. Based on
the TRUmath framework, characterizing the five essential dimensions of powerful
mathematics classrooms, the project brings together a focus on curricular
materials that support teaching, Lesson Study protocols and materials, and a
professional learning community-based professional development model. The
project will design and revise professional development and coaching guides and
lesson study mathematical resources built around the curricular materials. The
project will study changes in instructional practice and impact on student
learning. By documenting the supports used in the Oakland Unified School
District where the research and development will be conducted, the resources can
be used by other districts and in similar work by other research-practice
partnerships.

This project hypothesizes that the quality of classroom instruction can be
defined by five dimensions - quality of the mathematics; cognitive demand of the
tasks; access to mathematics content in the classroom; student agency,
authority, and identity; and uses of assessment. The project will use an
iterative design process to develop and refine a suite of tool, including a
conversation guide to support productive dialogue between teachers and coaches,
support materials for building site-based professional learning materials, and
formative assessment lessons using Lesson Study as a mechanism to enact reforms
of these dimensions. The study will use a pre-post design and natural variation
to student the relationships between these dimensions, changes in teachers'
instructional practice, and student learning using hierarchical linear modeling
with random intercept models with covariates. Qualitative of the changes in
teachers' instructional practices will be based on coding of observations based
on the TRUmath framework. The study will also use qualitative analysis
techniques to identify themes from surveys and interviews on factors that
promote or hinder the effectiveness of the intervention.