* 1503349
* Fostering (STEM) Identity through the Transition (FIT) to College among Underrepresented Students
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 349,229.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students from historically
underrepresented minority (URM) populations to successfully complete high
quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. The Broadening Participation Research (BPR) funding
opportunity provides three-year support to enhance the understanding of the
underlying issues affecting the differential participation and success rates of
students from underrepresented groups in STEM. Using the Fostering Identity
through Transitions (FIT) model, researchers at Stony Brook University (SBU)
will study cohorts of STEM and non-STEM majors to test the FIT model with STEM
programs, such as the SUNY LSAMP program, that seem likely to boost STEM
identity by providing STEM skills training, research mentoring, and community
building opportunities that parallel the FIT model components. The research
fills important scientific knowledge gaps in broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM by conducting an in-depth theory-driven
examination of the needed experiences that lead to engagement, retention, and
overall success versus withdrawal among URM and non-URM students particularly
during the first two years of college matriculation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of the three-year study is to test whether the FIT model can be used to
predict STEM success outcomes among students from historically underrepresented
populations. A quantitative and qualitative data intensive methodological
approach of "experience sampling" will be employed to capture pivotal academic
and social experiences that lead to college success during critcal first and
second year transition. An interdisciplinary advisory board will provide
oversight of the project. Project results will be disseminated broadly via the
institution's website, publishing of scholarly articles, conference
presentations, and among institutional administrators.