* 1503155
* Precipitation Mechanisms over Complex Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Robert Houze, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 660,546.00

The three major types of precipitating cloud systems in the atmosphere are deep
convection, frontal systems, and tropical cyclones. This project examines how
each is affected by the presence of mountains. The research will analyze
existing datasets including those of several past National Science Foundation
funded field campaigns.

Intellectual Merit: Heavy precipitation and flooding in regions of complex
terrain can be understood and anticipated by identifying key ingredients. This
research identifies such ingredients associated with each of the three principal
storm types. The ingredients for deep convection will be examined and identified
by comparing behavior of heavy rain-producing convection over the Himalayas,
Andes, Central Mountains of Taiwan, and the Sierra Madre Occidental of Mexico.
These different venues provide a variety of synoptic and orographic settings so
that the important ingredients for intense rainfall and flooding will be
identified through comparison of the storms in these different regions. The
parental synoptic conditions range from baroclinic waves dipping equatorward
over Asia, to monsoonal conditions, to equatorial waves, and diurnal forcings.
The ingredients for enhancement of precipitation when fronts cross mountain
ranges will be examined for the coastal mountains of British Columbia to test
the hypothesis that shear and thermally-induced turbulence enhance windward side
precipitation. The ingredients associated with the passage of tropical cyclones
over mountains will be studied by examining Hurricane Karl (2005) and Tropical
Storm Dolly (2014) as they entered and crossed the Sierra Madre Oriental of
Mexico. The roles of terrain-locked gravity waves and triggering of convection
over the mountains will be examined as ingredients for modifying and prolonging
the precipitation in the eyewalls and rainbands of tropical cyclones. Through
studying these types of enhancement of precipitation by the major atmospheric
precipitation systems as they pass over mountains and identifying key
ingredients, this project will contribute to a more general understanding of the
effects of mountains on precipitating clouds.

Broader Impacts: This work will have the broader impact of laying groundwork for
improved forecasting of heavy precipitation in regions of the earth most prone
to flooding and disastrous societal impacts. Further, by better understanding
how mountains affect storms, future studies may better anticipate how the
patterns of occurrence of natural disasters might be altered in a changing
climate. In addition, this project will optimize the use of past field campaign
datasets and will contribute to training women and minorities for atmospheric
sciences research.