* 1503759
* Efficient Generation of N-Photon Bundles Using a Solid State Cavity QED System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jelena Vuckovic, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a new platform (system) for studying the strong interaction between
light and matter, and to employ it to generate pulses of light containing a
precisely determined integer number (n) of indivisible particles of light -
photons. The system comprises a set of nano-sized mirrors that recirculate light
(a nanoscale cavity) around a semiconductor artificial atom (a quantum dot).
This enables a strong interaction between individual photons, which is otherwise
impossible. The system is probed with a series of laser pulses (consisting of
non-interacting photons, where the number of photons per pulse is not well-
defined). When laser pulses enter this medium, the medium filters (selects) a
desired number of photons per each pulse and transmits them to the output. The
potential applications include improvements in secure quantum communication,
quantum simulation, and quantum sensing. This work therefore combines photonic
and quantum engineering with materials science, nanotechnology, and fundamental
physics. The project contains educational and outreach activities integrated
with research, including active recruitment of minorities and women for science
and engineering careers, development of new classes and textbooks, undergraduate
research and advising, and participation in outreach programs for K-12 students
and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to continue
fundamental studies of quantum dot-nanocavity quantum electrodynamics, and more
specifically, to explore the strong nonlinear properties of such systems in the
detuned regime, and to use the knowledge gained from these studies to develop
on-chip sources of highly correlated photons (indistinguishable single photons
and n-photon bundles on demand). A platform to achieve these goals consists of
high quality factor and small mode volume photonic crystal resonators that are
coupled to single, electrically tunable quantum dots. This approach can lead to
nearly perfect photon indistinguishability and high photon bundle generation
rates, while preferentially generating the desired number of photons per pulse.
The specific research goals are to study the resonantly driven and detuned
strongly coupled quantum dot-cavity system, and to use it to develop sources of
indistinguishable single photons and n-photon bundles on demand with high count
rates. The ability to generate nonclassical states of light beyond the single-
photon level paves the way for novel concepts in quantum communication and
quantum sensing. Therefore, the research activities described here have a broad
impact on not only the communities focused on quantum nanophotonics or nonlinear
optics, but also on those exploring sensors or quantum technologies.