* 1503226
* 2015-2020 Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation - Louisiana Senior Level Alliance
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Diola Bagayoko, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,354,022.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations to successfully complete high quality degree programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern University and A&amp;M College, lead
institution for the Louis Stokes-Louisiana Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LS-LAMP), consists of a consortium of twelve two-and four-year
institutions and one research organization in the state. The alliance, located
in a NSF Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
jurisdiction, will expand its research capability through this project by
producing up to 900 new STEM baccalaureate degrees annually and retaining 25% of
these students for STEM graduate studies by 2020. These goals will be
accomplished by expanding partnerships with the pre-college community, community
colleges, 4-year institutions, and other institutional, state, and national
programs, public and private research organizations, and funding sources to
expand student and faculty opportunities and to address continuing
sustainability and institutionalization of successful practices in engagement
and retention of STEM students. The continued implementation of the Ten Strand
Systemic Mentoring Model and best practices in teaching and learning for STEM
minority undergraduate students (including financial support and research
participation locally, nationally, and internationally) will be employed over
the next five years in addition to enhancing the instructional and research
infrastructures of partner institutions to achieve project
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation will be conducted by an external
evaluation review board. Project results will be disseminated via the alliance
and partner institution websites and the LS-LAMP "Best Practices Manual" and
Journal.