* 1503611
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative: Documenting Fossil Marine Invertebrate Communities of the Eastern Pacific: Faunal Responses to Environmental Change over the last 66 million years
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Gregory Dietl, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 352,407.00

Fossils provide our only direct evidence of past biodiversity and how individual
organisms to ecosystems have responded to past and long-term environmental
change. This project fills a major gap in the documentation of past
environmental change, making available digitized data from the especially rich
fossil record of the eastern Pacific marine invertebrate communities of the
Cenozoic, the 66 million years that have passed since the extinction of the
dinosaurs. Digitization and integration of these data will foster increased
accessibility, efficient analysis to understand past change, the identification
of factors involved in that change, and enable predictions for how current
biodiversity may be impacted by future change. Development of virtual fieldwork
experiences will assist stakeholders and educators in understanding how field
data and fossil collections are used to infer past ecosystem and environmental
conditions.

The data currently exist as a vast collection of fossil specimens and printed
materials distributed among multiple natural history collections: this project
involves 7 primary institutions, one small collection and one federal
institution and will integrate this digitized specimen data with the other two
ongoing fossil networks through the web portal iDigPaleo, expanding the resource
for fossil invertebrate information by spanning over 500 million years. This
wealth of data will provide resources not only to researchers, but will be made
available to K-16 educators, government, industry, and the general public.
Through the national resource (iDigBio) these data will be integrated with
information on modern organisms providing the means to understand important
questions on niches, environmental change, transitions in sea levels, etc.
Additionally, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the modern
uses of natural history collections. This award is made as part of the National
Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing
Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this
award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).