* 1503481
* SimScientists Games: Development of Simulation-Based Game Designs to Enhance Formative Assessment and Deep Science Learning in Middle School
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Mark Loveland, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,831,545.00

The Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) program seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of
innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project is a four-year design and development study submitted to
the assessment strand of the program. It will focus on understanding how
educational games, designed according to research-based learning and assessment
design principles, can better assess and promote students' science knowledge,
application of science process skills, and motivation and engagement in
learning. The project will develop a new genre of games to serve as formative
assessment resources designed to collect evidence of science learning during
gameplay, provide feedback and coaching in the form of hints, and reinforce
middle grade (6th-8th) students' life science concepts and investigation
practices about ecosystems described in the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) (Achieve, 2013). The games will build on the designs of the simulation-
based, curriculum-embedded assessments developed in previous NSF-funded efforts,
which include student progress reports and reflection activities that allow
teachers to provide feedback to students and adjust instruction. The design of
the games will draw from multiple lines of research, such as cognition,
particularly model-based learning; principled assessment design; and motivation.
Intended to provide engaging activities for understanding and investigating the
system components, roles, interactions, and population dynamics of ecosystems,
the project will produce two sets of comprehensive games: (1) Organisms and
Interactions, and (2) Emergent Population Levels: Managing an Ecosystem. Each
game will consist of progressively advanced mini-games. Twenty-four California
Bay Area middle school teachers will participate in the study. Teacher
professional development (PD) will include face-to-face sessions and an online
platform that permits a wide range of interactions among participants and the
facilitators. The PD will emphasize the alignment of the ecosystem simulation-
based curriculum modules with their state standards, instructional materials,
and the new games. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address six research
questions: (1) How well do the games align with the ecosystem crosscutting
concepts, core ideas, and inquiry practices in the NGSS?; (2) How well do game
components meet quality standards?; (3) How well do the games integrate with the
existing simulation-based curriculum modules and the teachers' existing
instructional sequence?; (4) What effect does the use of the games have on
students' understanding of the science concepts, scientific practices, and
collaboration skills?; (5) How does success in gameplay relate to improved
performance on the external outcome measures comprised of the simulation-based
benchmark and the pre/posttest?; and (6) How does the use of the games affect
students' engagement in science learning? In a Year 1 usability study, the
project will test, analyze, and revise alpha versions of the games. In Year 2, a
classroom feasibility study of beta versions will inform further revisions. In
Year 3, six teachers will pilot-test the games. A second pilot test in Year 4
will examine the effectiveness of the games by comparing student performance in
classes using the existing simulation-based curriculum-embedded assessments and
reflection activities with classes using the curriculum-embedded assessments
plus the new games. Data collection and analysis strategies include: (a)
alignment reviews; (b) focus groups and usability testing; (c) cognitive labs
for construct validity and usability; (d) game reports (badges); (e)
pre/posttest of American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)
items; (f) benchmark assessment data; (g) student interest in the games and
science; (h) teacher surveys; (i) case studies; (j) game quality analysis; (k)
differential item functioning; (l) analysis of covariance; and (m) analysis of
variance on posttest scores (outcome variable) to compare the means across
student groups (by intervention mode) and their prior science achievement
levels.