* 1503986
* Conference: Dynamics Days 2015, January 9-11, 2015, Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Houston, Texas
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 01/31/2016
* USD 49,964.00

From Friday, January 9, 2015 Sunday to January 11, 2015 the Conference:
"Dynamics Days" will be hosted by the Center for Theoretical Biological Physics
(CTBP), an NSF Physics Frontier Center. Located in Houston with participation
from Rice University, the Baylor College of Medicine and the University of
Houston, the CTBP mission is to foster the convergence of physics and biology to
make sense of complex living systems. At the same time, results from this
research will feed back into physics in general, and help develop new ways of
thinking about all complex system phenomena. The conference will be attended by
100-200 people, with the core of the audience consisting from physicists and
mathematicians, but including a substantial number of people from other fields
such as engineering, biology, and chemistry. The conference format consists of a
single plenary session. Topics covered in the conference will include dynamics
on and of complex networks, nonlinear dynamics of biological systems,
synchronization and self-organization of nonlinear systems, geophysical fluid
dynamics, and pattern formation. This conference is essential for maintaining
coherence among all the disparate researchers involved in using physics and
mathematics to make sense of complex systems. Thus, researchers focusing on the
Physics of Living Systems (PoLS) will be able to interact directly with
researchers who may be pioneering new methods, in other contexts. Conversely,
scientists who have never been exposed to the enormous challenges encountered in
the biological realm will get to hear talks by leading PoLS researchers and may
have much to offer. Even as the PoLS field reaches out to the biology community,
maintaining ties with physics remain a high priority. Dynamics Days will help
make sure that this occurs. This meeting will bring together scientists actively
engaged in Dynamics research. Most of the participants in Dynamics Days will be
students and postdocs coming from a broad spectrum of the community. They will
all be expected to present posters on their own research work. The most
immediate broad impact will be on broadening the educational experience for the
junior participants. In addition, local undergraduates, both from Rice and from
the CTBP's existing network of collaborating minority- and Hispanic- serving
institutions will be invited.