* 1503153
* STEM Practice-rich Investigations for NGSS Teaching (SPRINT)
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Julie Yu, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 05/31/2017
* USD 446,253.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM Practice-rich Investigations for NGSS
Teaching (SPRINT) is an exploratory project that will research and develop
resources and a model for professional learning needed to meet the demand of
implementing the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). The Exploratorium
Teacher Institute will engage middle school science teachers in a one-year
professional learning program to study how familiar routines and classroom
tools, specifically hands-on science activities, can serve as starting points
for teacher learning. The Teacher Institute will use existing hands-on
activities as the basis for developing "practice-rich investigations" that
provide teachers and students with opportunities for deep engagement with
science and engineering practices. The results of this project will include: (1)
empirical evidence from professional learning experiences that support teacher
uptake of practice-rich investigations in workshops and their classrooms; (2) a
portfolio of STEM practice-rich investigations developed from existing hands-on
activities that are shown to enhance teacher understanding of NGSS; and (3) a
design tool that supports teachers in modifying existing activities to align
with NGSS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPRINT conjectures that to address the immediate
challenge of supporting teachers to implement NGSS, professional learning models
should engage teachers in the same active learning experiences they are expected
to provide for their students and that building on teachers' existing strengths
and understanding through an asset-based approach could lead to a more
sustainable implementation. SPRINT will use design-based research methods to
study (a) how creating NGSS-aligned, practice-rich investigations from teachers'
existing resources provides them with experiences for three-dimensional science
learning and (b) how engaging in these investigations and reflecting on
classroom practice can support teachers in understanding and implementing NGSS
learning experiences.