* 1503900
* Collaborative Research: Community based permafrost and climate monitoring in rural Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2020
* Santosh Panda, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/29/2020
* USD 460,778.00

The overarching goal of this project is to help the tribal communities of Upper
Kuskokwim region take the lead in assessing and responding to the environmental
changes that are coming with warming climate and thawing permafrost. Alaska?s
land, water, plants, wildlife, and seasons are undergoing a great upheaval, and
its people, especially the tribal communities living in remote villages are
directly and severely impacted by these changes. The project will help build the
tribal capacity to monitor changes in local climate and permafrost by providing
the Tribes the scientific knowledge and skills necessary to acquire, analyze,
and interpret scientific data through training and education. The project will
establish local climate and permafrost observation system and map land cover and
permafrost in the Upper Kuskokwim region. It will also develop a geo-hazard map
for the region to facilitate safe subsistence and recreational practices and
land use.&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this project are to 1) engage
traditionally-underserved tribal communities of the Upper Kuskokwim region in
permafrost and climate change research, 2) build community capacity to monitor
changes in local climate and permafrost, 3) model the state and distribution of
near-surface permafrost, and 4) develop a geo-hazard map. The high-resolution
land cover, permafrost, and geo-hazard maps will serve the communities? need to
identify sites experiencing rapid changes and could be hazardous. The land cover
map will serve as a baseline map to detect future changes in land cover. The
modeled permafrost maps of current and future decades will help identify sites
where permafrost degradation will likely be severe if the climate continues to
warm. &lt;br/&gt;The project will offer the traditionally-underserved tribal
communities of the Upper Kuskokwim region and the Tribal Council an opportunity
to engage in climate research. It will provide them the motivation, resources,
climate science knowledge and skills to study the impact of climate change on
their tribal way of life and environment. The data, knowledge, and skills gained
through this project will benefit the tribal communities in adaptive management
of subsistence resources, implementation of safe land use practices, and
planning for the future. The scientific community will also benefit hugely by
having an improved understanding of permafrost dynamics, access to field data
and maps from this understudied remote part of Alaska. In addition, the project
will provide outreach and workshops on climate change to the community members
in Nikolai and to all students and teachers in Iditarod Areas School District
through the Distance Learning Center facility in Fairbanks, Alaska.