* 1503883
* Topics in Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Richard Schwartz, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2019
* USD 452,574.00

This research project concerns the analysis of the patterns that emerge when a
simple geometric construction is repeated indefinitely. An example of a
geometric problem having to do with the arrangement of shapes in space is: If
one (endlessly) glues together equilateral triangles so that 7 triangles go
around each vertex, is it possible to embed the resulting surface in
3-dimensional space? An example of a problem having to do with geometric shapes
in the plane is to determine the possible shapes swept out by the path of a
frictionless ball as it rolls (endlessly) around the inside of a polygonal table
and bounces off the sides. Such processes occur both in nature and in a purely
abstract mathematical context, and often produce mysterious, intricate, and
beautiful patterns. These processes have connections to number theory, geometry,
and physics. This research project studies these processes via numerical
simulation to generate hypotheses that are subsequently confirmed or disproved
via rigorous mathematical justification.

Speaking more technically, the principal investigator will continue
investigations into geometric dynamics, concentrating on polytope exchange
transformations and outer billiards. One common theme in this work is the
construction of higher dimensional compactifications of non-compact low-
dimensional dynamical systems. Another common theme is the appearance of
renormalization phenomena. In the situation of interest, one has a fiber bundle
where the base space is the parameter space and each fiber is a polytope
exchange transformation based on the parameter it lies over. The goal is then to
find an auxiliary transformation of the base space which relates the dynamics at
the fiber over one point to the dynamics of the fiber over the image of the
point under the transformation. For instance, this seems to happen when one
studies the symbolic dynamics of a process, and this project aims to find a
general theory for this. The principal investigator will also study a number of
geometric iterations, such as the pentagram map, a projectively natural map on
the space of polygons that is related to integrable systems and cluster
algebras. Finally, the principal investigator plans to attack a number of
longstanding unsolved problems in geometry, such as the square peg conjecture.