* 1503507
* Math Snacks Early Algebra: Using Games and Inquiry to Help Students Transition from Number to Variable
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Theodore Stanford, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,999,995.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

Many U.S. students enter college without the necessary background in algebra to
be successful in advanced mathematics and science courses, and are thereby
blocked from many rewarding careers. Oftentimes, the problem goes back to early
algebra in grades 4-6, where students are introduced to abstract formulations
before they understand the underlying ideas and the reasons for the questions
being asked. As a result of inadequate preparation many students turn away from
mathematics when faced with abstract algebra. Without mathematics, students are
not able to enter the STEM field which results in a weakened workforce in these
fields in the United States. In this 4-year Full Research and Development
project, Math Snacks Early Algebra: Using Games and Inquiry to Help Students
Transition from Number to Variable, the interdisciplinary research group from
New Mexico State University will build on their success in using games to
increase students' understanding of proportional reasoning and fractions. They
will develop games to build conceptual understanding of key early algebra
topics. The materials will be freely accessible on the web in both English and
Spanish. The project will develop 4-5 games. Each game will include supporting
materials for use by students in inquiry-based classroom lessons, and web-based
professional development tools for teachers.

Most students do not understand the variety of distinct ways that variables are
used in mathematics: unknowns to be solved for, related quantities, general
properties of numbers, and other uses. Algebra courses often emphasize the rules
of manipulation, with less time spent on the underlying ideas. Students see
variables as confusing new material, rather than as shortcuts for making sense
of numbers, or as powerful tools for analyzing interesting problems. This
hinders students' later interest and progress in STEM courses and careers.The
intellectual merit for this R & D project includes the development of a new way
to learn key underlying concepts in algebra, further investigation of the
affordances of games and technology in learning abstract mathematical concepts,
and a better understanding of learning assessment in early algebra. The broader
impact for this R & D project includes making these tools widely available to
students, and the potential shift of teachers towards effective mathematical
pedagogy that is engaging and inquiry-based. Development will begin with
existing research on early algebraic thinking and learning, and proceed through
an iterative process involving design, testing in the NMSU Learning Games Lab,
testing in classrooms, and back to design. The project will then study the
effect of the developed materials on student understanding and on classroom
learning environments. Qualitative and quantitative measures will be used.
Researchers will use a custom measure aligned with NAEP (National Assessment of
Educational Progress) and other standard tests, interviews and observations with
teachers and students, and embedded data collection and self-reports on
frequency and extent of game usage. After two earlier pilot studies, in the
final year a delayed intervention study will be conducted with 50 teachers and
their students. The Math Snacks team has existing partnerships for distribution
of games and materials with PBS, GlassLabs, BrainPOP, and others. Academic
findings of the project will be shared through conferences and research
publications.