* 1503726
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Field-assisted Manufacturing of Metal Matrix Composites with Custom Microstructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Yung Shin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 60,000.00

Metal matrix composites consist of at least two distinct materials where a
continuous metallic material is combined with other materials. Various types of
materials, such as another metal, a ceramic, or an organic compound, typically
in the form of particles and fibers, are added to the metallic material to
change or improve the overall material properties. Most of the manufacturing
methods used for production of metal matrix composites, however, have limited
capabilities in controlling these particles and fibers and typically result in a
less than ideal distribution of them. This EArly-Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) study is motivated by such limited capabilities in creating custom
structures by existing manufacturing techniques for metal matrix composites.
This award supports a novel concept of using an electromagnetic force to control
the particles and fibers to create custom composite structures that can
potentially enhance and tailor the performance. The project will help strengthen
US leadership in advanced manufacturing of composite materials and contribute to
various application technologies that involve control and shielding of
electromagnetic field such as telecommunications, radars, waveguide materials,
antennas, medical devices, and magnetic storage materials.

The innovative concepts of Field-assisted Composite Manufacturing (FCM) allow
construction of custom reinforcement architectures through: (i) a uniquely
designed mask layer made of a magnetically shielding material that can
manipulate electromagnetic field patterns in microscale resolution; and (ii) the
layer-by-layer (bottom-up) manufacturing approach integrated with metallurgical
processing (top-down) that can accomplish a fine control of the microstructure,
while efficiently building large structures. The research team will establish a
fundamental basis for the FCM by performing experiments to evaluate the novel
concept of mask patterning to arrange and orient nanoparticles/fibers on a
substrate sheet to achieve a custom designed microstructure after consolidation,
and by developing a multiphysics numerical model that can predict particle and
fiber orientation under an electromagnetic field.