* 1503927
* Collaborative Research: Visualization, analysis, and HPC modeling of subglacial hydrology from high-resolution 3D conduit scans acquired with a novel sensor
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Jason Gulley, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2016
* USD 23,673.00

This project will examine the processes controlling the flow of water through
and beneath an Arctic glacier. The hydraulic properties of glaciers are a major
factor influencing the rate at which glaciers slide on the underlying rock.
Understanding subglacial flow is critical to developing models that accurately
predict how glaciers will behave in response to warming climate and how glaciers
will contribute to sea level rise. For outreach and educational purposes, the
project will develop a web-based, interactive fluid dynamics tutorial concerning
subglacial conduits. A project web site will also be developed. The project will
contribute to workforce development by supporting the training of a graduate
student and by providing partial support for three early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt; This study will perform three-dimensional computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) large eddy simulations (LES) of turbulent flows in a
subglacial conduit using realistic surfaces and mesh boundaries. The
computations will be done using 3D high-performance computing. The conduit
geometry and roughness will be based on a unique set of field measurements made
on a Svalbard glacier using with a modified video-game controller at mm
resolution. The result of this effort is a first-ever high resolution
visualization of a real subglacial conduit and the first subglacial LES
simulations with realistic geometry. Results will be compared with model output
using the more standard Darcy-Weisbach or Manning formulations. The study will
provide improved insights into hydrological processes in mountain glaciers and
large ice sheets such as the Greenland Ice Sheet.&lt;br/&gt;