* 1503358
* Scholarly Inquiry and Practices (SIP) Conference for Mathematics Education Methods
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Wendy Sanchez, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* robert ronau
* 05/31/2017
* USD 99,192.00

Mathematics methods courses are a critical component of mathematics teacher
education. One criticism of mathematics methods courses is that they vary widely
across institutions and states. Mathematics methods courses differ with respect
to what is taught, how it is taught, the intended learning goals, and how those
learning goals are assessed. This variation is due, in part, to the different
theoretical perspectives of mathematics teacher educators who teach these
courses. The investigators of this Conference and Workshop grant propose to
convene mathematics teacher educators with different theoretical perspectives to
develop a shared menu of research-supported practices and new research questions
to explore that could improve mathematics methods courses. The investigators'
hypothesis is that by drawing from the research knowledge base when designing
methods courses (using scholarly practices) and by studying these courses to add
to the research knowledge base (conducting scholarly inquiry), mathematics
teacher educators of any theoretical perspective can contribute to collective
efforts to improve the quality and coherence of mathematics methods courses. The
investigators intend to disseminate the conference findings to mathematics
teacher educators and mathematics education researchers through conference
presentations, publications, teacher educator association websites, and the
project website. A particular strength of this work is that it addresses a need
to prioritize scholarly practices and scholarly inquiry that could improve the
quality and coherence of mathematics methods courses across theoretical
perspectives, mathematics teacher educators, institutions, and states.

The Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) program seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models, and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. Scholarly Inquiry and Practices (SIP) Conference for Mathematics
Education Methods is a Conference and Workshop project that builds from the
investigators' prior studies, which revealed compelling questions mathematics
teacher educators and mathematics education researchers need to address in order
to improve mathematics methods courses. The project will convene forty
mathematics teacher educators who identify with social-political, situated, or
cognitive theoretical orientations to set a direction for building scholarly
inquiry and practices in mathematics methods courses. Before the conference,
participants will author abstracts and reflections about their methods courses
and will survey local mathematics teachers to identify critical issues they
perceive with mathematics teacher education. At the conference, participants
will identify with a preferred theoretical orientation and participate in
discussions around four themes: theoretical perspectives; building scholarly
practices; research for informing practice; and assessing impact and residue.
Some participants will be selected to present their abstracts in poster
presentation format. Investigators will provide additional commentary that
highlight common ideas that emerge across perspectives. Participants will
organize in thematic research and writing teams and continue to work after the
conference on co-authoring articles and conference presentations. The articles
will be disseminated in a comprehensive monograph or special issue in a
research-focused journal. Investigators have been invited to also publish
articles in practitioner-focused journals. Presentations at research and
practitioner conferences are also planned.