* 1503760
* A Multiple Pathway Approach to CyberCorps - Renewal
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Li-Chiou Chen, Pace University New York Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,788,466.00

Pace University proposes to add four new cohorts of undergraduate and graduate
students to their existing CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program
in cybersecurity with a multiple pathway approach to recruit and guide students
through different academic programs based on their background and interests.
With support for either two or three years, all Pace scholars will graduate with
a Bachelor's degree, a Master's degree, a five-year combined degree, or a PhD.
All scholars will fulfill core curriculum requirements in both cybersecurity and
mathematics, as well as interdisciplinary curriculum requirements in either
criminal justice or business management. The scholars will also be expected to
complete research projects and professional development activities as outlined
through competency-based advisement. With a solid background in computing and
flexibility to accommodate different talents, the program will help meeting the
diverse demands of government employment in the field of cybersecurity. The
scholars will be able to apply not only computing knowledge but also knowledge
from a relevant discipline, such as mathematics, criminal justice, or business
administration. The graduates will therefore be able to conduct tasks in
specialty areas defined in the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education
(NICE) Workforce Framework such as information assurance compliance, network
security administration, or digital forensics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the Pace CyberCorps project are 1) to produce fourteen to
seventeen cybersecurity professionals entering the government workforce upon
graduation over five years; 2) to prepare cybersecurity professionals with
diverse educational backgrounds by using a multiple pathway approach; 3) to
support diversity in the field of information technology by providing
opportunities for students from underrepresented groups; 4) to mentor non-SFS
institutions and their students through academic partnerships; 5) to strengthen
collaboration between Pace and its government partners, and 6) to generate
interest in becoming cybersecurity professionals among broader student
populations both at Pace and at our partner institutions. The broader impacts of
Pace CyberCorps include outreach activities to increase the number of students
studying in cybersecurity who are from groups underrepresented in information
technology; broaden the impact of the program through academic partnerships; and
mentor non-SFS institutions and provide scholarship opportunities for their
graduates.