* 1503084
* Collaborative Research: CSEDI -Understanding Si and Fe differentiation in Earth?s mantle and core through experimental and theoretical research in geochemistry and mineral physics
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Renata Wentzcovitch, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 215,003.00

To first order, the Earth is divided into three concentric shells of different
nature: the metallic core, the rocky mantle, and the fluid
atmosphere/hydrosphere. While samples are available from the mantle and
atmosphere/hydrosphere, the nature and composition of the core remain poorly
understood. In particular, the core is known to be less dense than pure iron-
nickel alloy, indicating that another light element is present in the core,
possibly oxygen, silicium, or sulfur. The conditions (pressure and temperature)
under which Earth's core formed and the nature of the light element in Earth's
core are two major unresolved questions in planetary sciences. Because no core
samples are directly available for study, scientists rely on remote seismic
observations or other indirect methods to address those questions. In the
proposed work, the approaches of geochemistry (the chemistry of the Earth),
mineral physics (solid state physics applied to natural materials), and
computational techniques will be combined to set limits on the temperature
condition during core formation and the nature of the light element in Earth's
core. This will be achieved by examining the extent to which different isotopic
flavors of silicon and iron were partitioned between metal and silicate when the
core formed. The work will involve synthesizing minerals in the laboratory and
compressing them to pressure conditions relevant to the deep Earth by confining
the samples between two diamonds, measuring the strength of the iron bonds in
those minerals at a synchrotron source that produces very energetic X-rays, and
examining, through computer calculations, the behavior of matter under high
pressure and temperature. This work can impact many fields of science, ranging
from the origin of Earth's dynamo to characterization of extrasolar planets
through measurement of their mass. All PIs will actively engage in training and
educating graduate students, undergraduate students, and postdocs in the
proposed research projects. The PIs will continue developing SciPhon, a user-
friendly, free software for NRIXS data reduction. This program will be made
available to various communities studying different aspects of NRIXS, including
geochemistry, mineral physics, material sciences, condensed matter physics, and
biochemistry. All PIs will be actively involved in outreach programs including
the UTeach Outreach Program that conducts academic summer camps for
underrepresented K-12 kids from the Austin and southwest Texas area. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The mass of the Earth and its accretion history are such
that core-mantle differentiation was probably unavoidable but considerable
uncertainties remain as to how and when this took place. Our limited
understanding of this major event arises from our lack of sampling of Earth's
deep interior. Scientists have devised indirect approaches to address this
shortcoming by relying on (1) mineral physics experiments to reproduce the high
pressure-temperature conditions prevailing in Earth's interior, (2) theoretical
calculations to mimic those same conditions, and (3) geochemical measurements of
the composition of mantle rocks to search for telltale signatures of core
formation. These strongly interweaved approaches have led to significant
progress but first-order unanswered questions remain, such as under what
pressure-temperature conditions did the core form, what is the nature of the
light element in the core, and did core formation fractionate Si and Fe
isotopes. Terrestrial basalts have non-chondritic Si and Fe isotopic
compositions, which could reflect partitioning of these elements into the core,
although other interpretations exist. The investigators propose to establish Si
and Fe isotope fractionation factors using high-pressure nuclear resonant
inelastic X-ray scattering (NRIXS) and theoretical calculations at deep mantle
conditions via collaborative approaches in geochemistry (Dauphas), theoretical
ab initio calculations (Wentzcovitch), and experimental mineral physics (Lin).
The derived force constants of Si and Fe bonds in basaltic glasses, lower-mantle
minerals (bridgmanite and ferropericlase), and Fe alloys will allow us to build
a deep-Earth geochemical model to evaluate if the specific Si and Fe isotopic
compositions of the silicate Earth reflect core partitioning, and if they do,
put constraints on important aspects of core formation such as temperature or
the presence of Si as a light element in the core. The experimental results will
serve as a benchmark for ab initio calculations of Si and Fe isotopic
fractionation between relevant metal and silicate phases at high pressure and
temperature. The theoretical work will in turn guide and refine the experimental
and geochemical modelling efforts, focusing in particular on nuclear resonant
measurements, force constant derivations, anharmonic and spin crossover effects.
The exchanges and feedbacks between geochemists and experimental and theoretical
physicists involved in this project will provide a holistic view of Si and Fe
isotopic fractionation during core formation.