* 1503439
* Ramping Up Accessibility in STEM: Inclusively Designed Simulations for Diverse Learners
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Katherine Perkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 12/31/2018
* USD 449,186.00

Ramping Up Accessibility in STEM: Inclusively Designed Physics Education
Technology (PhET) Simulations for Diverse Learners

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This project will bring together leaders in simulation design and accessibility
to develop and study interactive science simulations for diverse middle school
students including those with sensory, mobility, or learning disabilities. The
resulting simulations and research findings will help to address the significant
disparity that exists between the achievement in science by students with and
without disabilities. The Physics Education Technology (PhET) Interactive
Simulations project (University of Colorado Boulder) will develop and research
interactive science and math simulations used by teachers and students around
the world. The Inclusive Design Research Centre (OCAD University, Toronto,
Ontario) is an international leader in inclusively designed technology, with the
goal of designing for the full range of human diversity including those with and
without disabilities. Together, the project team will engage in an iterative
design process to develop innovative solutions for making the highly interactive
environment of an educational simulation simultaneously intuitive, accessible,
and supportive of exploration and discovery practices in science. Development
efforts will focus on three inclusive simulations and optimize the design and
implementation of several inclusive simulation features, including keyboard
navigation, auditory descriptions for screen readers, the use of non-speech
sounds to provide feedback (sonification), and the ability to control the
simulation with assistive technology (AT) devices. For each simulation,
professional development materials for teachers, including classroom activities
and user guides, will be developed to support teachers in effectively using the
inclusively designed simulations in their classrooms.

Through new research, this project will seek to understand: 1) how inclusive
simulations can support students with disabilities to engage in science
practices, 2) how students with and without disabilities utilize inclusive
simulations for learning STEM content, and 3) how students can engage in
collaborative learning between students with and without disabilities - with an
inclusive simulation. Researchers will use individual interviews with diverse
students to closely examine these questions. The resulting resources, models,
and tools will provide exemplars and important building blocks for an
inclusively designed interactive curriculum, educational games, and assessment
tools. Resulting simulations, research findings, design guidelines, and
exemplars will be disseminated through the project team and advisor partner
networks, education resource websites, and educator professional organizations.