* 1503634
* RUI: Addressing critical challenges in trace explosives detection through fundamental research in electrochemical science
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Praveen Sekhar, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 227,828.00

Abstract : Addressing the existing deficiencies in trace explosives detection
through fundamental research in electrochemical science

Non-Technical: Terrorists today are using a diverse palette of threats. There is
no single technology that can detect a wide variety of explosives. The goal of
this research is to address existing deficiencies in trace explosives detection
such as high detector cost, low sensitivity, susceptibility to interferences and
high detection limits by investigating a promising electrochemical sensor
technology. The research objective is to enhance the performance of the
promising electrochemical sensor technology by understanding how explosive
vapors react with sensors while engineering the sensor device architecture to
meet the rigorous sensitivity and selectivity demands in field conditions. A
two-order-of-magnitude reduction in detector cost as compared to existing
screening systems in airports such as Smiths IONSCAN is envisioned. The approach
of using a new signal conditioning technique to concurrently improve sensitivity
and selectivity in explosives detection is poised to transform current practices
in augmenting electrochemical sensor performance. An unknown but probably large
number of civilian users will benefit from the knowledge of screening threats.
The proposed research will enable security forces (civilian, military,
industrial) to have inexpensive detectors for instant, on-the-spot screening of
suspicious substances or trace detection from a surface sampling. Broader uses
are easy to envision - e.g., citizen involvement in widespread air quality
monitoring using the proposed low-cost electrochemical gas sensors. A cohesive
outreach plan with three major thrusts is planned as part of this research:
summer camp for high school students, teacher training workshop, and job
training for veterans.

Technical: The goal of this research is to solve critical barriers such as high
detector cost, low sensitivity, susceptibility to interferences, and high
detection limits impeding trace detection and robust discrimination of
explosives in field conditions. A mixed potential based electrochemical gas
sensing mechanism is envisioned to address the current challenges in explosives
detection. The research objective is to investigate the sensor-analyte
interaction and engineer the electrochemical interface to augment the
sensitivity and selectivity while lowering the detection limit and cost in
screening explosives under field conditions. The approach is to (a)
theoretically understand the thermal decomposition of the analyte to improve the
limits of detection; (b) study heterogeneous gas phase catalysis to improve the
sensitivity; (c) explore a novel signal conditioning technique to improve the
sensitivity and selectivity amidst strong interference; (d) investigate unique
electrochemical signature to impart the required selectivity; (e) implement low-
cost paper based sensor platform to minimize detector cost; and (f)
independently validate the test results and pursue field testing at Portland
International Airport. The approach of using a new signal conditioning technique
to concurrently improve sensitivity and selectivity in explosives detection is
poised to transform current practices in augmenting electrochemical sensor
performance. Implementing a paper based explosive sensor platform will pave the
way for a new generation of electrochemical sensors. The research results might
lead to a breakthrough in explosives screening with potential detection limits
of parts per trillion (pg/mL), a 1000:1 specificity (out of every 1000 positive
IDs, 1 is false), and an estimated two-order magnitude reduction in detector
cost all as compared to the gold standard Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
detector systems. The research results will be a quantum leap in the
implementation of simple and inexpensive detectors for instant, on-the-spot
screening of suspicious substances vital to a vast number of anticipated users.