* 1503311
* Guiding Understanding via Information from Digital Environments (GUIDE)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Chad Dorsey, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,983,810.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project will develop and test a digital monitoring tool that will
enable teachers to track student learning within a digital learning system and
quickly adjust classroom instructional strategies to facilitate learning. The
tool will be developed for use with an existing digital curriculum for high
school genetics, and it will be tested in both introductory biology courses and
advanced courses. The tool will be designed to analyze student progress within
the digital curriculum and provide feedback to both students and teachers about
challenges to learning as they are occurring. The system will simultaneously
monitor and analyze the learning patterns of all students in a class, providing
targeted feedback to individual students as needed, or enabling the teacher to
make informed decisions about when some students need individual attention, or
groups of students need help with a particular concept or learning challenge. As
more digital learning experiences are incorporated into classroom practices,
digital guidance systems such as this will be needed to help students and
teachers effectively blend a variety of classroom learning experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design and development study focuses on improving
student learning of domain-specific content and practices within traditional,
technology-enriched classroom environments. The project will be guided by
findings from prior research in two areas: the learning outcomes of game-like,
simulation-based digital learning environments, and the effectiveness of
intelligent tutoring systems. The system being developed in this project will
construct analytic models of student knowledge and behavior from clickstream
data and provide contextualized information at optimal junctures to students or
teachers. This approach will enable a three-layered response system: a) direct,
targeted support to individual students struggling with basic content; b)
referral of a student to another student or group of students having encountered
similar learning challenges; and c) feedback to teachers that would facilitate
strategic guidance of student learning. Research questions guiding this project
will focus on what information about student learning is most useful for guiding
learning in digital environments, how can this information improve support for
student learning within classrooms, and how does the availability and use of
this information improve student knowledge and practices? The design and
development work will be conducted over 4 years and will involve teachers and
students in 22 classrooms in New England and North Carolina.