* 1503192
* 2015-2020 Washington Baltimore Hampton Roads (WBHR) Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Clarence Lee, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,138,531.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to successfully complete high quality
degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Howard University, lead institution for the
Washington-Baltimore-Hampton Roads Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (WBHR-LSAMP) consists of a consortium of seven Historically Black
Colleges and Universities in the Washington, DC, Maryland and Virginia region
and six regional community colleges. The alliance aims to continue strengthening
retention of commuity college student transfer to four-year STEM degree programs
and increasing the competitiveness of STEM students for graduate studies.
International research experiences for both undergraduate and graduate students
in STEM programs will be emphasized. Project results will be disseminated and
will incorporate social media strategies through the alliance website.
Successful practices for student transfers and faculty mentoring will be also be
included in the website. Scholarly publications in refereed scientific journals
and presentations at STEM conferences will be another venue for dissemination of
results.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over the next five years, the WBHR alliance will
increase the number of historically underrepresented students who will complete
STEM baccalaureate degrees by 25%, and the number of students entering STEM
graduate programs by 30%. The alliance will also continue to sustain and
institutionalize successful retention practices. Evaluation and assessment
metrics will address graduation rates, efficiency and effectiveness of program
implementation, and measurable or sustainable goals. Implementation will include
summer and academic research activities, facilitating transfer to four-year STEM
degree programs and successful completion and fulfillment of STEM baccalaureate
degree requirements. In preparation for graduate school entry, students will
receive Graduate Research Examination (GRE) preparations and STEM professional
development activities that include international research experiences.