* 1503562
* ACSB 2015:  A Conference on Algebraic and Combinatorial Approaches in Systems Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Elena Dimitrova, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The conference "Algebraic and Combinatorial Approaches in Systems Biology" (ACSB
2015) will be held at the University of Connecticut Health Center during May
22-24, 2015. The primary goal of the conference is to provide a venue for
researchers to share recent advances in applications of computational algebra
and combinatorics to biology. The conference will consist of talks by invited
speakers, contributed talk,s and a poster session. This grant helps to defray
the expenses of the invited speakers and also to provide transportation and
lodging for graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and other junior
researchers attending the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The previous two
decades have witnessed the emergence and acceleration of a new paradigm in
mathematical biology, which employs advanced methods in computational algebra
and discrete mathematics toward modeling biological systems. In molecular
biology in particular, rich libraries of gene regulation, protein-protein
interactions and high-throughput gene expression profiling enable the
construction of increasingly granular discrete models, which require the
development and analysis of new algebraic and combinatorial techniques. Whereas
traditional methods in mathematical biology benefit from a robust infrastructure
of journals, organizations, and conferences, such infrastructure for algebraic
and combinatorial biology is still taking shape. A core objective of this
conference is to consolidate the ACSB as a national forum for the presentation,
discussion, and integration of current work in the field. ACSB 2015 will focus
on diverse aspects of modeling of molecular networks, in particular gene
regulatory networks, with an emphasis on discrete modeling approaches, including
stochastic aspects of networks. In addition to models of specific molecular
networks, it will explore questions such as the relationship between network
structure and their dynamics and design principles of molecular networks. Both
mathematical and biological aspects of molecular network modeling will be
discussed, and the conference will open with talks on
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site: http://acsb2015.cqm.uchc.edu/