* 1503330
* Collaborative Research: Development of Language-Focused Three-Dimensional Science Instructional Materials to Support English Language Learners in Fifth Grade
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Okhee Lee, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,694,034.00

This project was submitted to the Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) program that
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. The project is responsive to the societal
challenges emerging from the nation's diverse and rapidly changing student
demographics, including the rise of English language learners (ELLs), the
fastest growing student population (see, for example, "U.S. school enrollment
hits majority-minority milestone", Education Week, February 1, 2015). ELLs have
grown exponentially: 1 in 5 students (21%) in the nation spoke a language other
than English at home in 2011. The project's main purpose is to develop
instructional materials for a year-long, fifth grade curriculum for all
students, including ELLs. The planned curriculum will promote language-focused
and three-dimensional science learning (through blending of science and
engineering practices, crosscutting concepts, and disciplinary core ideas),
aligned with the Framework for K-12 Science Education (National Research
Council, 2012), the Next Generation Science Standards (Achieve, 2013), and the
Conceptual Framework for Language use in the Science Classroom (Lee, Quinn &
Vald√©s, 2013). The grade-level science content will target topics, such as
structure and properties of matter, matter and energy in organisms and
ecosystems, and Earth's and space systems, with engineering design embedded in
each topic. The language approach will emphasize analytical science tasks aimed
at making sense of and constructing scientific knowledge; and receptive
(listening and reading) and productive (speaking and writing) language
functions. Products and research results from this project will help to reduce
the science achievement gap between ELLs and non-ELLs, and enable all students
to attain higher levels of proficiency in subsequent grade levels.

After the curriculum has been developed and field-tested during Years 1-3, a
pilot study will be conducted in Year 4 to investigate promise of effectiveness.
Using a randomized controlled trial design, the pilot study will address three
research questions: (1) What is the impact of the intervention on science
learning and language development for all students, including ELLs and former
ELLs?; (2) What is the impact of the intervention on teachers' instructional
practices?; and (3) To what extent are teachers able to implement the
instructional materials with fidelity? To address research question 1, a
sequence of multi-level models (MLMs) in which the posttest score for each
student measure (the state/district science test score, and the science score
and the language score on the researcher-developed assessment) will be regressed
on a dummy variable representing condition (treatment or control) and pretest
covariates. To examine whether the intervention is beneficial for students of
varying levels of English proficiency, subgroup analyses will be conducted
comparing ELLs in the treatment group against ELLs in the control group; former
ELLs in the treatment group against former ELLs in the control group; and non-
ELLs in the treatment group against non-ELLs in the control group, using the
same MLMs. Exploratory analyses will be employed to examine the extent to which
the level of English proficiency moderates the impact of the intervention on
ELLs. To address research question 2, a 2-level model (teachers as level-1, and
schools as level-2) in which the post-questionnaire scale score will be
regressed on a dummy variable representing condition (treatment or control) will
be conducted. To address research question 3, plans are to analyze ratings on
coverage, adherence, and quality of instruction from classroom observations,
along with ratings on program differentiation and participant responsiveness
from the implementation and feedback form.