* 1503681
* CAREER:  Detailed Characterization of Graphene Quantum Dots of Controlled Size, Shape and Chemistry
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2014,09/30/2017
* Vikas Berry, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2017
* USD 195,005.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding to conduct
a detailed study on a novel nanotomy (nanoscale cutting) process to produce
graphene quantum dots (GQDs) of well-defined size (10-100 nm), shape (square,
rectangle, and triangle), and chemistry (pristine and functionalized); and to
thoroughly characterize their structural, optical and electrical properties and
property-correlations. By controllably scaling down graphene into nanosized
GQDs, its properties can be tuned over a wide spectrum, thus significantly
broadening the scope of its applications. In this project, nanotomy of graphite
and its subsequent exfoliation will be employed to produce large-quantities of
monodisperse GQDs with controlled structure and chemistry. This will be followed
by: (a) thorough characterization of the nanotomy-process to determine the GQD
size distribution, shape consistency, functionalization density, edge
smoothness, defect types and density, crystallography, and nanotomy
characteristics; (b) detailed optical and electrical characterization (band-gap;
net carrier mobility and density, and carrier transport mechanism in GQD films);
and (c) establishing the correlations and theoretical models defining the GQD
properties. The results from the correlations and models will be analyzed to
further engineer the nanotomy process to fine-tune GQDs' properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of production-routes and fundamental property-
correlations of important nanomaterials have revolutionized nanotechnology.
However, synthesis and experimental characterization of GQDs have been a
challenge. If successful, the results of this research will develop a novel
route to produce well-defined GQDs and uncover their fundamental properties. The
models and correlations established will enable direct tuning of GQD properties
and rational design of its applications for the semiconductor industry. GQDs
could potentially have the same impact that other carbon-nanomaterials have had.
Further, the research activities will be integrated with various educational
efforts. Nanoprocessing concepts will be incorporated into engineering education
at Kansas State University to strengthen its nanotechnology base; new
nanoprocessing and nanotechnology activities will be added to university
outreach programs designed to improve participation of women/underrepresented
students in engineering; and the students will be exposed to diverse research
cultures to broaden their perspective on the scope of science.