* 1503672
* Coordination, Data Management and Enhancement of the International Arctic Buoy Programme
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Ignatius Rigor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/28/2019
* USD 445,786.00

Dramatic changes in Arctic climate have occurred during the past two decades.
Many of these changes were first observed and studied using data from the
International Arctic Buoy Program (IABP), which maintains at least 100 buoys in
the Arctic Ocean that collect data on surface water temperature, air
temperature, atmospheric pressure, and ice motion. These data are analyzed and
made available to the research community by the United States IABP. IABP data
were fundamental in demonstrating that atmospheric pressure has decreased, air
temperature has increased, and the clockwise circulation of current and ice in
the Arctic Ocean has weakened in recent decades. The integrated effect of all
these changes contributed to the precipitous decrease in the average age
(thickness) of sea ice observed during this period. The data help us understand
the recent record low summer sea ice extents. The project will continue the
United States interagency Arctic buoy program which began collecting data in
1979 and provide critical atmospheric, ice, and surface ocean measurements that
cannot be obtained by other means. The project also has a multifaceted outreach
program to share science with the public that includes the principal
investigator participating in programs such as the Polar Science Weekend, public
presentations, K-12 school visits, and public communication through interactions
with journalists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observations from the IABP have been
essential for: 1) monitoring Arctic and global climate change, 2) forecasting
weather and sea ice conditions, 3) forcing, assimilation, and validation of
global weather and climate models and, 4) validation of satellite derived
estimates of sea ice motion, surface temperature, sea ice thickness, etc. Our
ability to predict weather and sea ice conditions requires in situ observations
of surface meteorology and ice motion. These observations are assimilated into
Numerical Weather Prediction models that are used to forecast weather on
synoptic time scales, e.g. by the National Weather Service; and into the many
long-term atmospheric re-analyses (e.g. National Centers for Environmental
Prediction/National Center for Atmospheric Research re-analysis) that are used
for innumerable climate studies. Based on a recommendation by the National
Academy of Sciences in 1974, the Arctic Ocean Buoy Program was established by
the Pacific Science Center/Applied Physics laboratory, University of Washington,
in 1978 to support the Global Weather Experiment. The program continued through
1990 under funding from various agencies. In 1991, the IABP succeeded the Arctic
Ocean Buoy Program, but the basic objective remains unchanged: maintaining a
network of drifting buoys on the Arctic Ocean to provide meteorological and
oceanographic data for real-time operational requirements and research purposes
including support to the World Climate Research Program, the World Weather Watch
Program, and the Arctic Observing Network. The project will collect data from
all Arctic buoys, analyze, disseminate, and archive all IABP data, and maintain
historical data bases.