* 1503389
* The Community Coordinated Modeling Center: Ionosphere-Thermosphere-Mesosphere Models, Applications and Services for Research, Forecasting and Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Ja Soon Shim, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Robert C. Moore
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC) is an interagency partnership
established in 2000, with the goal of bridging the gap between science and space
weather operations while enhancing research, supporting development of next-
generation space weather models, and disseminating knowledge to the public. CCMC
assets and services include: an expanding collection of state-of-the-art models;
one-of-a-kind runs-on-request service; innovative online tools and systems for
research, space weather analysis and forecasting. This project will comprise a
blend of activities that take advantage of unique, multi-faceted, and multi-
layered opportunities for hands-on education at the CCMC. This project will
focus on expanding and improving the CCMC collection of ionosphere-thermosphere-
mesosphere (ITM) models. Improvements will be made in the visualization and
analysis tools as well as developing new capabilities in ensemble modeling. The
project will also lead community-wide ATM model validation activities and
perform unbiased assessment of ITM model capabilities. All of these activities
will lead to improved capabilities in space weather now-casting and forecasting.

The CCMC will add a variety of data assimilation models to its suite of ITM
models. New models will include the AMIE model (Assimilative Magnetosphere-
Ionosphere Electrodynamics), the SuperDARN (Super Dual Auroral Radar Network)
global mapping method, MEPS (Multimodel Ensemble Prediction System), TRIPL-DA
(Texas Reconfigurable Ionosphere-Plasmasphere Logarithmic Assimilator), UK-MIDAS
(UK Multi-Instrument Data System), IDA4D (Ionospheric Data Assimilation
4-Dimensional), FUSION++ (Fprward Updating Simple IONosphere) and the LPIM (La
Plata Ionosphere Model). The CCMC will also expand the range of data sources
available for ingestion in the data assimilation models. New data streams will
include Incoherent Scatter Radar (ISR) electric field data from NSF supported
ISR radars. The CCMC will offer Runs-on-Request service of ensemble simulations,
which will be an invaluable tool for assessment of uncertainties in the ITM
models. It will continue leading the development of "patch-panel" driver
swapping tools, which will allow users to swap high-latitude ionospheric
electrodynamics (IE) drivers of the ITM models. The library of drivers will
include a variety of empirical, physics-based, and data assimilative models of
the high latitude potential pattern, penetration electric field, and auroral
particle precipitation. The driver-swapping tool will be utilized in studies of
the effects of IE drivers on the ITM system. The CCMC will continue leading the
community-wide model validation efforts to address the need for assessment of
state-of-the-art modeling capabilities to specify and forecast the ITM system.
It will enhance collaboration between communities for planning the ITM model
validation studies, including selection of metrics formats for specific
applications and tackling the problem of quantifying ITM model abilities to
reproduce physical phenomena. The CCMC will expand validation activity to
include the validation of the ITM models hosted at the CCMC utilizing data from
the NSF upper atmosphere facilities and from the NSF CubeSats program. The tools
and data derived from the model simulations will be made available to the
research community.