* 1503408
* Center for Sustainable Nanotechnology
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2021
* USD 20,000,000.00

The Center for Sustainable Nanotechnology (CSN) enables fundamental studies of
the specific molecular interactions expected to occur when the surfaces of
engineered nanoparticles come into contact with biological interfaces and
components. The chemical insight gained from molecular and mechanistic studies
of nano-bio interactions is used to intentionally design nanomaterials that
provide the desired technical functions while also minimizing potentially
adverse consequences with the environment. CSN research leads to introduction of
a new generation of safer nanomaterials that may impact multiple sectors of the
economy including energy, transportation, electronics, food, and agriculture.
The CSN prepares a new generation of scientific innovators by providing
education and professional development opportunities focused on innovation,
communication, leadership, and interdisciplinary scientific skills. CSN
researchers actively encourage diversity within chemistry through CSN-run
workshops on overcoming implicit bias, recruitment of graduate students and
postdocs, and Center-sponsored research experiences for students and faculty
from underrepresented groups as well as veteran undergraduates. CSN researchers
encourage diversity in public engagement, develops and practices informal
communication skills, and expands the highly successful sustainable-nano.com
blog to include Spanish language content, K-12 activity materials, podcasts, and
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSN integrates experiments with computation in
three integrated research focus areas (RFAs). RFA1 develops new materials with
precisely controlled structure and properties, molecular-level characterization
tools such as advanced non-linear optical methods and sub-diffraction imaging,
and novel computational methods spanning length scales from nanometers to
millimeters. RFA2 uses the RFA1 tool kit to understand, control, and predict how
nanomaterials attach to, penetrate, and alter cell surfaces using lipid bilayers
as model systems for cell membranes. RFA3 determines the molecular processes by
which pristine and environmentally transformed nanomaterials interact with
living systems with diverse cellular chemistries, ranging from single cell to
multi-cellular organisms. The integration of these three RFAs enables the Center
to establish how nanomaterial properties and behavior impact biological
outcomes. This knowledge leads to reliable predictions of biological responses
to existing and future nanomaterials and guides the design and synthesis of
safe, sustainable nanomaterials. In pursuing the project goals, the CSN puts
particular emphasis on the synthesis, characterization, and molecular-level
interactions initiated by complex, composite nanomaterials that are being used
in emerging and future nano-enabled commercial
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Sustainable Nanotechnology is
funded as part of the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) program.