* 1503742
* Scholarship Track: Scholarships for Service at WPI
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Craig Wills, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2021
* USD 4,517,569.00

This project seeks to establish a new CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at the Worcester Polytechnic (WPI) Institute to prepare highly-qualified
Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the federal, state, local, and tribal
government workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CyberCorps®: SFS program
features (a) coursework that includes technical courses, a business course, and
at least one course on human-facing aspects of cybersecurity; (b) opportunities
to participate in research projects; and (c) a monthly seminar series on
??Working in Cybersecurity for the Government??. WPI also has existing
collaborations with two nearby federal labs, MITRE and Lincoln Labs, and its
interdisciplinary graduate programs in Robotics, Interactive Media and Game
Design, Data Science, and Learning Sciences offer scholars the opportunity to
connect cybersecurity studies with other emerging computational fields. WPI is
designated as a National Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance
Research with a dozen faculty across four departments with active research
programs related to cybersecurity. A team consisting of two Program Directors, a
program manager, and several security faculty will manage the operations and
assessment of the program. The project has clear objectives for both scholars
and project operations, along with the measurements that will assess progress
towards the objectives. CyberCorps students will take a security-themed course
with a significant focus on human behavior, privacy and policy extending beyond
purely technical aspects of cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All SFS-
Scholarship awards share broader impacts on cybersecurity workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;The planned recruiting activities will engage hundreds of
students and may motivate more students in pursuing at least some level of
cybersecurity education. The proposed seminar series will be open to the public.
The recruiting plans include participating in established WPI outreach programs
to high-school students, summer residential programs to engage students in STEM
and an annual WPI science and technology festival that centers on a NASA
robotics challenge. The project has a strong plan for recruiting women and other
under-represented students.