* 1503802
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Tracking and Explaining Americans' response to the Ebola outbreak
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2016
* Kim Dionne, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

General Audience Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project examines the
American public response to the current Ebola outbreak, which started in rural
Guinea, West Africa, in December 2013. By October 2014, a handful of Americans
had been infected with Ebola, including a nurse who came into contact with a
Liberian national being treated in a Dallas hospital. This project asks how
public opinion is shaped by (1) the policy responses offered by leading
politicians and (2) the framing of Ebola as not just a public health issue but
also an immigration issue. In particular, we examine Americans' knowledge of
Ebola, their attitudes toward immigration, and their confidence in the U.S.
government to respond to the Ebola outbreak. We measure how different types of
information influence people's knowledge, attitudes and identify which factors
drive U.S. public opinion toward this issue. For example, some participants are
primed to think about an American as a potential source for Ebola transmission
in America, while others are primed to think about an African as the source. The
project also measures how these different frames affect respondents' willingness
to donate to a U.S.-based charity fighting Ebola in West Africa. Learning how
Americans respond to different frames of the Ebola crisis, and to the policy
responses offered by politicians, not just by capturing their responses to
survey questions but also determining their willingness to donate money to a
non-partisan, non-profit healthcare organization, will better our understanding
of the factors that shape attitudes and behaviors toward health, immigration and
charitable giving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;To study
how issue framing and partisanship influence knowledge, attitudes, and behavior
toward a public health epidemic, immigration, and the administration's response,
we use a survey experiment administered online by a professional survey firm.
The survey has four sections: pretreatment questions, such as the respondent's
gender, age, education level, partisanship identity, and previous knowledge of
and attitudes toward Ebola; the random administration of the treatment (an Ebola
Fact Sheet); the collection of attitudinal and behavioral outcomes; and a
manipulation check. The treatment (our Ebola Fact Sheet ) provides key facts
about the Ebola virus and the recent outbreak, plus one of five randomly
assigned pieces of information that allows us to assess the causal effect of
issue-framing and of partisanship on the American response to this crisis. One
of the novel aspects of our study is that it collects information not only on
individual Americans' attitudes, but also on their behavior. Specifically, our
survey instrument includes a question that provides respondents with the choice
to donate part of their bonus survey compensation to a nonprofit, non-partisan
organization currently fighting Ebola in West Africa. Finally, a manipulation
check is designed to verify the extent to which our survey respondents comply
with the treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted prior to
NSF 15-006 Dear Colleague Letter (DCL) on the Ebola Virus, but is funded
consistent with the priorities identified in the DCL.