* 1503510
* Teaching and Learning Algebraic Thinking Across the Middle Grades: A Research-based Approach Using PhET Interactive Simulations
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* David Webb, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,199,109.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

Widespread, high-quality use of technology has great potential to transform
today's mathematics classrooms and enable all students to develop a robust
conceptual understanding of mathematics. Critical challenges are currently
limiting the realization of this potential, and 69% of US Grade 8 students are
scoring below proficient in national studies. In this 3-year Discovery Research
K-12 Full Research and Development project, Teaching and Learning Algebraic
Thinking Across the Middle Grades: A Research-based Approach Using PhET
Interactive Simulations, the PhET Interactive Simulations group at the
University of Colorado Boulder is partnering with mathematics education
researchers at the University of South Florida St. Petersberg and Florida State
University to address three central challenges, as follows: 1) the tendency for
students to not engage in real mathematical thinking as they use technologies;
2) the tendency for teachers to not enact pedagogically-effective approaches;
and 3) the lack of adoption of effective technologies by teachers due to a
variety of barriers. This collaborative effort uses rich, exploratory,
interactive simulations and associated instructional materials as a pathway for
making rapid progress and focuses on advancing algebraic thinking in Grades 6-9.

This project seeks to enable teachers to fully-leverage the benefits of
interactive simulations to advance student engagement and learning of
mathematics, moving technology from the margins to a core part of instruction.
The project will answer critical research questions, such as: how the design of
an interactive simulation can generate pedagogically-productive use; how
instruction with simulations can be best structured to support learning of
mathematical concepts and engagement in mathematical practices; how sim-based
instruction can be made attractive, feasible and effective for teachers; and
finally, how student learning is impacted by sim-based instruction. At the same
time, this project will produce a collection of open educational resources for
teachers and students. These resources will include 15 research-based, student-
tested simulations for teaching and learning of algebraic thinking, associated
instructional support materials, and teacher professional development resources
for effective implementation. Based on the 75 million uses per year of PhET?s
science simulations, we expect these resources to transform mathematics
instruction for millions of students and thousands of teachers.

This project will employ a variety of research methods to approach these
questions. Researchers will use individual interviews from a diverse group of
Grades 6-9 students as they use the 15 new simulations to examine usability,
engagement, and achievement and to identify design approaches that stimulate
productive use. In parallel, classroom-based studies in Colorado and Florida
will investigate ways in which simulations can be combined with instructional
materials and teacher facilitation to engage groups of students in inquiry,
promote rich discussions of important mathematical ideas, and advance
achievement in the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. The project will
employ an iterative design and development process involving qualitative and
quantitative analysis of diverse measures including the quality of mathematical
instruction. Finally, a pilot study and an evaluation of teacher PD supports
will examine the feasibility and fidelity with which teachers implement the
innovation, and the impact on student learning.