* 1503939
* Collaborative Research: Winter snow depth as a driver of microbial activity, nutrient cycling, tree growth and treeline advance in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Michael Weintraub, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 580,850.00

The position of the Arctic treeline is an important regulator of climate and
subsistence resources. Recent research by the principal investigators (PIs)
suggests the importance of winter snow depth as a control on tree growth. They
now propose to experimentally isolate the importance of snow depth and soil
nutrient availability for tree growth. This novel and interdisciplinary proposal
will link the ecology of microbes to large-scale landscape patterns. If their
hypotheses are confirmed, the findings will contradict the prevailing theory of
the cause of treeline location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the development of the science workforce by supporting the
training of three graduate students and the entrainment of numerous
undergraduate students into the research activities. Outreach to the
predominantly Alaskan Native community of Kotzebue will take different forms.
The PIs will arrange with the local radio station, a primary means of media
communication for the local region, to describe their research. They will visit
the local high school to discuss the role of vegetation in climate and to share
the results of their research. They will provide opportunities for outstanding
students from the local high school to participate in their field research
program. They will participate in the Bureau of Land Management?s Campbell Creek
Science Center Fireside Chat series to promote outreach to the more urban
community in and around Anchorage, AK. They will enhance the existing
Interactive Model of Leaf Decomposition (IMOLD), a series of animated lessons
and activities about decomposition and nutrient cycling developed under a
previous award, to include examples and teaching activities derived from this
work at the Arctic treeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has long been thought that
temperature exerts a direct control on growth of treeline trees and the position
of the treeline. However, the PIs? recent work in the Arctic with white spruce
suggests that indirect effects of temperature on soil nutrient availability may
be of equal or greater importance. They hypothesize that cold soils at the
treeline, particularly during winter, limit microbial activity and nutrient
availability to the point where trees are barely able to survive and grow.
Measurements made during winter have revealed that Arctic forests maintain
snowpacks that are much deeper than observed at treeline. Trees are thought to
trap snow and lead to a deeper snowpack, insulating the soil from cold air and
allowing for greater overwinter microbial activity and greater nutrient
mineralization. Indeed, the PIs found a strong positive correlation between
white spruce growth and winter snow depth. They propose to isolate the
mechanisms underlying this correlation by using snowfences to manipulate winter
snow depth and fertilizer to increase soil nutrient availability at three
treelines that differ in soil moisture. To provide an experimental test of the
importance of temperature as a direct control on treeline tree growth, they
propose to incorporate experimental shoot warming into their snowfence
experiment in a factorial design. They predict that both experimental snow and
nutrient additions will lead to large increases in microbial activity,
photosynthesis, tree growth, seed quality, seed production, seedling
establishment and recruitment of new trees. They expect to observe the greatest
positive responses where soils are wet and cold. Meanwhile, they predict that
shoot warming will lead to negligible changes in growth.