* 1503579
* CAREER:  Advanced Acceleration Control Methods and Substructure Techniques for Shaking Table Tests
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Narutoshi Nakata, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 67,188.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program
project is to develop methodologies that enhance accuracy and capabilities of
shake table testing of structures. In particular, this study aims to improve
acceleration control methods to reproduce reference accelerations at shake table
and to develop substructure techniques to account for dynamically varying
boundary conditions. The accurate reproduction of reference accelerations is
critical for the investigation of their true impact on structures. By combining
feed-forward and feedback control, innovative, high-performance acceleration
control methods will be developed through analytical and computational studies.
These acceleration control methods will be experimentally validated based on
multiple stability and performance criteria under various conditions. Special
attention will be paid to acceleration trajectory tracking performance. When
partial structural models are tested on a shake table, substructure techniques
that take into account interactions with boundary members are essential for the
systems level assessment. Substructure techniques for shake tables will be
explored using two approaches: 1) inertial force approach, where the
acceleration of a supplemental inertial mass is controlled to generate an
inertial force that is equivalent to the boundary force, and 2) direct force
approach, where the dynamic boundary force is directly imposed by dynamic
actuators. Numerical integration algorithms that are required for the
substructure techniques will also be developed. Capabilities and limitations of
the substructure shake table tests will be investigated through numerical and
experimental studies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
have a direct impact on earthquake engineering, by providing accurate
experimental means for seismic performance assessment of structures under
dynamic loadings and boundary conditions. This research also meshes well with
the scope of the National Science Foundation, George E. Brown Jr. Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation program. The project will provide integrated
education and research opportunities for students at all-levels. In activities
for K-12 students and the general public, the focus will be placed on linking
their knowledge and the project through hands-on laboratory experience. Specific
targets include high-school students in the Woman In Science and Engineering
Program at the Johns Hopkins University and the Practicum Program at Baltimore
Polytechnic High School. At the college level, this research will be integrated
into a laboratory for the undergraduate Dynamics course that the PI is currently
offering. It will also provide undergraduate research opportunities that help
students develop fundamental understanding of theories in dynamics and control.
At the graduate level, a new course, "Advanced Experimental Methods for
Structures", will integrate the project into the course lecture and laboratory
activities. This research will be disseminated through the project website, and
the results will be published through a number of significant journals and
conference proceedings.