* 1503552
* Precision Muon Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Timothy Gorringe, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 555,000.00

Precise experimental tests of fundamental particle properties are now a well-
established way to search for new laws of nature beyond our current physical
knowledge. The proposed research is for two experiments to make precise
measurements of an elementary particle called the muon, which is similar to the
electron but with larger mass. One experiment at tha Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory, called g-2, will measure the magnetic moment of the muon to an
accuracy of better than a part-per-million, which will provide a test of the
Standard Model of particle physics, the theory that explains the properties of
the elementary particles making up most of the visible matter in the Universe.
The other experiment, called MuSun, at the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) in
Switzerland will measure the lifetime of an atom comprised of a muon and a
deuteron (a nucleus made from one proton and one neutron). This experiment will
further the knowledge of the reaction of thermonuclear hydrogen burning which
powers the sun, as well as helping to understand neutrino interactions with
matter.

The muon g-2 experiment will measure the muon anomalous magnetic moment to 140
parts-per-billion, a four-fold improvement over the previous experiment at
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), known as E821. The measurement will
address the longstanding 3 standard deviation discrepancy between the same
measurement from E821 and the Standard Model prediction. It represents a key
test of the Standard Model and has broad sensitivity to new particles and
interactions beyond the Standard Model. The muon g-2 project has involved the
relocation of the muon storage ring from Brookhaven National Laboratory to
Fermilab as well as new detector, electronics and acquisition systems. The PI
and his group are responsible for the 8 GByte/sec calorimeter readout, using
multi-teraflop GPU-based data processing, and distributed event building for the
data acquisition system. The MuSun experiment will measure the mu- d to n n
neutrino doublet capture rate to an accuracy of 1.5%. The measurement addresses
a longstanding discrepancy among earlier measurements of mu d capture. It will
provide a five-fold improvement in our knowledge of the two-body weak axial
currents that plays a role in pp thermonuclear fusion, cross sections for
neutrino experiments, and ordinary and double beta-decay.