* 1503574
* Partnership to the Macrofungi Collection Consortium for the Richard Homola Mycological Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Seanna Annis, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 66,495.00

The goal of this project is to add 8,000 macrofungi specimens from the Richard
Homola Mycological Collection at the University of Maine to the Macrofungi
Collection Consortium (MaCC). Label information for each specimen will be
digitized along with supplementary 35mm color slides, field notes, and scanning
electron micrographs of spores. The data and images will be publically
accessible through the MyCoPortal and iDigBio websites for research and public
use. Student training, course development, and public engagement through
workshops are also goals of this project.

A primary goal of the MaCC is to understand the diversity of macrofungi and
their symbiotic partners. Additionally, understanding how these attributes,
diversity and interactions, have changed over time, and informed human endeavors
is critical. Maine covers half of the area of New England and contains a
diversity of habitats, including eastern deciduous forest and northern boreal
forest, which support a remarkable diversity of fungi. The Homola herbarium
contains extensive collections from Maine by Dr. Homola and will fill historical
and geographic gaps in the MaCC data. This award is made as part of the National
Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing
Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this
award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).