* 1503596
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling Molybdenum and Rhenium speciation: Identifying the burial pathways of redox proxies in sulfidic settings
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Anthony Chappaz, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2017
* USD 63,618.00

When natural waters become devoid of oxygen, dissolved sulfide is produced and
can accumulate via microbial sulfate reduction. Sulfidic conditions occurred
within ancient oceans, and lead to extinction events in marine biota. Redox
sensitive trace metals, like molybdenum (Mo) and rhenium (Re), display
contrasting chemical behavior between oxygenated and sulfidic waters and
therefore can be used as tools to enhance our understanding of the Earth's
oxygenation history and the evolution of life. Oxygen depletion also occurs
within modern oceans, probably as a result of anthropogenically-induced
eutrophication. Such conditions have been observed globally, predominately in
coastal areas, and have become a major environmental issue leading to massive
fish kills. Thus, in addition to providing information on how and when the rise
of oxygen (approximately Â­2.4 billion years ago) in Earth's atmosphere
facilitated the development of life, Mo and Re can contribute to assessing and
preventing the development of oxygen-depleted zones within modern oceans.
However, to fully exploit Mo and Re as indicators of oxygen-depleted conditions,
the chemical transformations these metals undergo in sulfidic waters must be
well defined, as well as the mechanisms governing their ultimate burial. Filling
these gaps in knowledge is the backbone of this study as well as the future work
it will spawn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response, a two-pronged study has been
initiated. (1) Quantify actual Mo and Re speciation in natural sulfidic waters
utilizing our recently developed chromatographic method (reverse phase ion pair
chromatography: RP-IPC). Investigators aim to (a) couple their present RP-IPC
method with ICP-MS, (b) utilize RP-IPC-ICP-MS to quantify individual
thiomolybdate and thioperrhenate anions in the water column of Green Lake (New
York, USA), a lake characterized by a permanent chemocline and (c) quantify any
stable Mo or Re isotopic fractionations during transitions among thiomolybdates
and thioperrhenates. (2) Survey the role FeMoS cubane clusters play in the
ultimate burial of Mo and Re under euxinic conditions. They will (a) produce and
analyze solutions comprising an array of initial Fe, Mo, sulfide, ionic
strength, and pH conditions as well as trace quantities of Re, and (b) use X-Ray
Absorption Fine Structure (XAFS) spectroscopy to characterize any FeMoS solid
produced in the test solutions. The impact of this study will extend widely.
Five outcomes stand out most clearly: (1) Support the geoscientific community
studying biospheric evolution. (2) Provide a new method for quantifying
thiometallate speciation and isotopic fractionation. (3) Involve several
undergraduate researchers from underrepresented minorities in all facets of the
proposed research. (4) Train a Ph.D. student as a part of an international
collaboration. (5) Communicate research results at appropriate conferences, as
well as submit several scientific articles to disseminate findings.