* 1503907
* Unraveling the history of the Greenland Ice Sheet from its internal radiostratigraphy
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michelle Koutnik, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 307,324.00

The internal structure of glaciers and ice sheets, revealed by ice-penetrating
radars, has transformed our ability to understand ice evolution. Two
investigators propose to use a recently developed compilation of available radar
data from Greenland, in combination with ice-flow models, to increase
understanding of the history of the Greenland Ice Sheet that will provide
context for its response to current and future changes. This is the first time
such a project is possible across most of the Greenland Ice Sheet to address how
the climate and the ice sheet have changed over time. The major objectives of
the proposed work include: 1) validating inferences from the recently available
ice-sheet-wide dated radiostratigraphy of the Greenland Ice Sheet against those
from internal reflections mapped by targeted ground-based and airborne data
collected along flowlines; 2) defining and applying strategies to use Greenland
Ice Sheet radiostratigraphy; to constrain its history and to evaluate hypotheses
regarding its evolution; 3) determining reconstructions of Greenland's past
climate and ice flow that match the radiostratigraphy; and 4) providing a
foundation for future continental-scale ice-flow modeling that will seek to
assimilate an extensive radiostratigraphy. Broader impacts will include support
of two early-career investigators, mentoring graduate and undergraduate
students, public outreach, and incorporation of the research into formal
classes.