* 1503005
* Collaborative Research: Scientific Data in Schools: Measuring the efficacy of an innovative approach to integrating quantitative reasoning in secondary science
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Joseph Taylor, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Xiufeng Liu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,163,546.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate
whether the integration of real data from cutting-edge scientific research in
grade 6-10 classrooms will increase quantitative reasoning ability in the
context of science. Data Nuggets are activity-based resources that address
current needs in STEM education and were developed by science graduate students
and science teachers at Michigan State University through prior support from the
NSF GK-12 program and the BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action.
The goal of Data Nuggets is to engage students in the practices of science
through an innovative approach that combines scientific content from authentic
research with key concepts in quantitative reasoning. Partners from Michigan
State University and BSCS will adapt the materials to address current science
and mathematics standards, create a professional development program for
teachers, and test the efficacy of the materials through a cluster-randomized
trial in the classrooms of 30 teachers in Michigan, Colorado, and California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study whether short, targeted
interventions of classroom activities embedded within a typical curriculum can
impact student outcomes. Prior to the study teachers will participate in
professional development. Classrooms of the teachers in the study will be
randomly assigned to either a treatment or comparison condition. Student outcome
measures will include understanding of quantitative reasoning in the context of
science, understanding of the practices and processes of science, student
engagement and motivation, and interest in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to adequately train the next generation of citizens and scientists,
research is needed on how quantitative reasoning skills build upon each other
throughout K-16 science education Students need to experience activities that
emphasize how science is conducted, and apply their understandings of how
scientists reason quantitatively. Establishing the efficacy of Data Nuggets
could provide the field with information about supplementing existing curriculum
with short interventions targeted at particular scientific practices. By
facilitating student access to authentic science, Data Nuggets bridge the gap
between scientists and the public. Scientists who create Data Nuggets practice
their communication skills and share both the process of science and research
findings with K-12 students (and perhaps their families), undergraduates, and
teachers, improving the understanding of science in society.