* 1503694
* Expediting the Identification, Analysis, and Interpretation of Paleogene Volcaniclastic Facies at IODP Site U1438, Expedition 351
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2015,10/31/2015
* Kathleen Marsaglia, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 10/31/2015
* USD 25,810.00

The Izu-Bonin-Mariana (IBM) system was the focus of International Ocean
Discovery Program (IODP) Expeditions 350, 351, and 352 in 2014. These
expeditions were designed to answer questions about the fundamental plate-
tectonic processes of convergent-margin initiation and crustal development in
intra-oceanic settings. The proposed research addresses primary objectives for
Expedition 351, specifically the history of magmatic arc initiation and
evolution as recorded in the overlying stratigraphic section. During the
expedition, a 1.6 km volcanic/sedimentary section was cored. This core records
the Eocene to Oligocene stratigraphic record, including the inception of
subduction, initiation of the magmatic arc, arc development, and arc decline ?
when arc rifting led to seafloor spreading in the Shikoku Basin and eastward
migration of the axis of arc magmatism to its present position south of Japan. A
detailed analysis of the sedimentology and sedimentary petrology of the core
will be performed. The analyses will provide insights into the nature, eruption
mechanism, proximity, and magmatic evolution of the volcanic sources (s) for the
sedimentary succession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sedimentary facies analysis
includes an assessment of the processes by which these sediments were produced
and then transported to the basin, based on integration of shipboard core
description and compositional and textural information from petrographic
examination of discrete samples. Results are tabulated and summarized in
detailed stratigraphic columns and facies motifs. Results will be integrated
with other post-cruise studies of specific mineral and glass component
geochemistry and isotopic analyses, pore water geochemistry, diagenetic studies,
and logging data. The research directly addresses a topic featured in the IODP
2013-2023 Science Plan, but also the NSF GeoPRISMS Science Plan for the
Subduction Cycles and Deformation initiative. Thus, results from this study are
scientifically relevant to a broad global audience of geoscientists and are
fundamental to the understanding of subduction initiation and magmatic arc
development.