* 1503852
* Ladder-Type Heteroacenes-New Classes of Electro-Optic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Luping Yu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program is supporting Professor Luping Yu at the University of Chicago to
develop a series of new compounds with laddered structures connected via fused
rings. These semiconductor compounds may find uses in electronic and optic
applications ranging from solar cells to molecular electronic components. The
research involves development of new synthetic approaches, structural
characterization, and physical measurements and enriches our understanding of
the chemistry and physics of semiconducting organic materials and of
organic/polymer chemistry. This interdisciplinary project integrates chemistry,
material science and computation to generate new research directions and
synthetic strategies for a new class of compounds. Students and postdoctoral
associates receive interdisciplinary training and learn the skills necessary to
face future scientific challenges. Underrepresented minority students are
recruited and encouraged to pursue scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop a series of new ladder conjugated oligomers
based on thienobenzothiophene and its analogs. The synthetic approach is a
versatile route to preparing a series of well-defined ladder oligomers which are
a new class of semiconducting molecules for various electro-optic applications
ranging from photovoltaic solar cells to molecular electronics. Several research
efforts are undertaken including: synthesis of new ladder oligomers with
different electronic and structural features, structural characterization,
syntheses of block copolymers for supramolecular assembly, and exploration of
the electro-optic properties of these new systems. Conjugated ladder oligomers
have not been fully investigated due to the lack of a feasible synthetic
approach to soluble molecules. A new class of "perfect" ladder oligomers
obtained from this project may be soluble, allowing detailed characterization
both in solution and in the solid state. The knowledge gained from these studies
may enrich understanding of structure-property relationships of conjugated
systems.