* 1503875
* CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service to Create Community Cyber Security Champions (CCSC) and a Collaborative Learning Environment
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Ramnath Sarnath, St. Cloud State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 3,304,762.00

This project seeks to establish a new CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at St. Cloud State University (SCSU) to prepare highly-qualified
Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the federal, state, local, and tribal
government workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;St. Cloud State University (SCSU) has
an undergraduate program in Information Technology Security (ITS) and a Master's
of Science in Information Assurance (MSIA), both of which are undergoing strong
growth. The proposed CyberCorps®: SFS program will create Community Cyber
Security Champions (CCSC) and a Collaborative Learning Environment. St. Cloud
State University has been designated as a National Center of Academic Excellence
in Information Assurance Education since 2009. ITS and MSIA students have solid
theoretical foundation, along with experiential learning opportunities
throughout the curriculum. They have participated in the Collegiate Cyber
Defense competition since 2007, won the state competition twice, and the Midwest
Regional competition once. In addition, they also won the national Open Web
Application Security project - Application Security competition in 2011. The
proposed project has a strong management plan, including student selection,
mentoring, and assessment. CyberCorps students will form a team of cybersecurity
champions leading an effort to educate the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the project is to attract, retain
and graduate high quality students with knowledge and skills necessary to join
government cybersecurity workforce. Another goal of the project is to attract
female students by exposing them to cybersecurity aspects that have direct
social impact. It will be accomplished by implementing community service
component, where scholarship recipients will educate the broader community. This
social part of the project may attract more female students and will benefit the
community as a whole. The student clubs will regularly organize community events
to educate the public on cyber threats and how to mitigate them. The project
involves two Minnesota Community Colleges: Century College in St. Paul and Lake
Superior College in Duluth. The project will also recruit from Lincoln
University in Missouri, an HBCU, and other minority serving institutions.
Scholarship recipients will form collaborative study groups involving students
from SCSU and the two Community Colleges to share knowledge and experience with
cyber defense practice.