* 1503919
* Encouraging Science Communication in the Wabash College Chemistry Department
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Laura Wysocki, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 09/30/2018
* USD 208,954.00

Providing undergraduate chemistry students with opportunities to acquire
effective science communication skills is an important component of science
education for the twenty-first century. Scientists encounter a variety of
audiences with which they must communicate, including peer disciplinary experts,
scientists from disciplines other than their own and the general public
audience. Current research in the field of science communication identifies
several types of methods by which the interchange of information occurs and
suggests that broadening the exchange of ideas between experts and the public is
a valuable pursuit. Yet undergraduate science programs rarely include meaningful
opportunities for students to learn how to communicate highly technical
information to others, especially to non-scientific members of the public. This
project will provide robust education in science communication by incorporating
innovative activities throughout the undergraduate chemistry curriculum at
Wabash College. For students majoring in chemistry, the activities will include
communicating laboratory results in a clear and effectual manner, translating
scientific data for a general audience and encouraging broad discussion of
science-related news items, innovations and public policy issues. For non-major
chemistry students, activities will be designed to demonstrate how to
incorporate scientific evidence into public decision-making about issues such as
energy policy and the use of genetically modified organisms. Integrating
effective communication skills into the science curriculum has the potential to
impact how educators think about science education, preparing students for the
challenges they will face after graduation. As they enter the workforce,
regardless of their career path, science graduates will be required to
communicate scientific principles, concepts and results to clients, patients,
members of teams of collaborators, investors and many more audiences. In the
public sphere, they will be faced with countless conversations with non-
scientists about policies related to science and technology, issues of health
and safety and actions that affect society as a whole. This interdisciplinary
science communication approach of this project spans the entire chemistry
curriculum and will develop valuable skills in students to create well-rounded
citizen-scientists who can competently serve as leaders for their communities
and their governments in the future.

The overarching focus of the project is to build capacity in students and their
professors to create learning environments that will ultimately empower students
to understand, interpret and explain complex scientific matters competently,
which will ultimately facilitate effective communication with both scientific
peers and the general public. The primary goals of this project are: (1) to
develop innovative curriculum-based modules that cultivate science communication
skills in Wabash College Chemistry majors and minors; (2) to increase the
abilities of non-science majors to understand the importance of scientific
research and evidence in personal and public decision making; and (3) to
encourage faculty development in science communication education. Project
activities will include providing students early in the curriculum with exposure
to the language of chemical research. More advanced undergraduates will engage
in translational science communication activities, public presentations of
scientific news items and will receive guidance via evaluation of oral
communication through senior comprehensive examinations. Faculty professional
development will be achieved through a series of summer workshops for Wabash
College Chemistry faculty and chemistry faculty members from a diverse group of
other institutions, including two-year colleges. Additionally, materials and
outcomes generated by the project will be disseminated through conferences and
workshops to encourage and equip other faculty to integrate science
communication into their curricula. To evaluate the activities, the project will
use pre- and post-surveys that incorporate quantitative and qualitative measures
to assess items such as self-reported learning gains and the ways students
and/or faculty conceptualize science communication.