* 1503601
* Spin Dependent Transport in Materials with Multivalley Band Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hanan Dery, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 294,281.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental theoretical
research and education to understand how electron spin behaves in materials
contributing to the foundations of possible future electronic devices which
function by manipulating electron spin as well as its charge. In addition to
carrying an electric charge, an electron is also in a sense like a spinning top
that behaves according to the rules of quantum mechanics. There are two senses
of spin to an electron and it is natural to explore using the electron to
physically represent information, like the familiar '0' and '1' in digital
electronics. Spintronics research aims to introduce the quantum mechanical spin
into electronic devices by making use of the interactions between the electron
spin and its environment in a material. Because charge-based field effect
transistors are rapidly approaching their physical limits, the spin-charge
computation scheme has recently become an active research
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop theoretical models that quantify spin
transport in materials that include silicon and elements vertically above and
below silicon in the periodic table of elements. The PI will also investigate
crystals that are essentially a single layer of atoms such as transition-metal
dichalcogenides which are made of atoms from the transition-metal block of the
periodic table and elements from the periodic table vertically below oxygen.
This modeling is aimed to enable the design of spintronic devices in which the
time needed for manipulating and processing information is prolonged by strain
engineering and proper application of external electric fields. The primary
research focus will be on quantifying this spin relaxation time in doped
materials where the conductivity is improved either by intentionally adding
foreign atoms that donate/accept electrons to/from the host crystal, or by
applying a gate-voltage that brings charge carriers into atomically thin
materials from surrounding materials. &lt;br/&gt;This project presents ideas
that are fascinating to a wide range of students. Through collaboration of
materials science, physics and engineering graduate students, each learns from
the other concepts of quantum mechanics or device function. The PI will actively
promote this research among K-12 students by delivering interactive
lectures/demos that highlight the use of future technology in devices. The PI
aims to utilize the potential of this research for societal impact to help
attract students from under-represented groups to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of the interactions between the electron's spin
and its solid-state environment in metallic material systems has spurred immense
development in information storage technologies. Contrary to metals, silicon
holds complete sway over logic circuits. Fortunately, this and other group IV
materials are promising candidates for spintronic logic devices owing to their
crystalline inversion symmetry which suppresses precession of spins about
randomly changing intrinsic magnetic fields, and the zero nuclear spin of their
naturally abundant isotopes which suppresses spin relaxation by hyperfine
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;A major objective in this project will be to fill a
longstanding gap in the theory of spin relaxation processes in multi-valley
semiconductors such as silicon and germanium. The spin relaxation in these
materials shows a strong dependence on the identity of the donor atom. By
invoking analytical and numerical methods, the PI will quantify the donor-driven
spin relaxation by establishing a connection with the induced changes in the
donor ground state due to the spin orbit coupling. The effect will be
investigated as a function of strain, temperature, donor concentration, and
donor identity. &lt;br/&gt;Apart from group IV materials, monolayer transition-
metal dichalcogenides and oxides present another important class of materials
potentially useful for spintronics. These two-dimensional monolayer
semiconductors put together exotic charge, spin and valley electronic phenomena.
The strong binding between electrons and holes, a result of the impeded Coulomb
screening in genuine 2D systems, enables exceptionally strong light-matter
interaction that persists up to room temperature.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
systematically quantify the momentum scattering and spin relaxation due to
electron-phonon interaction in two-dimensional crystals such as graphene and
transition-metal dichalcogenides. Transport effects will include signatures of
electrical fields via piezoelectricity and symmetry breaking by the gate
voltage. The PI will also analyze the often-discussed topological insulator
phase in two-dimensional crystals from the perspective of
relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to recruit qualified undergraduate students to
participate in the research, and teach a new course on spintronics which
explains how quantum mechanics and magnetism can be applied into new logic and
memory architectures. The PI will try to recruit McNair scholars and will work
with the Kearns Center at the University of Rochester to attract students from
under-represented minorities to this research.