* 1503414
* Mathematical and Computational Methods for Planning a Sustainable Future II
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Margaret Cozzens, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,940,131.00

The project will develop modules for grades 9-12 that integrate mathematics,
computing and science in sustainability contexts. The project materials also
include information about STEM careers in sustainability to increase the
relevancy of the content for students and broaden their understanding of STEM
workforce opportunities. It uses summer workshops to pilot test materials and
online support and field testing in four states. Outcomes include the modules,
tested and revised; strategies for transfer of learning embedded in the modules;
and a compendium of green jobs, explicitly related to the modules. The Discovery
Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects. The
STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) Program is a joint effort between the
Directorate for Education &amp; Human Resources (EHR) and Directorate Computer
&amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE). Reflecting the increasing
role of computational approaches in learning across the STEM disciplines, STEM+C
supports research and development efforts that integrate computing within one or
more STEM disciplines and/or integrate STEM learning in computer science; 2)
advance multidisciplinary, collaborative approaches for integrating computing in
STEM in and out of school, and 3) build capacity in K-12 computing education
through foundational research and focused teacher
preparation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a full design and development
project in the learning strand of DRK-12. The goal is to enhance transfer of
knowledge in mathematics and science via sustainability tasks with an emphasis
on mathematical and scientific practices. The research questions focus on how
conceptual representations and the modules support students' learning and
especially transfer to novel problems. The project design integrates the
research with the curriculum development. It includes a mixed methods data
collection and analysis from teachers and students (e.g., interviews, content
exams, focus groups, implementation logs). Assessment of student work includes
both short, focused problems in the content area and longer project-based tasks
providing a range of assessments of student learning. The investigators will
develop a rubric for scoring student work on the tasks. The curriculum design
process includes iterations of the modules over time with feedback from teachers
and using data collected from the implementation.