* 1503277
* Thirteenth International Congress on Mathematical Education (ICME-13) Travel Grant
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Gail Burrill, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 05/31/2018
* USD 284,249.00

This project will support the participation of 55 U.S. K-12 mathematics teachers
or supervisors, graduate students, community college/university mathematics
teachers, mathematicians, mathematics teacher educators and mathematics
education researchers to attend the Thirteenth International Congress for
Mathematical Education (ICME-13) to be held in Hamburg, Germany, July 24-31,
2016. The project will also prepare an educational status report (called the
Fact Book) for the United States. The research team will report on the state of
U.S. mathematics education in 2016, through a Fact Book that builds from those
published for ICMEs 9, 10, 11, and 12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
participation in the conference, American math educators will interact with
mathematics educators from many countries and learn about their current math
education practices concerning curriculum development, the use of technology in
learning mathematics, strategies for reaching all students, teacher education
and ongoing teacher professional development. The project is supported major
national mathematics research and professional societies including the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Association of Mathematics Teacher
Educators, United States National Commission on Mathematical Instruction,
Mathematical Association of America, American Mathematical Society and American
Mathematical Association of Two Year Colleges. Participants will disseminate
information and resources from the conference through these mathematics
organizations, math education journals, and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) program seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. This conference will advance the
understanding of the U.S mathematics community regarding current international
research and development in mathematics education, addressing the Teaching and
Learning strands of the DRK-12 program.