* 1503595
* In-situ Transmission Electron Microscopy Studies of Metal Contact with InGaAs Nanochannels: Correlating Interface Reactions with Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Shadi Dayeh, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical Description: This research project focuses on the development of
fundamental understanding and control of metal-semiconductor reactions at
nanoscale. The research team utilizes transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to
study, at the atomic scale and in real time, the relationship between structure,
properties, and functionality of these nanoscale materials similar to the
working conditions of a new class of nanoscale transistors. The research is
expected to provide new insights into the fundamental materials science on the
metal-semiconductor interface and their reactions, an area of technological
importance for developing metal contacts for advanced III-V compound
semiconductor transistor channels. The outreach and educational activities are
well integrated with the research activities and include (1) developing new
sections in current graduate and undergraduate courses in the multidisciplinary
area of semiconductor heterostructures and microfabrication, and (2) involving
high-school and undergraduate students in hands-on research through various
outreach activities at UC San Diego, with a particular emphasis on the inclusion
of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: In this
research project, the PI and his team utilize a novel transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) measurement method to monitor, in-situ, reactions of metal
contact with III-V semiconductors. Fins of III-V semiconductors are wafer bonded
to a Si TEM grid using Ni silicidation to form free-standing nanoscale
heterostructures (i.e., nanochannels) for both in-situ heating study and ex-situ
electrical measurements. Multiple nanochannels designed with various channel
widths, III-V crystallographic orientations, and surface morphologies, can be
integrated on the same TEM grid for the combined in-situ and ex-situ studies.
With this capability, the team correlates the resulted nanochannel composition,
interface structure and the transistor performance with the effects of III-V fin
size, crystallographic orientation and stress. In particular, the research work
allows experiments on alloy formation between Ni and InGaAs as a function of
size and crystal orientation and addresses the following scientific questions:
(i) the III-V fin size effects on the structure and composition of the formed
NiInGaAs alloys, (ii) the influence of interfaces and strain engineering on the
Ni-InGaAs reaction and nucleation in ultra-short channels, and (iii) the effect
of a limited Ni diffusion source in a multi-layered contact stack on the alloy
composition and structure. The findings are important for developing Ohmic
contacts for sub-10 nanometer III-V compound semiconductor transistor channels.
The wafer bonding of nanochannel structures on TEM grid for the combined in-situ
TEM and ex-situ electrical study can potentially enable fundamental interface
studies in other materials systems.