* 1503563
* PECAN: Ground Based Lidar and Micro Wave Radiometer and Radiosonde Profiling of the Thermodynamic and Dynamic Structure of the Nocturnal Boundary
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Belay Demoz, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2019
* USD 309,631.00

This award is for participation in the Plains Elevated Convection at Night
(PECAN) field campaign. PECAN will take place in the central United States in
the summer of 2015. The focus of the overall project is on overnight
thunderstorm complexes that regularly occur in the Great Plains area. A variety
of observational systems will be put in place for the field experiment including
multiple aircraft, mobile radars, and ground-based systems that can profile the
wind and particles in the lower atmosphere. This individual project will provide
funding for researchers to provide instrumentation at one of the campaign ground
sites. The researchers will focus on measurements that describe the environment
prior to the initiation of the thunderstorms. This project will help to increase
understanding of these convective systems in order to better predict and warn
the public of hazardous weather. The project will also help train the future
generation of scientists by involving a student in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The steering committee for the PECAN campaign has
identified four main research topics to be addressed: 1) Nocturnal convection
initiation and early evolution of mesoscale convective clusters; 2) Bore and
other wave-like disturbances; 3) Dynamics and microphysics of nocturnal
mesoscale convective systems; 4) Prediction of nocturnal convection initiation
and evolution. This objective of this project is to provide a quantitative
assessment of the evolution of the nighttime boundary layer and entire
troposphere with particular attention to its potential for elevated convection.
The researchers will coordinate and manage the deployment and data acquisition
of highly resolved water vapor mixing ratio, temperature, aerosol structure and
wind profiles at one of the Fixed PECAN Integrated Sounding Array (PISA) sites.
The specific instrumentation includes a wind lidar, sounding system, ceilometer,
and Raman lidar.