* 1503734
* Collaborative Research: Using protein function prediction to promote hypothesis-driven thinking in undergraduate biochemistry education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Robert Stewart, Oral Roberts University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 23,783.00

Recognizing the national need for significant improvement in undergraduate STEM
education, collaborators from six institutions (Rochester Institute of
Technology, St. Mary's University, Oral Roberts University, Hope College,
Ursinus College, and California Polytechnic University) will explore a new
approach to introduce students to authentic research in biochemistry laboratory
courses. The project will test the hypotheses that engaging in authentic
research will improve students' abilities to master key aspects of
experimentation (experimental design, data processing and interpretation, and
communication of research outcomes) and visualization (use of representations to
communicate various aspects of the research process). The project is likely to
be transferrable to other institutions, and is an example of a cost-effective
way to introduce course-based research into the undergraduate curriculum.

Biochemistry laboratory courses will be redesigned to include modules in which
students will integrate computational and wet lab techniques as they
characterize proteins whose three dimensional structures are known but to which
functions have not been previously ascribed. Because the project is focused on
discovery, it is reasonable to expect that some of the students will produce
novel results that will contribute to the field of biochemistry. Formative and
summative evaluation will address assessment of student learning gains in terms
of improved conceptual understanding and visualization of experiments using a
validated instrument composed of open-ended and closed-ended questions. Faculty
members and teaching assistants will be surveyed and interviewed about their
satisfaction with the project, its usability, and the extent to which they see
the project as part of their own and their students' development. The project
team will create and disseminate modules (promol.org) that form the core of a
new curriculum for undergraduate biochemistry laboratory courses. The results of
the work will be presented at professional meetings, such as the American
Society of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and submitted to scholarly
journals.