* 1503751
* How to adapt efficiently using distributed resources and multiple models to time varing dynamic systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Kumpati Narendra, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2019
* USD 366,777.00

When the environment in which a person or a device is operating is relatively
constant, but uncertain, information can be collected slowly and used to make
decisions. However, the situation is quite different when critical decisions
have to be made rapidly as the environment changes. Such situations arise in
medical emergencies, trading in the stock market, conflict management, and
taking counter-terror measures. In such cases, there is (i) incomplete
information about the situation (ii) uncertain or unreliable information and
(iii) limited resources. The aim of the proposed research is to use the given
resources as efficiently as possible to find adequate responses. The central
idea of the research is to exploit the information coming from distributed
sources, and decide at every instant how to combine the information for decision
making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems that continuously monitor their own
performance, and adjust their control strategies to improve the performance are
considered. These are both stable and robust for time-invariant plants when the
parametric uncertainty is small. However, in recent years the need for analytic
tools for reacting effectively to large uncertainties and rapidly varying
environments, in the presence of input and output disturbances, has been arising
in a variety of fields including biology and medicine, economics and finance,
and various engineering problems such as energy management, aircraft and
automotive control, and security. In many of these applications, it has been
found that classical adaptive algorithms result in large and oscillatory (and
possibly unstable) responses. To address such problems, the use of different
methods based on multiple models has been proposed by the PI. These include a)
Switching b) Switching and Tuning c) Interactive adaptation and d) Second Level
adaptation. The first method involves switching between fixed models, while the
second method combines adaptive switching and continuous adaptation. The third
method is based on novel ways of locating models, while the fourth method
confined search of unknown parameters to convex regions. In complex problems,
the variations that can occur cannot be classified easily. The proposal attempts
to study methods for adapting efficiently by distributing resources.