* 1504718
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging "Big Data" to Explore Big Ideas: Utilizing the Paleobiology Database to Provide Hands-on Research Opportunities for Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Mark Uhen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2021
* USD 222,763.00

With the rapid growth of "big data" in the sciences, the need to understand and
manage their use in undergraduate education has become increasingly important.
This project will investigate how the Paleobiology Database (PBDB), a large
database of fossil information, can be leveraged to provide research experiences
to undergraduates at two and four-year colleges that do not necessarily have
extensive fossil collections of their own. It will also investigate how
students' attitudes towards scientific research change after engaging in
research experiences using a large database such as the PBDB. Two year colleges
and distance-based learning initiatives seek research-based alternatives to
traditional lab activities, and "big data" provides opportunities for the hands-
on science they pursue. "Big data" science initiatives, such as the Paleobiology
Database (PBDB), provide affordable and easily accessible research
opportunities, but the extent of their value in the undergraduate classroom has
yet to be tested and documented. The PBDB contains a wealth of data on fossils
entered by experts from around the world. Research skills, such as critical
thinking, statistics, and computing, are essential to scientifically literate
citizens. This project will guide how other large scientific databases can be
used to craft research experiences for undergraduate students, and provide the
means for other earth science programs to engage their undergraduates in
scientific research.

Integration of research experiences into the undergraduate classroom can result
in increased recruitment, retention, persistence, and motivation of science
students. "Big data" science initiatives, such as the Paleobiology Database
(PBDB), can provide inexpensive and accessible research opportunities, but the
value of these programs in the undergraduate classroom has yet to be tested and
documented. This project will: (1) evaluate how research experiences using the
PBDB compare to field or lab-based research experiences; (2) establish how a
large online database can be leveraged as a tool to provide effective research
experiences for students at two and four-year colleges; (3) and determine how
research databases can be used to teach STEM principles to non-majors, majors,
and pre- service teachers. To accomplish these goals, guided research activities
and a new user interface will be developed for the PBDB. The project will
implement the PBDB-based research activities across two pairs of two-year and
four-year institutions in Virginia that attract students with broadly diverse
backgrounds. This project will assess how applicable "big data" science is to
undergraduate education, specifically to what extent online databases can engage
students in authentic research experiences. Research activities will focus on
content crucial to scientific literacy, and will be scaffolded to build
transferable skills including critical thinking, quantitative skills, and
database savvy. The new PBDB interface and research activities resulting from
this work will be implemented across a diversity of two- and four-year colleges,
allowing the evaluation of its applicability across institution types and
student populations, including distance learning versus traditional educational
settings.