* 1504030
* A Spiral Computer Engineering Lab Framework
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Pong Chu, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2020
* USD 245,373.00

This project is establishing a "spiral" laboratory framework for a computer
engineering curriculum in which the key concepts are revisited at increasing
levels of sophistication and interconnection. Instead of treating each course as
an isolated topic, the project is developing a sequence of laboratory
experiments and projects weaving through the entire curriculum, from freshman
engineering to senior capstone design. This approach will help students see the
"big picture" of the discipline and enhance their "integration skills" to
address complex and realistic problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
connects and integrates the individual courses through laboratories that
incorporate three types of media: video, audio, and touch sensor. The
laboratories are designed to illustrate and reinforce key theoretical concepts
in various courses. Their complexities and abstraction levels gradually grow as
students progress through the curriculum. Each individual project and its
components eventually evolve into a complete set of IP (intellectual property)
cores that form customizable I/O subsystems that can be incorporated into any
FPGA (field programmable gate array) based computer system. The overall project
addresses a serious deficiency - lack of integration skill - in the engineering
curriculum. It uses low-cost prototyping boards and parts and can be easily
incorporated into existing curricular structures. The improved curriculum will
enhance students' integration skill, make them aware of the big context, and
keep them interested and motivated. The project will be implemented in two
institutions in parallel and its effectiveness will be evaluated.