* 1504224
* Arctic Observing Networks: Collaborative Research: ITEX AON - understanding the relationships between vegetation change, plant phenology, and ecosystem function in a warming Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2020
* Robert Hollister, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 09/30/2020
* USD 304,439.00

Arctic ecosystems are changing in response to arctic warming, which is
proceeding more than twice as fast as the global average. The International
Tundra Experiment (ITEX) was established in the early 1990s to understand the
effects of warming and environmental variability on tundra vegetation properties
and ecosystem function. The ITEX program has been extremely valuable for
detection of changes in tundra plant and ecosystem responses to experimental
warming and to background climate change across sites that span the major
ecosystems of the Arctic. In 2007, the Alaskan and Greenland ITEX sites were
combined into an Arctic Observatory Network (AON). The current ITEX AON project
will continue to document and understand Arctic terrestrial vegetation change
and its ecosystem consequences by maintaining the long-term datasets of the
ITEX-AON. The warming experiment of ITEX-AON allows us to assign the cause for
observed changes in response to warming instead of relying on simple
correlations. This project provides urgently needed data on changes in
vegetation and the importance of these changes for ecosystem services from a
variety of Arctic ecosystems. This project will provide training for
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in the emerging fields of
remote sensing, cybertechnology and big-data analysis. The project will include
outreach activities through strong relationships with the CLEO Institute in
Miami; the Grand Valley State University Regional Math and Science Center; and
K-12 school systems in Miami, Anchorage, Grand Rapids and El Paso. All data from
this project are and will be freely available at the NSF Arctic Data Center.

The core datasets of the proposed research include manual observations of
phenology, vegetation structure and composition, and ecosystem function (carbon
flux and nutrient cycling) on long-term ITEX control and experimental warming
plots, repeat measurement of vegetation plots on the long-term 1 km2 vegetation
grids, and a multifactor warming/moisture experiment in Greenland. In 2009, the
sampling scheme was expanded to include a larger spatial component to amplify
the value of the measurements collected. This expansion included the addition of
phenocams, automated mobile sensor platforms, and medium-scale aerial imagery.
The automated platforms measure a suite of vegetation surface properties with
minimal effort across focal transects spanning strong moisture and
microtopographic gradients at a near-daily frequency. These measurements capture
the fine-scale changes in vegetation over the growing season that are missed by
lower frequency manual measurements and provide a bridge between manual
measurements and aerial imagery. Medium-scale aerial imagery, using Kite Aerial
or Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, is acquired throughout the growing season for
scaling of manual and automated measurements; satellite imagery is referenced to
medium-scale aerial imagery to aid scaling of responses to the regional level.
In the newest phase of AON ITEX, we are particularly focused on understanding
the relationship between landscape subsidence as a result of permafrost thaw and
vegetation structure and function because of the potential for significant
positive feedbacks to climate change.