* 1504528
* Interdisciplinary Scholarship for Service for the Inter-Mountain West - Idaho State University
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2023
* Corey Schou, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 3,969,830.00

Idaho State University (ISU) proposes to add four new cohorts of undergraduate
and graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program in cybersecurity combined with MBA degree. A unique feature of
this program is a mandatory participation in a weekly 20-hour Practicum,
generating a variety of student research projects focused on the broad theme of
organizational information asset protection. Program provides students with hard
and soft modalities via emphasis in technical skills as well as policy,
operations, and project management. Students need to demonstrate a strong
cybersecurity background, critical thinking skills and second language
competency. Another feature of the ISU's CyberCorps(R) SFS program is a
requirement to complete three standard cybersecurity certifications: Security+,
SSCP and CISSP. Integration of MBA business skills with cybersecurity knowledge
results in attractive graduates that are in demand by hiring managers of
government agencies. The program uses community of scholars approach to
learning, case-based cybersecurity projects, Saturday classes for critical
thinking topics, hands-on experience in specialized labs, and peer-led learning
in policy, procedures and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is having
an immediate impact on the cybersecurity capabilities of the federal workforce
by providing graduates with security skills to federal agencies. Through
directed work, students may emphasize industrial control systems, cloud
security, forensics, secure software, health care security as well as National
Security Information procedures. The program has evolved from certification and
accreditation focus to continuous monitoring and defensive simulations,
including development of cyber competitions and infrastructure simulation.
Recruitment of underrepresented groups expands upon the regular recruitment of
women and minorities at ISU and is resulting in a better diversity in the SFS
program than the overall campus percentages. The PIs have developed a strong
partnership with Hampton University, an HBCU, which is creating a strong
minority pipeline to the ISU program. Our cyber-range is used worldwide. An
annual student led effort during October Cyber Security Awareness month embraced
media outlets, including radio PSAs, and cybersecurity lectures at the local
schools.