* 1504956
* Collaborative Research: Multimedia learning principles for design-it-yourself online instruction of GIS concepts
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Jeffrey Howarth, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2019
* USD 91,309.00

This project will contribute to the development and creation of engaged learning
environments in which students will solve geography problems by using a
geographic information system (GIS), a computer software system used to capture,
store, manipulate and analyze location-based information. The project will also
provide instructors with 'design-it-yourself' guidance for developing online
instructional materials that engage students in learning before they enter the
classroom. The project will test evidence-based principles of multimedia
learning theory and will extend this theory by testing the applications of these
principles to a lesson that aims to improve 'spatial thinking' skills, the
ability to visualize objects in three dimensions and to draw conclusions about
those objects with limited information. By focusing on instructional methods
that can be implemented prior to student interaction with a GIS, this project
will contribute to the development and creation of engaged learning environments
in geography education. Using evidence-based design principles for lessons on
solving problems with a GIS can help retain early-stage students in introductory
STEM courses. The resulting improvements in instructional design of college STEM
courses will have a particularly positive impact on students who need support in
developing spatial thinking skills in introductory courses.

A series of randomized controlled experiments will be employed to examine how
specific instructional features in the way the lessons are presented affect
learning outcomes, such as, whether the learner reads or listens to verbal
explanations, whether the presentation is continuous or self-paced, whether
words and pictures appear drawn by hand or by computer, and whether pictures
appear before or coincide with a verbal explanation. The project will also test
for spatial ability and examine how individual differences in a learner's
spatial abilities affect the impact of these instructional features. A series of
experiments will test hypotheses from multimedia learning theory and measure
learning outcomes through transfer and retention tests. A preliminary
intervention study to investigate whether incorporating well-designed online
lessons in an introductory GIS class improves student engagement and learning
outcomes will also be conducted. The final products will be (i) a set of
evidence-based principles regarding how to design online GIS lessons, and (ii) a
model application in a blended learning classroom. This project will also
provide empirical evidence evaluating the generalizability of multimedia
learning theory to the understudied domain of college education in spatial
thinking with computer software systems. The project will systematically
investigate how evidence-based methods of presenting words and pictures interact
with spatial abilities to affect learning outcomes.