* 1504069
* Collaborative Research: Reconciling conflicting Arctic temperature and fire reconstructions using multi-proxy records from lake sediments north of the Brooks Range, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Carrie Morrill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,428.00

Temperature reconstructions from the region north of the Brooks Range in Alaska
suggest a warmer-than-present Last Glacial Maximum (LGM, 26,500 to 19,000 years
ago). Global climate models differ strongly in their simulations of this region,
with some suggesting a warmer and others a colder climate. There are virtually
no high-resolution temperature records from this region. Robust temperature
reconstructions spanning the LGM to present are therefore needed to test the
outputs from climate models and to understand regional sensitivity to climate
forcing. Associated with the ambiguous temperature history is uncertainty in the
regional fire history, as revealed by the unexpected discovery of three major
Alaskan tundra fires in last 150 years. These fires contradict the conventional
notion that tundra ecosystems rarely, if ever, burn and stimulate a key
question: What are the relationships between climate change, fire, and
vegetation since the LGM? This project will develop careful reconstructions of
temperatures in the region using records obtained from lake cores. The resulting
data will then be compared with a variety of climate model outputs.

The project will contribute to workforce development by supporting the training
of two graduate students. The students and their mentors will leverage
activities of the Brown STEM Outreach Office to K-12 classrooms in Providence,
RI, where the classroom population is composed largely of under-represented
minorities in the STEM fields. The project will entrain a K-12 teacher into the
laboratory during the summer and support the teacher's participation in a major
regional science meeting. The team will participate in the Kaktovik Oceanography
Program, a project in the Inupiat village of Kaktovik, Alaska for K-12 students.
The data collected will be made public and serve as a reference for Alaskan
tundra science. Finally, the principal investigators will expand an existing
project blog into a dedicated website for public outreach concerning the
project.

The PIs will generate high resolution, multiproxy records of temperature and
fire since the LGM from sediment cores of four lakes on the North Slope of
Alaska using a suite of organic geochemical and traditional paleoecological
proxies. These data will be tested against predictions from fully coupled
climate models to evaluate the ability of IPCC-grade models to simulate past
temperature changes, and to evaluate potential forcings and feedbacks that
regulate regional temperatures. The work is built upon initial studies that
indicate that: 1) strong, quantifiable relationships exist between alkenone
distributions and early summer temperature in these lakes, and plant leaf wax
D/H ratios in Arctic lake sediments record mean summer temperatures; 2)
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) in lake sediments record the regional
fire history; and 3) multiproxy analysis can determine temperature changes in
early, middle and mean summer temperatures and will permit critical examination
on the impacts of seasonal temperature change and its associated feedbacks and
forcing. The PAH approach complements charcoal records and allows detection of
paleo-fires across a broader regional scale. Study sites are located within the
Toolik Field Station Arctic Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site, which
only began to provide continuous, strategically important monitoring data since
1975. The study will provide fundamental, high quality temperature and fire
data, placing the past 40 years of instrumental monitoring in the grand context
of the Holocene and late Pleistocene.