* 1504630
* Implementing and Investigating Mathematical Modeling as a Means to Demonstrate the Interdisciplinary Nature of Science and Increase STEM Retention
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Ray Klump, Lewis University
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 06/30/2018
* USD 201,123.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE) Program, this project will address the established and growing
national need to increase the quantity and diversity of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate majors as well as improve
their preparation to enter the workforce. In particular, the project team at
Lewis University in Romeoville, Illinois, will redesign Calculus for Life
Sciences by: (i) adopting and adapting evidence-based best practices in the
mathematical modeling of biological systems; (ii) developing students'
computational skills with respect to real-life problems; and (iii) fostering
interdisciplinary and cooperative student interactions and learning. Faculty
from biology, computer science, and mathematics will collaborate to design this
course, primarily for biology and computer science majors.

Goals of the project include: 1) enhancing the attitudes and practices that
correlate with success and retention in STEM; 2) improving learning outcomes,
academic performance, and first-year STEM retention; 3) and providing STEM
faculty development for community college university faculty to integrate
mathematical modeling, including computational activities, into additional STEM
courses. The project will also embrace the growing diversity of the
institution's student population by providing professional development for
faculty in cultural competency and culturally sensitive pedagogies. The design
of the project's research and evaluation plans are comprehensive and utilize
matched comparison cohorts and a mixed methodology for quantitative and
qualitative data to assess the impact of activities and pedagogies on student
learning, attitudes, and retention, and to determine how to refine and improve
the approaches taken. The project will provide a model for improving
interdisciplinary STEM learning that will be disseminated through faculty
professional development and replicated in other STEM courses and at other
institutions, impacting a greater number of students and strengthening the
institutions' capacities to retain and graduate more and higher quality STEM
majors.