* 1504865
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD: TAILORING JET INSTABILITIES USING ULTRASONIC MICROACTUATORS
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* John Solomon, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 239,657.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Tuskegee University has potential broader impact in a number of areas.
The goal of the project is to study fundamental characteristics of jet
instability and its potential alteration using an ultra-frequency micro-fluidic
actuation technique called resonance enhanced microjets (REM). Instability
modification, using REM, has potential applications in augmentation of air-fuel
mixing in supersonic flow and control of jet noise. Undergraduate students will
gain research experience in experimental fluid mechanics. A course in
experimental fluid mechanics that includes topics such as digital data
acquisition, random data analysis and gas dynamics will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes the design and fabrication
of REM in the ultra-frequency range (above 20 kHz) and the study of their
interaction and impact on shear layer dynamics of an air jet in free and cross-
flow configuration. The jet properties will be studied using unsteady intrusive
probes as well as non-intrusive techniques such as laser based microschlieren
and planar scattering imaging. The proposed micro-actuation scheme is expected
to modify inherent instabilities of a jet, exciting the most unstable modes and
generating high frequency three dimensional vorticities for enhanced entrainment
and diffusion. The actuators proposed here can produce high momentum pulsed
disturbances up to 50 kHz generating instabilities every 20 microseconds in the
cross-flow jet. Since such a time scale is very close to the mixing time of a
high-speed combustor, this approach is expected to potentially enhance air-fuel
mixing in supersonic flows. Fundamental studies on such a tailored jet flowfield
will be useful for designing high-speed combustors with improved air-fuel mixing
and flame stability.