* 1504469
* Collaborative research: Does dissolved organic matter influence the concentrations and distributions of trace elements in the Arctic Ocean?
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Rainer Amon, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 399,878.00

The investigators propose to take advantage of three already-funded research
expeditions to investigate the distribution of cycling of natural dissolved
organic material (DOM) in the Arctic Ocean and in particular its relationship to
the cycling of trace metals such as iron. The Arctic Ocean has experienced
significant changes over the last 30 years, including declining sea ice and
increasing continental runoff. The Arctic is considered a harbinger of changes
in the carbon and hydrological cycles, with important implications for regional
and global climate. How the physical, chemical and biological structure of the
Arctic Ocean will respond to such fundamental changes is poorly understood. The
proposed research will provide novel insights about dissolved organic matter and
its role in trace element cycling. Recent studies provide tantalizing data
indicating the transport and fate of DOM and trace metals are closely linked in
the Arctic Ocean, and suggesting an important role of continental runoff and sea
ice formation in the distribution of DOM and associated trace metals.

Water samples will be collected and analyzed for dissolved organic carbon and
nitrogen, amino acids, lignin phenols and detailed optical characterization of
chromophoric DOM (CDOM) during 3 expeditions in 2015 aboard the USCGC Healy, the
German ice breaker Polarstern, and the Japanese research vessel Mirai. The
combined optical and molecular analyses will be used to distinguish and quantify
terrigenous and marine DOM and their potential interactions with trace elements.
A probe for measuring in situ fluorescence of DOM will be interfaced with the
CTD/rosette for high-resolution mapping and real-time examination of interesting
features to guide sampling efforts. The U.S. and German expeditions are part of
the international GEOTRACES program, whose goals are to identify processes and
quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and
isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these distributions
to changing environmental conditions. The U.S. Arctic GEOTRACES project has
established a central outreach program for this research program including
meetings with local communities in Alaska, recruiting a high school teacher to
participate in the expedition and interact with schools in the US and beyond via
a blog. These investigators will tie into the existing GEOTRACES outreach
efforts and will link interested Texas and South Carolina Schools to the
expedition blog. This project will train 3 graduate students in and expose about
6 undergraduate students to research in the Arctic Ocean. The goal of the
teaching component of this project is to provide students with an experience
that demonstrates the scientific method, from development of goals and
hypotheses to experimental design and presentation of results. Findings of this
project will be conveyed to the public using established links with local
newspapers where students describe research projects in their own words.