* 1504006
* Collaborative Research: Carbon, Water, and Energy Balance of the Arctic Landscape at Flagship Observatories in Alaska and Siberia
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* George Kling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/28/2019
* USD 79,497.00

Arctic terrestrial ecosystems exchange greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide and
methane), water vapor, and energy with the atmosphere. The balance between
uptake and release of these quantities influences both the Arctic region and the
global climate system. The terrestrial cycling of carbon, water, and energy are
strongly linked, and therefore need to be studied at the same time and in the
same place. This project continues long-term measurements of carbon, water, and
energy balance in terrestrial and freshwater systems in the Alaskan Arctic,
extending measurements that began in 2007. Carbon loss over the winter has
recently increased dramatically at one of our study sites, as winter air and
soil temperatures have warmed. This study will determine whether these losses
continue and seek to understand the underlying causes. Broader impacts of this
project include contributions to teaching and learning, including
underrepresented groups, support of undergraduate summer research, participation
in the Marine Biology Laboratory Logan Science Journalism program and the Arctic
LTER Schoolyard program, and outreach to K-12 schools in Fairbanks, Alaska, and
to Native Alaskan communities. This project will support career development of
two female Principal Investigators at UAF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will extend continuous measurements of carbon, water, and energy
balance in three tundra ecosystems near Imnavait Creek, Alaska.
Ecosystem/atmosphere flux measurements have been collected at these sites via
eddy covariance since 2007. Long-term monitoring of hydrology and stream
chemistry of Imnavait Creek and depth of thaw in its catchment area will be
maintained. Additional measurements to help interpret these data will include
water table depth, plant community composition, and vegetation greenness via
reflectivity, which is related to leaf area and biomass. Long-term measurements
of stream chemistry and discharge are available at Imnavait, enabling
comprehensive assessment of carbon budgets. All data will be made publicly
available and archived at the Arctic Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) web
site, the International Arctic Research Center Data Archive, and the Advanced
Cooperative Arctic Data and Information Service (ACADIS).&lt;br/&gt;