* 1504243
* Exploring Virtual Interactive Models for Large Scale Research Mentoring of Undergraduate Women in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Lori Pollock, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2021
* USD 182,279.00

The Computing Research Association's Committee on the Status of Women in
Computing Research (CRA-W) will design, implement and evaluate a virtual
research mentoring "town hall" model for large-scale mentoring of undergraduate
women majors in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) towards research and
graduate school. Women have been earning only 18% of the Bachelor's degrees in
CSE from 2008-2012. These trends significantly limit the number of CSE women
advancing into research and teaching careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will engage students in interactive meetings with distinguished female CSE
researchers and students at virtually connected sites where local groups of
women students are gathered. Distinguished researchers will present mini-
lectures on their research and its impact, followed by an interactive question-
and-answer town hall with mentoring related to research, graduate school, and
topics suggested by students. This project will gather evidence to determine the
efficacy of using virtual meetings to scale opportunities for access to role
models, awareness of the research community, and mentoring to increase retention
of undergraduate women in CSE. If effective, virtual "town hall" meetings have
the potential to help to broaden participation in undergraduate research in CSE,
will improve preparation for successful graduate school admissions and
transitions, and will expand the local networks in computing communities across
the country.