* 1504880
* Promoting the Development of Metacognition and Combating Robust Misconceptions In a Gateway STEM Course Using an Intelligent, Web-based Homework System
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Rockford Ross, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 249,724.00

To meet the current and projected needs of industry for Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math (STEM) professionals, significant efforts to recruit
students into STEM fields continue across the nation. Once recruited into a STEM
field, retention is of paramount importance. Examinations of the retention issue
have identified key gateway courses as areas in which many students are lost
from STEM fields. Failure and withdrawal rates in such courses often exceed 30%
and issues related to inadequate metacognitive skill and self-regulated learning
among struggling students appear to be key contributors to attrition. This
project is exploring cost-effective and transferable means to foster
metacognitive skill development among STEM majors in a key gateway engineering
course so students become self-regulated learners and progress successfully not
only through the gateway course, but through the entire
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward this end, an "intelligent" web-based
platform is being developed and deployed in an electric circuit analysis course
at two institutions. The system is being designed to identify knowledge deficits
of a student and to deliver an individualized experience for each user according
to their current level of mastery. The web-based approach ensures the
interventions will be scalable and transferable and their grounding in
established theories from cognitive science suggests they will be effective and
broadly applicable. Unique within the system are features which foster self-
reflection on the part of the user with the promise of enhancing metacognitive
skill and the correction of common misconceptions. Rigorous assessment and
evaluation measures are in place to quantify the project's effectiveness.