* 1504363
* IUSE Engaged Student Learning Exploration Project: Understanding the Development of Metacognitive Skills in a Problem-based Learning Undergraduate Engineering Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Rose Marra, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,994.00

The capacity for life-long learning is critical for success in engineering
practice. Metacognition, defined as thinking about thinking, is key to the
development of life-long learning, yet is rarely directly addressed in
engineering education. This project is designed to (1) understand the
metacognitive skills developed during preparation of engineering students in a
problem-based learning (PBL) program, and (2) understand if this preparation
helps students in transitioning to the workforce. Project investigators are
studying students and graduates of the Iron Range Engineering (IRE) program, an
innovative PBL program that integrates metacognition instruction with
engineering content. The IRE program offers a unique setting for studying
developing metacognitive skills in engineering students who, as part of their
curriculum, solve ill-structured, real-world problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this study, project investigators are interviewing students, recent graduates
who are working as engineers, and employers of IRE graduates. In addition, two
questionnaires and a think-aloud protocol will be administered to measure
students' use of metacognition. The think-aloud protocol involves recording what
students say as they solve an engineering design problem. These instruments will
provide the team with rich information about the students' use of metacognition.
The model of engineering metacognition developed as part of this project will
make a significant contribution to engineering education. If the explicit
metacognitive instruction used by the IRE program provides success in developing
metacognitive capacity, and that capacity is applicable in the workplace, these
instructional activities could be used as a model for engineering educators to
improve the readiness of students to be flexible, independent, and life-long
learners.