* 1504023
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Simulated Arctic Freshwater System in CMIP5 Models, the CESM Large Ensemble, and Forced Simulations
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Bruno Tremblay, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 60,247.00

The Arctic freshwater (FW) system is likely to undergo considerable change in
coming decades with downstream impacts on ocean circulation, climate, and
ecosystems. An ability to understand and project these impacts, in turn, will
have important socio-economic influences on fisheries, energy distribution, and
reinsurance industries, amongst others. However, the reliability of climate
projections is uncertain and there is only a limited understanding of the
importance of natural variability in the midst of anthropogenically forced
change. This project seeks to address these issues through a series of modeling
experiments and comparison of the model results with observational and
reanalysis data sets. This project will contribute to STEM workforce development
through provision of support to a young, early-career, female PI during the
formative years of her career and support for the training of a graduate
student. The PI will leverage her connections with the National Center for
Atmospheric Research to include project results in their outreach exhibits for
the general public. Results will also be included in public talks and university
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
following major science questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. Do climate models show a
consistent picture of projected Arctic Ocean FW changes during the 21st century
and beyond? Are there obvious reasons for the model differences (e.g.,
resolution, sea ice model complexity, number of straits through the Canadian
Arctic Archipelago, etc.)?&lt;br/&gt;2. How large is the role of internal
variability for different terms of the Arctic FW budget in climate simulations?
How does this affect uncertainty in future projections at various timescales?
How large does an ensemble need to be in order to capture the magnitude of
internal variability?&lt;br/&gt;3. How well do simulated FW components in Fram
Strait and the switchyard region agree with observations from the last decade?
What are the dynamics that lead to changes in FW from different
sources?&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, first the Arctic Ocean freshwater
(FW) budget in the suite of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5
(CMIP5) simulations for the 20th and 21st century will be assessed, followed by
an analysis of the role of internal variability of terms of the Arctic FW budget
in a large ensemble of simulations from the Community Earth System Model (CESM).
Finally, the contribution of FW from different sources in Fram Strait and the
Arctic switchyard region in the CESM will be compared with observations using
new simulated FW tracers, and the Arctic Ocean dynamics leading to the
variability of FW from different sources will be investigated. The Arctic Ocean
FW budget has not been analyzed for the new generation of climate models
participating in CMIP5, despite the changes that can be expected compared to
CMIP3 due to the improvements to the simulation of the Arctic sea ice and the
additional open passages in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. The use of the
large CESM ensemble provides an unique opportunity to assess the role of
internal variability in terms of the Arctic FW budget, and comparisons to
across-model scatter from CMIP5 will allow insight on the sources of uncertainty
in future projections. Furthermore, the use of FW tracers in the CESM will allow
a more detailed comparison with a new set of observations and will enable
analysis of the dynamics that lead to the observed interannual variability of FW
from different sources in two key regions in the Arctic.