* 1504792
* Development of a Simulation-Based Application for Teaching Human Physiology through Guided Discovery, Pure Discovery, and Authentic Research
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,04/30/2018
* David Julian, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2018
* USD 247,129.00

The University of Florida has received an NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Exploration Track award to develop a web application with which
undergraduate students can learn human physiology using both guided and pure
discovery. The Principal Investigator (PI) team will design, conduct and analyze
the results of authentic, simulation-based research. In contrast to many of the
existing simulations commercially-available for human physiology instruction,
the systematic model that forms the foundation of this project was created for
basic and applied physiology research. The most recent iteration, called HumMod,
is the most comprehensive model of human physiology, with over 6,000 variables
describing cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, neural, endocrine, skeletal
muscle, and metabolic physiology constructed from empirical data from peer-
reviewed physiological literature. HumMod accurately predicts qualitative and
quantitative changes in both clinical and experimental responses, and can
simulate both acute and chronic clinical scenarios.

Based on the use of previous work involving the use of HumMod in physiology
classes, it was recognized that it is a valuable guided-discovery tool for
authentic, simulation-based research undergraduate physiology courses. However,
the work demonstrated that the comprehensiveness that makes HumMod an
outstanding research tool also makes it daunting for use as an education tool.
To that end, the PI team will design a user interface that will simplify HumMod
so that it can be used as an effective tool for student guided- or pure-
discovery research in the classroom. The PI team also will investigate how
instructional strategies for the simulation can be optimized to promote flexible
and generalizable reasoning. Theories of learning are in direct conflict on how
to manage the learner's efforts. Cognitive load theorists (CLT) emphasize the
need for guided discovery to minimize extraneous load; while error management
theorists (EMT) suggest pure discovery to promote higher-level cognitive
processes and active learning. The PI team will experimentally compare the two
approaches to determine an effective application design and teaching strategy
for undergraduate human physiology instruction. This project is funded jointly
by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed
in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.