* 1504659
* Applying Multidimensional Item Response Theory Models to Generate an Interconnected Bank of Items for Earth System Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Ryan Bowles, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,584.00

This project will investigate the potential for applying high quality test
development strategies to assessment of learning in Earth System Science courses
taught at the undergraduate level. Assessing student learning at the collegiate
level is difficult, a difficulty that stems from the diversity of U.S. colleges
and universities and the diversity of curriculum taught within those
institutions. The project team will seek to provide college faculty with an
assessment resource that will allow them to evaluate learning in their courses
through use of a common bank of questions. These questions will be designed to
allow meaningful assessment across different institutional settings, from large
research institutions to tribal colleges. In addition, different populations of
students will be included in the study, from non-足science majors through
advanced undergraduates. This work builds upon prior development of a set of
geoscience-足focused questions, some of which were developed in collaboration
with tribal college colleagues. This project will provide: 1) a bank of test
questions that faculty from diverse institutions can use to evaluate student
learning, providing a mechanism for truly understanding if and when learning is
occurring; 2) a model for assessment instrument development and analysis that
can be followed by colleagues within other science and engineering fields; and
3) training for faculty, particularly tribal college faculty, for development
and use of assessment questions that are meaningful within their own
institutional and course contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will apply high quality psychometric standards to the current quantitative
assessment practice utilized in higher education Earth System Science. This work
will apply cutting-足edge Multidimensional Item Response Theory (MIRT) techniques
to item and scale validation as well as scoring of multiple dimensions of Earth
System Science understanding. Data will be collected from freshmen, students
enrolled in non-足majors courses, geoscience majors enrolled in schools
nationally, and students enrolled in tribal colleges. This broad data collection
will allow for accurate estimation of ability measures and use of Differential
Item Functioning (DIF) to evaluate potential bias. Providing mechanisms for
inter-correlation of concept inventory items is vital to guarantee that
measurement of learning outcomes is meaningful across educational contexts and
can be effectively used to inform higher education policy and practice.