* 1504430
* RAPID, GOALI: Evaluating Groundwater Quality Impacts of Shale Gas Extraction within the Marcellus Shale Play
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2017
* James Saiers, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 151,182.00

The question "Does shale gas extraction lead to contamination of freshwater
aquifers by methane, deep-formation brines, or frac-water chemicals?" is a topic
of considerable public and scientific interest and the debate to date has taken
place within a fundamental lack of data and cooperation. This study begins with
a cooperative arrangement between Yale and an industry partner that will
facilitate the exchange of knowledge and data between industry and university
scientists and will lead to an assessment of water quality concerns stemming
from shale gas development. The study directly addresses the issue of an
established predrilling baseline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will improve
our knowledge of drilling as an initiating mechanism for cross formational flow
of water, brines and gas. The study improves upon previous knowledge with: (i)
time series data on groundwater quality to be collected before gas wells are
drilled, enabling natural variations in shallow groundwater chemistry to be
distinguished from a shale gas effect; (ii) data on water quality and
groundwater flow to be measured throughout all stages of shale gas development
and (iii) monitoring locations to be chosen strategically to take into account
known locations of gas well laterals, rather than sampling only from drinking
water wells that are located randomly, without consideration of hydrology and
potential sources of water quality impairment. The project will provide
fundamental research on drilling as a means of initiating cross formational
subsurface flow.