* 1504404
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Variability of Freshwater Components in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* William Smethie, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 437,500.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The salinity of water in the Arctic Ocean
determines much of its buoyancy and thus how stable the various layers of water
are. This is important because stability of the stratification of the ocean
determines its circulation, heat transport and formation of deep water, which in
turn affect the local and regional climate system, as well as
ocean/atmosphere/climate interaction in lower latitudes. Thus understanding the
basic processes of the circulation, buildup, and release of lower salinity water
(called 'freshwater') is of fundamental importance for understanding future
states of the Arctic Ocean. This project will study the dynamics and variability
of the freshwater components and the overall freshwater inventories, in the
region of the ocean north of Greenland, where water and sea ice ultimately take
one of two pathways south. The main goal of the study is to understand how
buoyancy is redistributed within the Arctic Ocean and how freshwater accumulates
and is released. The project is especially interested in the role distinct
freshwater components play in this process. For this purpose data collected as
part of the Arctic Observing Network will be compared to model simulations and
vice versa to test hypotheses concerning the circulation, accumulation and
release of freshwater and its components in the Arctic Ocean and to test the
performance of an Arctic Ocean model. This project will create data products for
researchers and educators interested in the Arctic and its response to climate
change. Circulation patterns of the individual freshwater components and other
synthesized outputs, along with information and documentation needed to assist
educators, will be made publicly available through an online site that is
expected to have significant traffic from educators in academia and secondary
school levels. This project will provide the core of a PhD dissertation for a
graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the basic
processes of the circulation, buildup, and release of freshwater is of
fundamental importance for examining possible future scenarios of the freshwater
lens covering the Arctic Ocean, the role of freshwater in internal circulation
within the Arctic, and the role of freshwater in deep water formation in the
convective regions of the Nordic seas and the North Atlantic. This project will
study the dynamics and variability of the freshwater components and the overall
freshwater inventories, in the Switchyard (SY) region in the context of an
Arctic Ocean-wide analysis of freshwater component sources and pathways. The
main goal of the study is to understand how buoyancy is redistributed within the
Arctic Ocean and how freshwater accumulates and is released. There will be
special emphasis on the role distinct freshwater components play in this
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent long-term observations conducted in the
Switchyard (SY) region as part of the Arctic Observing Network (AON) program,
have revealed detailed information on both the total freshwater balance, and the
components contributing to it: Pacific Water (PW), Meteoric Water (MW: River
Runoff and P-E), and Sea Ice Meltwater (SIMW). The SY observations along a
section between Alert and the North Pole show rapid changes in the contributions
of individual freshwater components to the total inventory along with gradual
changes in the total freshwater content. From backtracking the surface
circulation in time based on sea ice drift patterns, the group infers that the
rapid changes in the freshwater components are probably due to shifts in the sea
ice and surface water source regions and pathways on time scales as short as one
year, the frequency of their observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will combine the SY freshwater component data with those from previous
(icebreaker) expeditions to characterize the main features of their
distributions. In a second step, the team will extend the sea ice tracking
method developed by Maslanik and Fowler to include Ekman transport in the
surface ocean and will download GCM runs that simulate individual FW components.
They will track the observed freshwater components back to their source regions,
and forward to their exit points from the Arctic, and will identify mechanisms
impacting the freshwater component circulation, especially in the SY region
where they have an 8-year time series. The principal intellectual contributions
will come from integrating observed freshwater component inventories and
pathways with those obtained from model simulations, inferring the dynamics
governing the freshwater component distributions and their adjustment as
functions of source terms and atmospheric forcing.