* 1504301
* Curvature as a Physical Determinant of Tissue Organization
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Sascha Hilgenfeldt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 310,216.00

This project will investigate the physical properties of living tissue that are
important in determining the tissue curvature. The PI will quantitatively
determining the number and location of defects in ordered tissues and will
develop a mechanical theory of the defect distribution that can be compared with
experiment. This constitutes the first quantitative study of tissue curvature as
a determining factor of structural organization. Understanding of the morphology
and morphogenesis of organisms has grown tremendously based on recent advances
in biological and genetic research. Yet, few attempts have been undertaken to
describe the development and structure of organs or tissues through quantitative
mechanics. The results of this work will be equally applicable to all curved
tissue layers that show a degree of order, including cancer cell acini, whose
morphology is important for the development of cancer, as well as developing
embryos in the morula and blastula stages. As curvature induces constraints on
the degree of order, it may play a role in symmetry breaking and polarization,
and thus in the earliest patterning of the embryo. Describing a direct influence
of mechanical forces on cell development will be a fundamental advance towards a
better understanding of morphogenesis and tissue formation in the context of
both diagnostics and therapy, e.g. tissue regeneration or cancer. Data
acquisition will employ the help of undergraduate students as well as outreach
to high school students through the existing Bugscope project at Illinois, thus
connecting with the broader public through a visually fascinating and
interdisciplinary project.

This project focuses on insect eyes as a concrete example of an ordered tissue
structure, because of the extreme regularity of the compound eye, the large
number of individual eyes (ommatidia) in the compound eye, and the relative ease
with which the structure can be quantitatively analyzed. Using both SEM imaging
and confocal microscopy, the goals are to (i) determine the complete
microstructure of the ommatidia and (ii) determine the macrostructure (global
shape and curvature) of the eye, in order to (iii) compare the number and
position of ommatidial defects with those predicted by the mechanical theory of
curved patterned surfaces. The existing theory of defect placement on curved
surfaces (developed for a limited number of examples from solid state physics)
will be adapted to the more general shapes encountered in insect eyes. Both
numerical simulations and analytical theory will be developed. While Drosophila
wild-type and mutant eyes in mature and pupal stages will be the main focus, the
variety of insect eye sizes and shapes in different species is an asset to this
study.