* 1504786
* Collaborative Research: Fostering integration of computational practices into physics courses - A local communities approach
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Marcos Caballero, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 40,526.00

Studies have for a long time documented the need to introduce computational
physics into the undergraduate curriculum. The future workforce needs to be
computationally competent-in thinking as well as in skills and practice. This
project is a response to the need and proposes exploration into a new change
model using a research-based Framework. The Framework - a structure and a
research strategy for introducing computation into undergraduate physics was
born in 2006 and developed by the Partnership for Integration of Computation
into Undergraduate Physics (PICUP). &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this collaborative
research exploration is to design and test an adaptation of the Framework that
is effective and sustainable and that can be scaled up by replication. It is a
proof of concept study centered on this project's attempt at significant
curricular reform through faculty development starting at the grass roots. The
research-based PICUP Framework is used in a local approach at a sectional
meeting of the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) followed by
extensive collaborative development work among participating faculty. Research-
based faculty development is implemented at regional sites and is scaled up by
replication in any of the 47 AAPT sections. Central to the evaluation plan is
assessing how this novel approach helps a computational community to develop. An
experienced evaluator is developing metrics to measure progress.