* 1504361
* The Combined Influence of sea ice and snow cover on Northern Hemisphere Atmospheric Climate Variability
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Judah Cohen, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 299,938.00

Arctic snow and ice form an integral part of the climate system. They have
undergone unprecedented changes within the past decade. Initial studies on the
potential remote and larger scale influences of their variability have often
been inconclusive and even contradictory. In a recent review article, the
principal investigators (PIs) of this proposal hypothesized that sea ice and
snow cover can combine to force large-scale atmospheric variability. This
project focuses on analyzing reanalysis datasets and model output from targeted
numerical modeling experiments in order to understand the physical pathways
linking sea ice and snow cover variability with atmospheric climate variability.
This variability may, in turn, influence mid-latitude weather on seasonal time
scales. Understanding such processes is anticipated to improve weather
prediction on similar time scales, with consequent benefits to the energy,
farming, and reinsurance industries, amongst others. The project will contribute
to STEM manpower development through providing support for the training of a
graduate student, entrainment of undergraduate students into scientific
research, and development of a short course of climate prediction. Finally, the
project will promote international collaboration with a German research
institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prescribed sea ice and snow cover perturbation
experiments with the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM) will lead
to a quantitative assessment of the physical pathways between sea ice, snow
cover and the initiation and maintenance of atmospheric variability,
particularly in winter, that cannot be accomplished using statistical analysis
alone. The use of a high-top model, which has only recently become available, to
study the influence of sea ice and snow cover on the hemispheric winter
circulation is novel to this proposal. In parallel, the PIs will collaborate
with colleagues running similar experiments with ECHAM6. They will further
analyze reanalysis atmospheric data, to test hypotheses about the combined role
of sea ice and snow cover in climate variability learned from the model output.
The proposed project will analyze the combined impact of sea ice and snow cover
anomalies on atmospheric climate variability. This will improve understanding of
the atmospheric response associated with changes in sea ice and snow cover, and
lead to a quantitative assessment of the links between high-latitude and lower-
latitude climates as well as enable improved climate predictions. The proposed
research focuses specifically on the combined role of sea ice and snow cover in
the initiation and maintenance of the dominant mode of high-latitude atmospheric
variability, i.e. the annular mode. Modulation of the annular mode is
hypothesized to be a key physical mechanism for climate feedback in high
latitudes and is the dominant mode of variability in the mid-latitudes including
the industrial centers of the United States, Europe and Asia. The conceptual
framework developed in this project will be applied in an operational seasonal
forecast model at the end of the project.