* 1504541
* Research in Classical and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Gary Horowitz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,320,000.00

This project supports research in gravitational physics at the University of
California, Santa Barbara. Many of the deepest problems in theoretical physics
revolve around combining Einstein's theory of general relativity with quantum
theory. The resulting theory is called "quantum gravity" and is needed to better
understand the origin of the universe, the nature of space and time on small
scales, and what happens inside black holes. The research supported by this
award will use the latest techniques and tools to try to answer some of these
fundamental problems. An essential part of this project is the training of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in the knowledge and techniques
that are central to understanding and discovery in gravitational physics.
Through a range of forums from public lectures, to informing media reporters,
the Principal Investigators will disseminate the directions and results of their
research to a broad audience. Society at large will benefit by increasing their
understanding of science and the world they live in.

James Hartle will continue exploring the interface between quantum mechanics and
cosmology. He will work on extending the predictions of the no-boundary quantum
state of the universe for observations today to increasingly general and
detailed situations. He will further develop the generalizations of quantum
mechanics that are necessary for cosmology and investigate cosmologically
motivated extensions of quantum mechanics. He proposes to continue to refine our
understanding of the origin of the quasiclassical realm of every day experience
as an emergent feature of our quantum universe. Gary Horowitz will investigate
physics near cosmological singularities in holographic theories of quantum
gravity. These are theories in which quantum gravitational degrees of freedom
are equivalently described by a lower dimensional nongravitational theory.
Horowitz will also explore connections between gravity and condensed matter that
can arise using a classical limit of holography. This provides a new tool for
the study of superconductivity and other phenomena. In addition, Horowitz will
investigate aspects of higher dimensional black holes. Don Marolf will explore a
variety of issues in classical and quantum gravity related to black holes,
thermodynamics, and entropy. One is to extend arguments that black holes are
thermodynamic systems to more general situations. Another is to investigate the
possibility that the area of more general surfaces in spacetime might also be
associated with entropy, and that spacetime itself may exist only due to
thermodynamic phenomena. A final part of his work will continue to study
implications of a quantum-mechanical phenomenon (the so-called Hawking effect)
that causes black holes to slowly evaporate and which may require significant
changes in our understanding of fundamental physics. The methods employed for
all this work will be primarily analytic, though it will be supplemented with
numerical calculations on desktop computers.