* 1504701
* Convexity and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Elisabeth Werner, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 221,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1504701, Principal Investigator: Elisabeth M. Werner

These research projects are in asymptotic geometric analysis and affine convex
geometry. One main emphasis of the principal investigator's research is on high-
dimensional objects and phenomena. This leads to applications of her research in
areas as diverse as physics, biology and medicine, computer science,
optimization and economics, and material science: Indeed, a mathematical
description of a scientific or engineering question often requires lots of
independent numbers, leading to a geometric space of high dimension. For
example, if one wants to specify the location of one gas molecule in a room then
you need to report the front/back, side-to-side, and up/down locations of the
molecule, using three numbers. The direction and speed of the molecule's motion
takes another three numbers, and so to describe enough of the molecule's current
state to allow one to predict its future motion from position and velocity one
would need six separate numbers in all. If one wants to track 100 distinct
molecules of the air in the room then one will need 600 independent numerical
coordinates to collect all of the relevant measurements. As these dimensions
increase then the difficulty of sampling and computation go up rapidly, a
phenomenon scientists and mathematicians sometimes call "the curse of
dimensionality." However, there are also patterns that emerge as dimension
increases which are not visible in low dimensions. We can exploit those patters
thus taking advantage of the "curse of dimensionality" to make it the "blessing
of dimensionality". It is one purpose of this grant to study such high
dimensional phenomena.

Important features of the proposed project are, on the one hand, emphasis on
affine invariant and high dimensional objects and phenomena, and, on the other
hand, links with other areas of mathematics and mathematical sciences (such as
probability, statistics, information theory and quantum information theory).
Topics to be studied include: Entropies for convex bodies and log concave
functions, affine invariants and their inequalities, structural properties of
convex bodies, probabilistic methods in convexity and geometric aspects related
to optimization, Banach spaces, and quantum information theory. A focus of this
research program is the development of affine invariants and their related
inequalities. The principal investigator and her collaborators started the
systematic study of (affine invariant) functionals associated with convex bodies
and log concave functions and their corresponding inequalities. Among the most
important such functionals for convex bodies are affine surface area and
p-affine surface area. Those were recently extended to log concave functions by
the PI and her collaborators. The affine isoperimetric inequalities related to
the affine surface areas are more powerful than their Euclidean relatives and
related to other important inequalities (e.g., the Santalo- and Inverse Santalo-
inequalities). The latter is related to Mahler's conjecture, which is still open
in dimension three and higher. Connections, observed recently by the PI, between
affine surface areas and Renyi entropy allow interactions between information
theory, and convex affine geometry.