* 1504860
* Agile communicators: Preparing students for communication-intensive software development through inquiry, critique and reflection
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Charles Wallace, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2018
* USD 240,435.00

This project will address a significant, important, and largely overlooked need
in the education of future software professionals: thorough, sustained
instruction in the communication skills required for real software development.
The quality of team communication is widely acknowledged to be a key factor in
the success or failure of software projects. The fast pace and constant change
of today's software workplace demand an Agile approach, i.e., drive by constant
team and customer communication. This project will develop an undergraduate
curriculum for computer science and software engineering programs that promotes
Agile communication through exercises in inquiry, critique and reflection, all
grounded in authentic software development settings.

The goal of the project is to strengthen the Agile communication characteristics
of proactivity, flexibility, and creativity among computer science and software
engineering students. Communication-intensive activities are woven through
introductory courses in a variety of ways. The well-established Process Oriented
Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL) framework will provide a structured approach to
inquiry. Automated feedback on test coverage, programming style and code
documentation will be provided through WebTA, a tool that supplements instructor
feedback with continual critique of code and documentation. A program of guided
inquiry through case studies of software communication prepares students for
their team software activities, and a series of reflective exercises will lead
them to focus on their own team communication practices.