* 1504904
* Promoting active learning in large undergraduate STEM courses: Identifying critical knowledge used by effective instructors
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Marguerite Brickman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,887.00

Although active-learning teaching strategies can increase students' ability to
learn fundamental concepts and develop scientific and critical thinking skills,
the results that instructors achieve vary substantially. In order to support
instructors to successfully implement active learning in undergraduate STEM, and
thereby improve student outcomes, it is imperative to determine the instructor
knowledge that facilitates effective active-learning instruction. Knowledge
regarding teaching and learning, not just knowledge of course content, likely
influences how instructors use active learning. The objective of this project is
to elucidate and characterize critical differences in knowledge of experienced
and highly effective (i.e., expert) active-learning instructors versus novice
active-learning instructors in large (100+ students) undergraduate biology
courses. To accomplish the project objective, a video-based instrument featuring
clips from active-learning classrooms is being developed and validated. This
instrument will measure instructors' knowledge of teaching and learning during
active-learning lessons in large undergraduate courses. The developed instrument
will make it possible to determine how expert and novice active-learning
instructors differ in their knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion of this
project will contribute in-depth understanding of the knowledge that is crucial
to effective implementation of active learning. This project is also creating
and making freely available high-quality videos of undergraduate instructors
implementing active learning in large courses. These videos will provide a
variety of examples of active learning, helping instructors to imagine how they
might change their own instruction. This study will have a significant positive
impact on our ability to facilitate faculty learning, and ultimately to improve
student learning in undergraduate STEM.