* 1504664
* Bringing Team-Based, Project-Based Learning to Scale
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Harvard University has received an NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
Exploration Track award to promote the adoption of effective teaching strategies
that increase student learning and foster student creativity in STEM
environments. Previous research has established that team-based and project-
based learning are successful strategies for enhancing student learning and
creativity while improving retention for students from underrepresented groups.
However, these teaching practices result in a high workload for instructors who
are required to grade rich, personalized project assignments and create an
environment that encourages positive teamwork experiences for students. To
overcome this workload barrier for instructors and improve feedback given to
students, this project will create technology to scale an established teaching
model which combines team-based and project-based learning. The technology will
allow instructors to implement these effective practices in large classes and
without extensive instructional support.

Building on previous work in team-based and project-based learning and past
development of highly successful instructional technology, the PI team will
create an easy-to-implement team evaluation and peer grading system for team-
based and project-based learning. The system will have two components. First, it
will deliver rubrics for team evaluation. These rubrics help instructors
incentivize students' positive behavior in teamwork by soliciting students'
feedback on their own contribution and the contributions of their peers to team
projects. This team evaluation affects students' grades based on their relative
participation in project work and gives students feedback about their
performance as team members. Second, the system will provide a mechanism to
facilitate peer grading in a team-based learning environment to ease the
assessment burden on instructors while providing an effective learning tool to
students. The system is web-based, user-friendly, and easy to implement and will
significantly reduce the burden on instructors using team-based and project-
based learning. The evaluation of the project will contribute to our knowledge
of peer grading in project-based STEM classrooms, best practices of design of
educational technology, and understanding of students' team experiences in
highly collaborative learning environments.