* 1504270
* Paleoenvironmental perspectives on prehistoric human settlement of Arctic Norway: Implications for climate, sea-level, and land-use changes during the Iron Age
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* William D'Andrea, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 331,349.00

This project will investigate the relationship between environmental change and
characteristics of early settlement in Arctic Norway. Research will contribute
toward understanding how humans respond to environmental change, and evaluate
the sensitivity and resilience of settlements in marginal locations. Arctic
Norway is an important region for socio-ecological research because early
settlements were at the northern limits for agriculture and had mixed
agricultural and maritime economies that were susceptible to changes in climate
and sea level. Research will be conducted at sites in the Lofoten Islands, where
settlements developed from small pioneering agricultural outposts to prominent
nodes of power and trade under Viking chiefdoms during the Iron Age (c. 500 BC-
AD 1100). The collapse of these cheifdoms occurred during the late Iron Age at
which time these societies were associated with westward migrations to other
North Atlantic islands, which helped spread agricultural, maritime, and cultural
knowledge that was subsequently adapted to suit these new environments. The Iron
Age in Arctic Norway therefore marks an important period in the human history of
the North Atlantic and outstanding questions remain concerning the role of
environmental changes (both natural and anthropogenic) in this history that
paved the way for North Atlantic expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will take an interdisciplinary, geo-archaeological approach to
reconstruct human-environment interactions. Scientists and students from the
College of William &amp; Mary and Columbia University will work alongside
Norwegian archaeologists to: compile and synthesize a large number of Iron Age
archaeological studies, using mostly unpublished information within Norwegian
cultural heritage databases, in order to assess the influence of natural
environmental changes within an informed cultural framework, and develop
continuous, high-resolution reconstructions of human impacts on the landscape by
using lake sediments recovered near key settlements and by applying
biogeochemical techniques to directly link human activity with landscape
changes. The main objectives are: (1) to establish a more comprehensive
understanding of cultural development during the Iron Age, particularly with
respect to environmental changes, (2) document the changing patterns of human
settlement as the region transformed to a center of power and trade, and (3)
test the hypothesis that climate variability and sea-level variations had an
impact on patterns of human settlement. The project will also promote teaching
and training by engaging undergraduate students in international and
interdisciplinary research. It will create strong partnerships among
institutions within the U.S. and in Norway, and has outreach components that
involve public lectures and the development of a comprehensive museum exhibit
that will significantly promote learning and communication of archaeological and
environmental sciences with the general public.