* 1504652
* I-Corps:  Technology Transfer for Commercialization of Industrial, Electronic and Medical Device Products Based on a Patented Ultrananocrystalline Diamond Coating
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2014,04/30/2015
* Orlando Auciello, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 04/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Product reliability is one of the main issues that any company worries about and
offers to the customers. For example, chemical attack of metal-based anodes and
cathodes by the harsh Li-ion battery environment shortens substantially the
battery lifetime and strongly reduces it performance. Current metallic
prostheses, such as hips and knees, implanted in humans, exhibit corrosion by
body fluids, resulting in pain and need for early replacement. This I-CORPS team
focuses on identifying and developing the commercialization pathway for novel
patented ultrananocrystalline diamond (UNCD) films as coatings for critical
components of industrial, electronic, and medical devices/systems exposed to
harsh chemically and mechanical environments, improving their lifetime and
performance by at least one order of magnitude. The focus of the proposed effort
will be to explore the insertion into the market of a new generation of Li-ion
batteries (LIBs) with UNCD-coated anodes, cathodes, membranes, and inner walls
case, to produce LIBs with ยกร 10x longer life and smaller dimensions than for
current LIBs, due to the protective action of the UNCD coatings on all battery
components from corrosion. The technology will be demonstrated for coin-type
cell phone small batteries. The other application of UNCD coatings will be for
medical devices and implants, for which preliminary work done by this team group
has demonstrated that UNCD coatings can enable a new generation of medical
implants with order of magnitude longer life and superior performance than
current uncoated metal implants (e.g., hips, knees, dental implants, which are
failing due to chemical attach by body fluids), which are failing due to
chemical attack by body fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The patented UNCD coatings
will be grown using microwave plasma chemical vapor deposition (MPCVD) and hot
filament chemical vapor deposition (HFCVD) techniques, available to the team, to
determine which provides the best coating properties for the specific
application. The research work over the last 20 years has demonstrated that the
UNCD films exhibit unique nanostructures with 3 to 5 nm grain sizes, and a
unique combination of properties, namely: 1) highest hardness and resistance to
wear (similar to single crystal diamond) compared to any other known coating, 2)
extremely smooth surface (rms roughness of ~ 3-5 nm), 3) lowest friction
coefficient compared to any other coatings, 4) extremely low stress, 5)
tunability of surface wettability from highly hydrophobic (no water adhesion to
the surface) to highly hydrophilic (high water adhesion), 6) extremely resistant
to chemical attack by any strong acid and human body fluids (critical for
applications as coating for medical implants), 7) electrically conductive when
doped with boron atoms in the diamond lattice or nitrogen atoms in the grain
boundaries, 8) electrically insulating when grown without B or N incorporation,
9) B-doped UNCD exhibits the widest electrochemical potential compared with
other electrode materials, 10) UNCD films exhibit one of the lowest threshold
voltages for electron emission, 11) UNCD films can be processed by lithography
and etching processes used for fabrication of silicon based MEMS/NEMS devices,
to produce a new generation of these devices far superior than silicon based
counterparts, and 12) UNCD is extremely biocompatible. The UNCD properties
mentioned above enable multi-functionalities for a wide range of technological
applications as described above, which can make a substantial impact in several
high-tech markets. The MPCVD technique will be implanted in an industrial-type
system capable of growing UNCD films on up to 200 mm diameter substrates to
demonstrate immediate transfer of the UNCD growth process into an industrial
compatible process. The HFCVD technique will be implemented in a system capable
of growing UNCD films on up to 100 mm diameter substrates.