* 1504634
* Collaborative Research: Scalable scaffolding of novice programmers' learning and automated analysis of their online activities
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Alessio Gaspar, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2019
* USD 94,580.00

The need for a programming-savvy workforce, the challenges encountered nation-
wide in teaching programming skills, and the advent of massively open online
courses (MOOCs) all stress the importance of revolutionizing existing
technologies meant to support learning via unsupervised practice. The reliance
on hand-designed learning experiences in Intelligent Tutoring Systems has
created a bottleneck in the enhancement of such technologies. The significance
and importance of this project will be the creation of a system that
automatically provides programming practice problems via a tutoring system.
Parsons puzzles, which are the focus of this work, have already demonstrated
improvement in programming skills. This project will continue research on the
effectiveness of Parsons puzzles and determine whether an evolutionary algorithm
approach to creating Parsons puzzles is effective in producing the same or
better learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, this project will
achieve two complementary goals. First, Interactive Evolutionary Algorithms will
be used to autonomously design Parsons puzzles. These relatively new practice
problems have already shown great promise in supporting the development of
programming skills. By integrating Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development
theory in the design of our fitness function, the pedagogical soundness of the
evolved Parsons puzzles will be further enhanced. Second, recent breakthroughs
in Co-evolutionary Algorithms will be leveraged to data-mine the underlying
learners-problems interaction space. This will permit autonomous extraction of
insights about the most informational interactions. Such information has the
potential to provide new perspectives on the significance of both evolved and
hand-designed Parsons puzzles, along with the order in which to guide students
through these puzzles to ensure proper scaffolding. Quantitative and objective
measures of differences in mean difficulty and number of attempts to solution
will be used in comparing hand-designed Parsons puzzles and evolutionary
algorithm created Pasons puzzles.