* 1504778
* Accelerator Physics for Polarized Beam, Neutron Storage Ring, and Envelope Resonance correction in Space Charge dominated Beams.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Chen-Yu Liu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has. One technique for
exploring physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) is in making precision
measurements of SM model atomic parameters such as the electric dipole moment
(EDM) of the neutron. This award will develop the accelerator technology
necessary for such a precision measurement of the neutron EDM. This project is
to explore essential tools for exploration of physics beyond Standard model of
particle physics. Tools for this exploration include a neutron beam storage
ring, polarized proton beams and high power beams. Besides the basic physics,
high power beams can be important to "nuclear waste" incineration, which can be
important to national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow the
study of synchro-betatron coupling of polarized beams relevant to the
measurement of EDM, continuing exploration of a neutron beam storage ring, and
envelope dynamics of high power proton accelerators. The group will study spin
dynamics and synchrotron-betatron coupling of all electric rings that are
relevant to polarized beams and will continue to study the neutron beam storage
ring. The longitudinal focusing of longitudinal phase space has been explored.
The transverse dynamics in using periodic quadrupole and sextupole magnets will
be explored to fulfill the initial design of a storage ring. TEST beam
experiments will be carried out to test numerical simulations for high power
beams.