* 1504681
* Collaborative Research: Biophysical Analysis of Magnetosome Formation in Magnetotactic Bacteria
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Arash Komeili, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2019
* USD 352,499.00

Central to the survival of many organisms is their ability to manipulate
inorganic molecules into elaborate crystalline structures such as skeletons,
teeth, and protective shells. This ubiquitous process of "biomineralization"
depends on the precise action of specialized proteins within cells to form
minerals where they are needed and prevent their accumulation in sensitive
tissues. Although progress has been made, much is not understood about how
biomineralization is realized inside of individual cells and which genes control
the process. This collaborative project will address this challenge by applying
recent advances in magnetic imaging technology to detailed studies of
biomineralization in a simple and well-controlled biological system: the
production of nanoscale magnetic particles within magnetotactic bacteria (MTB),
and the use by MTB of chains of these particles (known as magnetosomes) for
orientation and travel along the Earth's magnetic field lines (known as
magnetotaxis). During this project, students and postdoctoral researchers will
receive training in scientific practices at the interface of the physical and
life sciences. In addition, the project may inform the development of improved
materials with broad practical relevance, as products of biomineralization have
superior properties compared to those currently engineered by humans.

The scientific goals of this project are to study the molecular mechanisms
governing biomineralization and the development of magnetic nanoparticles in
MTB. The studies will employ a "diamond magnetic imager" that exploits a
nanoscale layer of quantum sensors at the surface of a diamond chip, enabling
imaging of magnetic field patterns from individual MTB in a population under
ambient laboratory conditions, with better than 50 nanometer spatial resolution
and greater than 1 millimeter field-of-view. The investigators will apply the
diamond magnetic imager to studies of magnetic nanoparticle growth in various
MTB species and biomineralization mutants. The project will open a new window
onto the physical processes enabling magnetotaxis, including the transition of
magnetic nanoparticles from a superparamagnetic to a stable single-domain
magnetic state during magnetic nanoparticle growth, and the role of interactions
between magnetic nanoparticles within individual MTB. Magnetic measurements on
genetic mutants will provide biological insights into the genes controlling the
biomineralization process. Observations will also be made of the dynamics of the
magnetic nanoparticle chain during the cell division cycle, both through time
series magnetic measurements on different MTB as well as magnetic imaging of
individual living MTB.