* 1504533
* A Surge in a Complex Glacier System: Results from Observations, Data Analysis and Numerical Experiments of the Bering-Bagley Glacier System
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Ute Herzfeld, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 01/31/2020
* USD 207,500.00

This research project will bring together results from several years of
observations of the surge of the Bering-Bagley Glacier System in Alaska BBGS
surge and experiments with a finite-element model in order to enhance knowledge
of the dynamic within processes in a complex glacier system during a surge.. The
Bering-Bagley Glacier System in Alaska is the largest surge-type glacier on
Earth and the largest glacier system outside of the Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets. Project results will increase knowledge about the processes that occur
during glacial accelerations in Alaska and in the outlet glaciers of the
Greenland Ice Sheet, thereby helping to reduce uncertainty in predictions of
sea-level rise. The project will provide education and training opportunities
for a graduate student and for three undergraduate students from
interdisciplinary and diverse backgrounds. The project also will result in the
development of education units for direct use in Alaska and Colorado high
schools and a web-based curricular unit for schools elsewhere that focuses on
the Bering Glacier surges and the surge phenomenon in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding fast-flowing glaciers and
accelerations in ice flow is critical to understanding changes in the cryosphere
as well as changes in sea level. Glacial acceleration is the main source of
uncertainty in assessment of sea-level rise in the current realm of climatic
warming. Surging is the least-studies of the four types of glacial
accelerations. Because they suddenly accelerate and advance in a quasi-cyclic
and unpredictable manner, surging glaciers are a counterpoint to the seemingly
omnipresent retreat in the cryosphere. The current surge of the Bering-Bagley
Glacier System provides a rare opportunity to observe and analyze a surge of a
large and complex glacier system. This project will include observation, data
analysis, data parameterization, and comparison of results from data analysis
and model-based numerical experiments. The investigators will analyze data
collected during several years of airborne campaigns conducted by the research
team together with airborne and satellite laser altimeter and image data from
NASA, European Space Agency and commercial satellites and radar data of
subglacial topography. The investigators continue their efforts to bring
together Earth observations, remote sensing, and numerical modeling. They will
apply an automated classification system they previously developed to identify
physical parameters from images of crevasse fields. The rapid changes in ice
flow during the characteristically different phases of the surge, which often
lasts several years although with regionally different slow-downs and
accelerations, are manifest in complex crevasse patterns. Derived physical
parameters relate directly to deformation and other variables of ice dynamics
that are hard to retrieve otherwise but necessary for physical modeling. The
image-based classification method is expected to be generally applicable in
other areas of environmental and spatial sciences, remote sensing-data analysis,
geography, geology, and geophysics.