* 1504912
* Critical Life-Cycle Decision Making in Complex Engineering Projects for Engineering Economy Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* John Jackman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2018
* USD 282,100.00

Complex engineering projects (CEPs) such as electric transmission networks and
transportation infrastructure are becoming increasingly important to the public
in general and engineers in particular. These projects are large-scale in terms
of money and time, and contain significant uncertainties over their life-cycle
ranging from output prices to input costs. For CEPs, strategic decisions
constitute flexibilities or 'real options' because the decision maker can alter
the course of an investment over time when an uncertain aspect of the project
such as the price becomes known. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing (1) a module in an introductory course emphasizing the concept of the
aforementioned strategic flexibilities from a stochastic optimal control
perspective and (2) an advanced course emphasizing the experiential learning via
a team-based project and a multidisciplinary guest-lecture series for the CEPs.
Intellectual merits come primarily from learning how best to make critical
decisions for CEPs under uncertainty (e.g., timing, thresholds for action,
etc.). The development process is based on data-driven iterative cycles of
design and reflection, as guided by the principles of educational design
research. It will include three phases, each with an iteration cycle involving
students: (1) Analysis &amp; Exploration, (2) Design &amp; Construction, and (3)
Evaluation and Reflection. Baseline performance will be measured using a pre-
test based on concepts and principles that a student must understand in order to
perform an economic analysis correctly (i.e., declarative and procedural
knowledge). The pre-test will also include self-efficacy questions. After
completing the intervention (course module or the advanced course), students
will take a post-test with the same set of questions. For broader impact, this
project aims to transform engineering economy education via a conceptual module
in an introductory course and an experiential advanced course. Given that
engineering economy courses are quite ubiquitous in colleges of engineering
(taken by multiple engineering majors) across the U.S., if this project is
successful, the potential impact of project findings on the effectiveness of the
instructional approach, teaching materials, and learning outcomes will be
substantial. Ultimately students of engineering economy will become better
decision makers within CEP contexts, a skill that is becoming increasingly
important in technology-driven societies domestically and globally.