* 1504654
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Human Ecological Integration In Beringia
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Francois Lanoe, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 24,810.00

Ph.D. candidate François Lanoë, of the University of Arizona, will study the
long-term ecological interactions between societies of hunter-gatherers and
populations of large terrestrial mammals. The human species has interacted with
its environment by means of hunting and gathering life-ways for over 99% of its
history. Previous scholarship has described the consequences of some of these
interactions, including possible resource extinction caused by overharvesting.
The archaeological and paleontological records are particularly well placed to
describe and provide interpretations for these ecological dynamics because they
generally extend over very long periods of time. Often, however, these issues
are studied separately by archaeologists and paleoecologists without real
integration of their respective research questions; as a result, perspectives
specific to human ecology have so far been under-emphasized. Within this broader
context this project will focus on the trophic ecology of hunter-gatherers, how
they fit in the trophic networks ("food webs") among other large predators and
what their role and impact on the whole ecosystem is. This project is innovative
in that it will implement an interdisciplinary methodological and theoretical
framework in order to address novel aspects of the sustainable integration of
hunter-gatherer societies in ecosystems over the long-term. It will allow a
variety of professionals (archaeologists, paleoecologists, theoretical
ecologists) to build upon its results.&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
modeling the modes of resource partitioning between humans and other large
predators, and their respective impacts on communities of large mammals. It will
be conducted in Alaska and Yukon, where societies of hunter-gatherers entered
North America for the first time at the end of the Ice Age, between 14,000 and
8,000 years ago. The colonization of this region corresponded to one of the
first settlements of the arctic and generally coincided with major turnover in
both vegetation and mammalian species, including megafauna extinction. This
project will contribute to the knowledge of human settlement and subsistence of
central Alaska through the excavation and faunal analysis of selected
archaeological sites. In addition, using a combination of paleontological and
chemical methods, this research will document feeding interactions among large
mammals at the end of the Ice Age. This interdisciplinary dataset will then be
used to model and understand how human settlers exploited resources, and how
their economical choices impacted the ecosystem as a whole.