* 1504134
* Response of high-latitude forests to a warmer and CO2-enriched atmosphere: tree rings in a process-based model
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Rosanne D'Arrigo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 579,971.00

Temperatures in Arctic and subarctic North America have been rising in recent
years and are projected to continue to rise. Furthermore, atmospheric carbon
dioxide is increasing around the globe. This project will evaluate the response
of white spruce to these ongoing changes. It will use archived samples from ten
sites, standard tree-ring methodologies supplemented by novel chemical analyses,
and numerical models to understand tree growth response to changing
environmental drivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alaskan timber industry has
been in decline in recent years. Successful outcomes from this project will
provide useful information to forest managers and planners. Workforce
development will be promoted as this would be the first NSF award to the
principal investigator. It will also provide support for the training of a post-
graduate scholar. Finally, it will involve undergraduate students in the
research activities. Educational outreach will be accomplished through workshops
to be offered to high school students from a school serving a population that is
under-represented in science and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will advance the use of tree-ring data in understanding forest growth
responses to natural and anthropogenic forcings. Extending traditional tree-ring
width and maximum latewood density records, the principal investigators will
establish a high latitude network of stable carbon (del13C) and oxygen (del18O)
isotope measurements, which provide an independent constraint on such changes
relative to traditional dendroclimatological measurements. This project
represents an interdisciplinary opportunity to combine three distinct
disciplines: (1) basic dendrochronological techniques, which allow for
precisely-dated, quantitative and verifiable long-term tree-ring records; (2)
low temperature geochemical tools to measure del13C and del18O ratios that will
independently reflect environmental variables including temperature,
precipitation, relative humidity and long-term physiological information on
water use efficiency in natural forests; and (3) the joint use of a process-
based mechanistic model, MAIDENiso, to distinguish between the confounding
effects of increases in temperatures and atmospheric CO2 and to predict boreal
forest response under different scenarios, and the NASA GISS ModelE2 general
circulation model to provide inputs to MAIDENiso.