* 1504551
* Mathematics Capstone Course Resources: Preparing Secondary School Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Shandy Hauk, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

The preparation of the highest quality teachers and learners of mathematics is a
national imperative. As undergraduates, future secondary school teachers take
many courses from professors with advanced degrees in mathematics. However,
university faculty members often do not possess deep knowledge of the kinds of
teaching demands faced by new school teachers. There is a notable need for
instructional materials that deliberately and explicitly connect undergraduate
mathematics content to the knowledge needed for teaching secondary mathematics.
This project will leverage the existence of Capstone Courses for future teachers
found in many universities, which bring together ideas from across the college
mathematics experience, as well as recent developments in policy and school
accountability, to create and refine activities for use by university faculty in
mathematics pre-service teachers Capstone Courses. This project will develop
Capstone Course modules which provide access to advanced mathematical ideas
along with opportunities to unpack mathematics in ways helpful for teaching it
in middle and high school settings. The proof-of-concept work of the project has
two parts. One is the development and refinement of two full modules, each
designed to take about a week of instructional time in a Capstone Course. The
second aspect is refining the module development process itself.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is significant in that it intends to
strengthen the pre-service preparation of teachers while it will also contribute
to educational research on the improvement of pre-service teacher learning
experiences in mathematics. The design for each module will use assessments
linked to state mathematics standards as anchors for discussion, sites for
development of mathematical knowledge, and foundations for other mathematics-
specific knowledge used in teaching. Modules will include mathematical task
exploration, analysis of middle and high school student thinking illustrated in
video-recorded clinical interviews, and examination of sample formative and
summative assessment items. The project brings together WestEd with San
Francisco State University and the University of Maine to: (1) develop and pilot
multi-media instructional modules for advanced pre-service secondary mathematics
teacher learning; (2) create guidance for college mathematics faculty for
effective use of the modules with target audiences; and (3) gather information
from instructors and the pre-service teachers in their courses to inform future
module development work. Design-based implementation research (DBIR) strategies
will be employed, using an iterative process to examine a persistent problem of
college instructional practice, to develop theory and tools for systematic
inquiry into feasibility and fidelity of implementation of the modules.
Intellectual Merit of the project resides in the expertise of the PI team, the
materials that will be developed, and a research agenda that will examine
feasibility (accessibility and usability by mathematics faculty), promise (pre-
service teacher learning based on the modules), and scalability (identification
of challenges to effective implementation). The Broader Impacts are present in
the intention to have faculty members at other institutions pilot test materials
during the project and in the potential for faculty, nationwide, to use the
modules to replace parts of, or enrich, current capstone course designs. Also
contributing to the Broader Impacts is that knowledge gained from project
research will provide a foundation for future research-based development efforts
to increase tools available for preparing mathematics teachers.