* 1504535
* STEM Club Leadership for Undergraduate STEM Education, Recruiting and Success (STEM CLUSTERS)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Michael Jacobson, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 347,753.00

There is a national need to improve undergraduate STEM education and to
understand effective strategies for developing disciplinary knowledge and non-
cognitive skills sets of undergraduates. The significance of this project is
that it will study the effect on undergraduate students of their participation
in 7-12 STEM outreach, a strategy that is being used across the nation and
believed to be beneficial. In particular, the STEM Club Leadership for
Undergraduate STEM Education, Recruiting and Success (STEM CLUSTERS) project
will study the influence of 7-12 outreach, through organizing school STEM clubs,
by conducting research on undergraduate STEM majors' learning, metacognition,
communication skills and sensitivity to equity issues in STEM. Building upon an
established culture of multidisciplinary K-12 STEM outreach at the University of
Colorado Denver, this project will organize and lead STEM clubs at five partner
schools in the greater Denver area. Each club will be organized by a vertical
team centered on 2-3 undergraduate Outreach Fellows (undergraduate STEM majors)
who will take a central role in designing, organizing and delivering club
activities. Each club's Fellows will be supported by experienced university
faculty, an experienced 7-12 STEM teacher, and a graduate co-
facilitator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this exploratory project are to:
(1) conduct a detailed research study to ascertain how organizing STEM clubs
impacts the undergraduate Outreach Fellows' learning, communication skills,
metacognition and sensitivity to equity issues in STEM; (2) provide the Outreach
Fellows with an authentic, interactive learning experience, through their
responsibilities to plan and oversee a middle or high school STEM club; and (3)
provide broad, high-quality STEM outreach to students in grades 7-12. The
project's research agenda explores how participation in the project: (1) impacts
Outreach Fellows' own science content knowledge; (2) increases the Fellows'
metacognitive knowledge and skills; (3) affects the Fellows' ability to
communicate complex scientific ideas; and (4) heightens the Fellows' sensitivity
to equity issues in STEM. The project utilizes a case study approach to these
questions, in which each Fellow is a case, and all Fellows together are
interrelated cases with common experiences. The Intellectual Merit of this
project resides in the evidence-based findings that will be generated related to
the effects of 7-12 STEM outreach on undergraduate student learning and other
key skills, and is further supported by the capacity of the research team and
the soundness of the project research plan, which builds upon a well-established
research literature. The Broader Impacts of this project include the potential
for broad adoption of the model, which is compatible with a wide variety of club
formats and school settings. Moreover, the project's findings are applicable to
improving access for a breadth of students, as the Fellows and the schools they
support are representative of the increasing diversity of our nation. Finally,
the findings of the project will be useful to a broad cross-section of the STEM
education community, relating both to the diversity of the STEM pipeline and to
the creation of effective learning environments.