* 1504881
* Best Practices on a Budget: Revamping Undergraduate Laboratory Sections to Stimulate Empirically-Based Learning and Foster Modern Research Skills
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Daniel Bubb, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 244,698.00

Numerous reports from government and industry have called for colleges and
universities to produce more -- and more capable -- STEM graduates. This project
addresses this need in the context of physics. The investigators will develop a
method of teaching introductory physics laboratory (IPL) sections that
encourages students not only to think like scientists but also to acquire STEM-
relevant technical skills. In particular, the investigators will develop new lab
exercises in a format that does not provide students with step-by-step guidance.
This approach will foster authentic scientific thinking as well as quality
interactions among the students. New technologies such as open-source hardware
and 3D printers will be an integral part of the labs. During a two-semester IPL
sequence, students will gain intimate experience translating conceptual
knowledge and technical skills into the design and implementation of scientific
experiments. A student's experience in introductory courses (such as IPLs) plays
an important role in the recruitment and retention of STEM majors. In this
regard, the project aims to remove some of the drudgery that students tend to
experience in introductory labs and to transform them into exciting learning
environments that promote creativity and provide a sense of accomplishment.

The project's approach is modeled on proven pedagogical techniques, such as peer
instruction and active engagement, and it will build on the Investigative
Science Learning Environment (ISLE) project, in particular. Many colleges and
universities cannot afford to operate multiple sections of the same introductory
lecture course in a manner that best implements these techniques. Because
laboratory sections are usually capped at a relatively small size to ensure
appropriate student-instructor interaction, the investigators have chosen to
implement the effective pedagogical techniques in the lab setting. This approach
will be cost-effective ("Best Practices on a Budget"). The labs will be based on
open-source software/hardware so that other institutions that wish to adopt the
approach can do so at reasonable cost. The investigators will also employ some
novel assessment methods to gauge the effects of the redesigned labs on
students. For example, because they will combine students from algebra-based and
calculus-based introductory physics courses in a single IPL course, they will be
able to study student pair-work interactions and determine whether
intellectually pairing students is a beneficial methodology. Additionally, they
will investigate whether built-in growth opportunities are a beneficial feature
in science education.