* 1504741
* Collaborative Research: "I AM an engineer!" Assessing Engineering Identity, Its Development, and Its Contribution to Retention among Engineering College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Debra Major, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 124,674.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project conducted at the
Texas A&amp;M University System and Old Dominion University will help to improve
retention of students in engineering by studying the development of engineering
identity among engineering college students in their first two years of study.
Engineering student retention must be improved in engineering programs across
the country. Understanding the extent to which engineering identity is related
to student retention, producing valid and reliable quantitative measures of
engineering identity and related constructs, and examining the extent to which
student participation in professional development activities influence changes
in engineering identity during the first two years of college will be a
contribution of this project that every engineering program can
apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an Exploration project in the Engaged Student
Learning program, this research contributes specifically to the body of
literature on student retention and engineering identity and also has
substantial potential to generate and to inspire future research in engineering
identity. The project objectives are to: validate a measure of engineering
identity; examine the extent to which engineering identity changes during the
first two years of college; assess the extent to which engaging in professional
development activities is related to engineering identity; and examine links
between engineering identity and retention among engineering students. This
project will establish a concise, valid, and reliable measure of engineering
identity that will enable large-scale assessment, thereby facilitating future
research and interventions concerning identity and retention among engineering
students. The findings of this project will inform the broader literature on the
retention of college students in science, technology, engineering and math.
Additionally, the research findings will have implications for the career
identity and professional development literatures, especially pertaining to the
pre-entry phase of the career pathway.