* 1504293
* Authentic STEAM-based Computer Science Education for Non-Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Brian Magerko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,679.00

Computer science has become an essential intellectual skill that is fundamental
to a broad range of academic disciplines and careers. Colleges and universities
have consistently struggled to engage a diverse population of students in
computer science. Introductory computing courses, now required at a growing
number of colleges, have largely failed to engage non-majors and to entice them
to further study in the field. To rectify this problem, researchers from Georgia
Tech and Georgia Gwinnett College will develop a new introductory computing
course that uses a STEAM (STEM + Arts) approach to engage a diverse population
of non-majors in computing. The course will use EarSketch, a learning
environment that teaches computer science in the context of music remixing and
music production. EarSketch has been proven to engage underrepresented groups at
the high school level. The goal of this project will be to demonstrate that
EarSketch will be effective at the undergraduate level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will adapt the EarSketch curriculum for
college-level study and develop new EarSketch features to support collaborative
learning practices in college courses. Through student engagement surveys, a
content knowledge assessment, focus groups, and a comparative analysis with
other courses, the team will assess the potential of EarSketch to impact
engagement, learning outcomes, and future interest in computing with a diverse
population of college students. Findings from this project will contribute to a
better understanding of STEAM learning environments in introductory
undergraduate STEM courses and their effects on content knowledge and engagement
across diverse student populations.