* 1504350
* Development of Multidimensional Resonance Raman Spectroscopies for Studies of Photochemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrew Moran, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program,
Professor Andrew Moran of the University of North Carolina is developing laser-
based experimental methods for studies of photodissociation and electron
transfer dynamics in heme proteins. The heme proteins targeted in this research
project are of interest, because they mediate electron and oxygen transport in
living systems. For example, hemoglobin is responsible for transporting oxygen
in blood, whereas cytochrome plays a central role in the electron transport
chain in mitochondria. This project focuses on the femtosecond time scale in
which elementary nuclear motions of these systems take place. Pulsed laser
techniques are uniquely equipped to resolve such fast dynamics. In addition to
advancing the understanding of these particular proteins, the experimental
methods developed in this project can be adapted by other researchers for
applications to a much wider range of systems and processes. The graduate and
undergraduate students who conduct this research develop a wide range of
technical skills (e.g., optics, instrument development, machining, computer
programming).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the development of two-
dimensional resonance Raman (2DRR) spectroscopies in which five noncollinear
laser beams induce light emission from a chemical system. Reaction mechanisms
are exposed by separating resonances of the reactants and products in separate
spectroscopic dimensions, which is not possible in traditional resonance Raman
spectroscopies. The background-free nature of these techniques facilitates fast
data acquisition rates and enhances sensitivity to weak signals. Two-dimensional
Raman spectroscopies are challenged by undesired nonlinearities known as
cascades in off-resonant systems (i.e., systems that do not absorb the incoming
laser beams). It is generally understood that "forbidden" steps in the desired
nonlinear optical processes are the origin of the problems encountered under
off-resonant conditions. In contrast, the experiments developed in this proposal
are carried out under resonant conditions, where such unfortunate selection
rules do not apply. A variety of control experiments are used to rule out
contributions from cascades.