* 1504886
* IUSE: TSU Wetland Observatory - Reforming Laboratory Instruction and Strengthening Research Experiences for Undergraduate Students in Biological and Environmental Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* William Sutton, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 08/31/2018
* USD 167,320.00

Wetlands are crucial to the health of both our water resources and wildlife.
Human-induced environmental changes create serious problems, such as the
deterioration of water quality and profound alterations to biogeochemical
cycles. Solving these problems requires training a diverse population of
students in environmental science. At this time, the lack of available resources
and facilities poses severe limitations on curriculum innovation at minority-
serving institutions and urban universities. The significance and importance of
this project is its potential to answer these challenges by reforming
undergraduate laboratory instruction and strengthening undergraduate research
experience using a wetlands resource situated on the college campus. The project
will improve undergraduate education at Tennessee State University (TSU). It can
serve as a model for other campuses hoping to upgrade their undergraduate
offerings to include more opportunities for students to learn science by
engaging in research opportunities that both advance what is known about the
world and contribute to the public good. The long term impact will be to help
build a more diverse workforce in biology, ecology and environmental
sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use the TSU
Wetland Observatory as an educational and research platform that supports a
series of challenging laboratory activities and course projects involving
courses taught by five faculty members in two departments. This project will
improve student learning and research experiences in biology, ecology,
environmental microbiology, and wetland hydrology. Each year the project will
benefit over 250 students in a variety of courses. In addition, the TSU Wetland
Observatory will serve as a convenient, safe and meaningful education site for
public and high school students. Course materials and data developed in this
project will be disseminated through workshops, education meetings, journal
publications, and a dedicated website. In so doing the project will broaden the
knowledge base regarding effective practices to improve undergraduate STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.