* 1504663
* 2015 International Workshop on Clinical Brain-Machine Interface Systems, Tokyo, Japan, March 13-15, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2015
* Leigh Hochberg, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 24,981.00

PI: Hochberg, Leigh R. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1504663&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brain machine interfaces (BMIs) interpret neural
signals to provide users with a new method for controlling external devices.
BMIs have the potential to improve the quality of life for millions of
individuals around the world with neurological impairments leading to paralysis
or limb loss, enabling the restoration of communication, movement, or sensory
function. The development of this technology is a multidisciplinary endeavor,
involving scientists, engineers, computer scientists, physicians, and other
healthcare providers. The 2015 International Workshop of Clinical Brain-Machine
Interfaces (CBMI), to be held at Nadao Hall, Tokyo, Japan, will provide a venue
for students and professionals from diverse backgrounds to learn from each other
and to develop a strategy to translate BMIs from research laboratories to the
clinic. This award is being made jointly by three Programs. (1) Biomedical
Engineering, in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems Division (Engineering Directorate); (2) General and Age-Related
Disabilities Engineering, in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems Division (Engineering Directorate); and (3) Emerging Frontiers
in Research and Innovation (EFRI) (Engineering
Directorate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2015 CBMI conference will convene expert
speakers and leaders in clinical BMI research, including rehabilitation
clinicians, neurologists, neurosurgeons, engineers, neuroscientists, regulatory
scientists and industry representatives. Beyond the keynote and plenary
lectures, the conference will ensure ample time for discussion and workshops on
topics including: BMIs in the home; roadmaps for BMI research in the US, Europe,
and Asia; combining neuromodulation and BMI strategies; neuroethical and legal
dimensions of BMI research; and many others. At the conclusion of the meeting, a
Consensus Report for disseminating the findings of the international workshop
will be prepared and submitted for peer-review to Frontiers in Neuroprosthetics
-- a first-tier electronic open access journal devoted to studies of BMI and
neuroprosthetics.