* 1504432
* PolarGlobe: Powering up Polar Cyberinfrastructure Using M-Cube Visualization for Polar Climate Studies
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Wenwen Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 449,974.00

The project aims at developing and implementing techniques for multivariate,
multi-dimensional, and multi-faceted visualizations to support polar climate
studies. Specifically, the project will focus on the following objectives.
Objective 1: develop a "PolarGlobe" virtual earth and map engine with
programming interface aided by cutting-edge visualization techniques that will
serve as an Arctic research platform. The platform will support virtual scene
simulation, volumetric graphics rendering, true terrain rendering, and dynamic
scene alternation. Objective 2: A location-aware, cyber-enabled multivariate
visualization technique aimed at supporting cross-sectional and longitudinal
climate studies. Objective 3: A 2.5D visualization module that realizes seamless
service-oriented integration of climate data with true-terrain scenes supported
by a highly efficient, high spatial-resolution terrain server. Objective 4: A
multi-faceted visualization module for examining complex climate patterns from
different perspectives. Objective 5: A general visualization platform to support
interactive, intuitive and responsive visualization of polar climate data. The
development of this new polar CI portal visualization technique will serve as an
intuitive, interactive and collaborative decision-making platform to uncover the
unknown spatiotemporal dynamics in the polar climate and to advance the
understanding of regional to global climate complexity. The cyberinfrastructure
platform here developed will also serve as a very effective teaching tool for
students in climate studies, polar sciences and geographic information science.