* 1504013
* The HILT-LAS Project: High Impact, Little Time activities that address Lexical Ambiguity in Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Diane Fisher, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 05/31/2018
* USD 215,371.00

This project will address the growing national need for improvements in
undergraduate statistics education to enable a large cadre of America's
residents to acquire a deeper understanding of statistics in order to make
informed decisions. A corollary is that statistical literacy is imperative for
an educated complex society. Recently, much has been learned about the teaching
and learning of undergraduate science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) fields, and one of the recommendations in STEM education is to foster
active learning in the classroom. In line with this, education researchers in
the STEM disciplines also have long noted that language often poses a barrier
for students studying science. With funding from the NSF Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education Program, the project investigators will create and study a
collection of research-based activities and corresponding materials for first-
year undergraduate statistics courses. These activities and materials will be
designed to have high impact on student learning, while requiring little time
for an instructor to adopt and implement. These High Impact Little Time (HILT)
activities and materials also will focus on breaking down language and jargon
barriers in statistics in the process. Following a recommendation from the 2012
National Research Council Report on Discipline-Based Education Research, the
project will bring together a multidisciplinary research team of statisticians,
discipline-based statistics education researchers, and an expert evaluator with
background in assessment and faculty development to guide improvements in
learning and instruction in introductory statistics courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: (1) develop a set of
research-based HILT activities for addressing issues in student learning of
statistics related to language use; (2) generate evidence-based knowledge of the
effects these activities have on student learning in statistics; (3) create an
interactive professional development instructional model in statistics education
that can be widely disseminated; and (4) produce the basis for a web-repository
designed not only to disseminate the HILT activities, but also to contain the
functionality necessary to promote and sustain the success of the professional
development model. The researchers will employ a mixed methods methodology to
determine (a) to what extent the implementation of the HILT language activities
promote student learning in statistics and (b) the instructional approaches
which are effective for developing or improving student learning outcomes in
statistics. Quantitative data will be used to determine the extent of
differences in student learning, and fhs data will be collected via the
administration of the Comprehensive Assessment of Outcomes of a first Statistics
Course (CAOS). The project team will also collect qualitative data via the
Lexical Ambiguity Instrument (LAI), which will be finalized as part of the
project. Data will be collected and analyzed from both students who are exposed
to the HILT activities and those who are not.