* 1504587
* Fostering Active Learning in Statistics: Research on Students and Graduate Teaching Assistants
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Jennifer Kaplan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 05/31/2018
* USD 223,529.00

This project will address the established and growing national need (i) for
United States citizenry as a whole to develop a better understanding of uses and
applications of statistics in order to make informed decisions and (ii) to
improve quality and increase quantity of college graduates to enter the
workforce in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) areas with
the ability to apply statistics to advance knowledge and information to help
keep the Nation equipped with a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce.
Recently, much has been learned about the teaching and learning of undergraduate
statistics, and one of the recommendations in statistics education is to foster
active learning in the classroom. In connection with this, the investigators
will: (a) produce materials to foster active and lasting learning for
undergraduate students in introductory statistics courses; (b) train statistics
graduate teaching assistants (GTAs) in the content and pedagogical issues needed
to implement these materials effectively; and (c) conduct research to understand
and generate improvements regarding the effectiveness of the developed materials
and the graduate student training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to produce and disseminate a research-based student manual and
instructor's guide along with the associated materials necessary to train GTAs
to facilitate active learning experiences. Another outcome of the project will
be an addition to the body of research on the professional development needs of
GTAs to implement successfully active-learning experiences in undergraduate
classrooms. In 2010, over 500,000 students were enrolled in introductory
statistics at the undergraduate level in the U.S., an increase of over 65% over
the previous decade, and many of these courses are taught by GTAs. So research
related to GTA training is imperative. The following research questions will be
investigated. (1) To what extent do the active learning labs result in higher
levels cognitive learning outcomes, attitudes toward statistics, and successful
completion of introductory statistics course? (2) What is the content and
pedagogical knowledge needed by GTAs in statistics to facilitate active learning
labs and how does their knowledge change as a result of facilitating active
learning? The questions will be addressed using mixed methods, repeated
measures, and hierarchal models. Materials generated from the project will be
portable to other institutions, and the accompanying research will inform these
institutions; whereas, information generated from the research on professional
development not only will apply to institutions with GTAs, but will also be
pertinent to any higher education institution where introductory undergraduate
statistics is taught.