* 1504267
* Collaborative Research: Ice sheet sensitivity in a changing Arctic system - using Geologic data and modeling to test the stable Greenland Ice Sheet hypothesis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Beata Csatho, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 778,963.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is enough water in the Greenland Ice
Sheet (GrIS) that, were it to melt, it would raise sea level in most coastal
cities significantly with huge consequences for society. In the face of
accelerated ice sheet contribution to sea level rise, it remains uncertain how
the GrIS will adjust to a warming Arctic, declining sea ice and related changing
precipitation patterns. This is a concern, given that future sea level rise is
strongly dependent on the GrIS response to arctic change. The scientific
community is currently undecided between a model of a dynamic GrIS that becomes
greatly reduced during warm periods and a model where it is relatively stable,
even through periods warmer than today. This proposal addresses the idea that
increased arctic precipitation offsets GrIS mass loss during times of elevated
temperature. The researchers will test this by contributing significant new
information on arctic system change and related GrIS dynamics during past and
ongoing warm periods, and employing an ice sheet modeling effort synthesizing
all new data aimed at both past and future GrIS simulations. The researchers
explicitly combine multiple scientific disciplines to provide a better
understanding of how key arctic system components such as precipitation,
temperature, sea-ice cover and GrIS mass balance are interconnected. The results
will be of fundamental relevance to the fates of the arctic system, the GrIS and
global sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train six graduate
students and one post-doctoral researcher. The cross-cutting research program is
paralleled by the scope of the outreach plan, to develop a variety of
deliverables, including development of an iBook and public outreach events. In
addition the team will participate in public outreach events in Buffalo and New
York City, where the public and scientists interact in a casual setting.
Finally, this work has synergies with ongoing missions at NASA and other
programs within the NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due
to recent advances in numerical ice sheet models and new sub-ice topography of
Greenland, combined with finely-tuned field approaches and geochronologic
techniques, the time is ripe for a coordinated, cross-disciplinary effort
focusing on cryosphere variability in a warming Arctic; the Greenland Ice Sheet
(GrIS) and sea ice constitute the largest, and most critical components of the
arctic cryosphere. The hypothesis that increased arctic precipitation can
counterbalance GrIS mass loss during times of elevated temperatures stems from
recent findings suggesting that it may be more stable than expected during
interglacials. The researchers will: generate new GrIS margin reconstructions
during and since the mid-Holocene Thermal Maximum (9,000 to 5,000 years ago),
with a powerful approach that combines lake sediment stratigraphy with new sub-
ice topography and novel high-sensitivity cosmogenic isotope methods; develop
new Holocene climate reconstructions of moisture, temperature and sea ice
conditions from lake and ocean sediments and an advanced synthesis of existing
arctic ice core and other paleoclimate data; and employ state-of-the-art
numerical ice sheet modeling fueled by ice margin and climate reconstructions to
test a range of climatic and dynamic controls on GrIS change. If the idea is
supported, then it would suggest a relatively stable GrIS during warm periods.
If, however, this project provides evidence that the GrIS retreated considerably
during the warmer-than-present mid-Holocene and in turn, that the GrIS has
reacted more sensitively to temperature than to precipitation change, the
results would support a tightly coupled ice sheet size-temperature link and in
turn, a much greater near-term GrIS contribution to sea level rise. Either
result will be of fundamental relevance to the fates of the arctic system, the
GrIS and global sea level rise.