* 1504934
* Taimyr Reindeer Migration Reanalysis (TAMARA)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2023
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/28/2023
* USD 155,995.00

Reindeer or Caribou (Rangifer tarandus L.) inhabit Arctic lands in Eurasia and
North America. An important part of Arctic ecosystems and Aboriginal livelihood,
wild reindeer have been monitored by scientists for almost 50 years. During this
time, herds have exhibited large changes in size and these changes have been
recorded in almost all herds across the animal?s range. The increase in the
number of wild reindeer 20-30 years ago was almost universally followed by a
significant population loss in the last decade. In addition, recent monitoring
revealed substantial shifts in the distribution of wild populations. The decline
in wild reindeer is likely related to natural cycles and changes in the Arctic
environment caused by climate change and increased anthropogenic activity. In
order to explain the observed changes in the abundance and distribution of
reindeer, it is necessary to collect long-term and seasonal observations. The
Taimyr Reindeer Herd (TRH) is both the largest and the longest monitored wild
reindeer herd in Eurasia. The Extreme North Agricultural Research Institute in
Noril?sk, Russia, has observed the TRH since 1969. Only a limited amount of the
information on the TRH has been released, digitized, processed, analyzed or
published. Much of the information is held in single-copy paper in locations and
under conditions that threaten its longevity. The proposed project aims to
digitize all available past records concerning the Taimyr wild reindeer
populations and develop related datasets on climate and habitat over the decades
of observation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Taimyr Reindeer Migration Reanalysis
(TAMARA) project will be based upon a collaborative and integrated
interdisciplinary international network of reindeer experts, arctic researchers,
and geospatial scientists. The project is designed to build a comprehensive and
openly available information system that will provide insight into the
historical relationship between humans, climate, environment, and reindeer.
Building on both international and local experiences the investigators will
implement a major data digitization and dissemination effort that will be a
considerable contribution to the polar cyberinfrastructure pertaining to Arctic
terrestrial mammals. The project has the following objectives: 1) Retrieve,
digitize, archive, transfer, process and publish historical observational data
collected between 1969 and 2009, document relevant methodologies, and develop
appropriate metadata; 2) Develop value-added data products resulting from the
(re)analysis of historical spatial migration patterns of the TRH; and 3)
Contribute to developing polar spatial cyberinfrastructure by creating a
comprehensive and open data visualization and data dissemination system. The
TAMARA project will be an integral part of the worldwide network of reindeer
observation programs. The project will involve US and Russian scientists and
students, supporting one graduate student and two part-time undergraduates.
Results will be widely disseminated to local residents and stakeholders. The
project will contribute to the early career development of a young investigator.