* 1504226
* Surface and Bulk Properties of Layered Transition-Metal Compounds: Manifestations of Broken Symmetry
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* E. Ward Plummer, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 946,981.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSRTACT&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Condensed Matter Physics
Program of the Division of Materials Research supports experimental condensed-
matter physics research on new class of materials that are relevant to future
energy applications and advanced electronic devices. This class of materials,
complex transition metal compounds, exhibit new physical properties that cannot
be understood with traditional approaches. The complementary expertise of two
scientists, one on surface (one atomic layer) and the other on bulk, will allow
us to explore the fundamental physics underlying the emergent phenomena seen in
both surface and bulk. Creating a surface allows this team to explore the
manifestations of broken symmetry on this new class of materials. Our ultimate
goal is to address one of the grand challenges of materials science: how do
complex phenomena emerge from simple ingredients? Through combined effort of two
scientists, this research project offers an ideal training ground for
undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and visiting scholars,
exposing them in frontier scientific research. In particular, Ph.D. students,
supported through this project, will have hands-on experience in state-of-the-
art instrumentation, and be trained for careers either in academia, national
laboratories, or industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSRTACT&lt;br/&gt;This research project, supported by Condensed Matter Physics
Program of the Division of Materials Research is designed to study the surface
and bulk physical properties of newly discovered transition-metal layered
compounds. This class of materials exhibit strong coupling between charge, spin,
lattice and orbital. Their physical properties are extremely susceptible to a
subtle change either internally (chemical doping), or externally such as
magnetic field or pressure. Creating a surface by cleaving these layer-materials
is an ideal way to distort the delicate balance in the bulk, and explore the
manifestations of broken symmetry. The complementary expertise of two
scientists, one on surface and the other on bulk, will allow us to explore the
fundamental physics underlying the emergent phenomena in this class of
materials. The ultimate goal is to address one of the grand challenges of
materials science: how do complex phenomena emerge from simple ingredients?
Through combined effort of two scientists, this research project offers an ideal
training ground for undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
visiting scholars, exposing them in frontier scientific research. In particular,
Ph.D. students, supported through this project, will have hands-on experience in
state-of-the-art instrumentation, and be trained for careers either in academia,
national laboratories, or industries. Both of the principal investigators have
been hosting students from Louisiana high schools, LSU through the "Chancellor's
Future Leaders in Research" program, and NSF supported REU program.