* 1504547
* Renewal of Scholarship for Service at California State University, Sacramento (2015-2020)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2023
* Isaac Ghansah, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 3,077,428.00

California State University, Sacramento proposes to add four new cohorts of
undergraduate and graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R) Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program in cybersecurity. Sacramento State has developed a
solid infrastructure for cybersecurity education, including the establishment of
both a strong cybersecurity component to the Computer Science program and a
Center for Information Assurance and Security (CIAS). The previous NSF funding
has helped Sacramento State to establish a strong SFS program and contributed
significantly to sustainability of the cybersecurity curriculum. All students
who graduated through May 2014 have been placed in qualified government
positions. The National Security Agency and the Department of Homeland Security
designated Sacramento State's CIAS a National Center of Academic Excellence in
Information Assurance Education and Cyber Defense. Participating faculty will
attend technical workshops and conferences in cybersecurity, which will allow to
disseminate broadly the results of their scholarly activities and maintain
currency in this rapidly changing field. In return, faculty will further enhance
the depth and scope of research being conducted in
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFS project broadens its impact by
mentoring community colleges in northern California in their efforts to
establish or enhance cybersecurity programs. The project will assist the
colleges in developing pathways that reach the region's high schools up to the
graduate program in cybersecurity at Sacramento State. This will significantly
enhance cybersecurity workforce development in northern California. The project
is expected to increase participation of individuals from underrepresented
groups in cybersecurity. It has built-in flexibility in the selection process to
enhance the acceptance rate of minorities and female candidates into the
program. The project includes an assessment and evaluation plan coordinated by
an independent evaluator to ensure that the project achieves its objectives. The
project's results will be disseminated through conference and professional
presentations.