* 1504702
* Towards the Rational Design of Materials Exhibiting Colossal Metal-Insulator Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Sarbajit Banerjee, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2019
* USD 398,240.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;There are few physical properties of matter that
show as much variation across different materials as electrical conductivity.
Materials can be insulators, semiconductors, and metals, and indeed the
distinctive abilities of different materials to carry electronic charge underpin
most aspects of modern technology. A relatively rare class of materials
comprises solids that abruptly switch from being insulators to metals in
response to an applied external stimulus such as an increase in temperature,
application of a voltage, illumination with a light source, or being subjected
to a tensile strain. Rarer still are materials that undergo such dramatic
switching of properties close to room temperature. With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
this project focuses on deciphering the changes in atomic structure and chemical
bonding across these abrupt transformations with a view towards rationally
designing materials that can be induced to switch their conductivity across many
orders of magnitude in response to external stimuli. The activity takes
advantage of the structural versatility of transition metal oxides, a class of
materials where the chemical composition and the precise details of the atomic
structure can be finely controlled. The project is anticipated to greatly expand
the available repertoire of materials that show such technologically relevant
switchability of properties close to room temperature while also addressing
fundamental science related to the interaction between electrons in such solids.
The principal investigator is focused on engaging students transferring from
community colleges in research early on in their college careers to better tap
into this often overlooked talent pool. Finally, the project is developing
inspirational material to provide elementary school students a flavor of the
technological possibilities of nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on the intriguing phenomenon of metal-
insulator transitions wherein the electrical conductivity of a material abruptly
switches from insulating to metallic behavior in response to temperature,
pressure, voltage, photo-excitation, or change in chemical composition. Such an
abruptly discontinuous change in electrical conductivity arises from the
transformation of localized valence electrons to itinerant electrons in the
material, and is often underpinned by electron-electron interactions.
Understanding and tuning electron correlation remains one of the grand
challenges of the physical sciences. The fundamental premise of the research
activity is the idea that inter-atomic distances, charge-ordering motifs, and
dopant ratios can be precisely modulated in complex transition metal oxides
through variation of the size, charge, stoichiometry, and polarizability of
intercalating cations. The activity spans chemical synthesis of complex oxides
with precise control of composition and structure, correlation of structural and
compositional characteristics to metal-insulator transitions, the application of
diffraction and spectroscopic tools to probe the mechanistic basis for these
transitions, and modulation of the transitions by defining intercalation
gradients. A summer research activity will engage undergraduates transferring to
Texas A&amp;M from community colleges. Graphical novels focused on nanoscience
and designed to motivate elementary school students will be developed and
disseminated at public science events.