* 1504265
* Translocation and diffusion of polyelectrolytes and electronic conduction in polyelectrolyte systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2020
* USD 756,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When certain numbers of charged ions,
dispersed in a salty solution, are connected together in a chain-like fashion,
the system exhibits tantalizing properties with additional tuning of chemistry
of reactions. Examples of use of these materials include super-absorbancy of
water in diapers, targeted delivery of large macromolecules such as genes using
synthetic platforms, guided transport of charged macromolecules through nano-
fluidic devices, and high electronic conductivity of polyelectrolyte films
formulated from water-based solutions. Despite the high importance of charged
polymers in today's materials world, fundamental understanding is limited. The
difficulty arises from several long-range forces acting on the molecules
simultaneously so that each molecule feels the presence of almost every other
molecule in the system. The Principal Investigator proposes to bring a
combination of experiments on carefully chosen model systems, computer modeling,
and advanced theoretical methods to address several interrelated transport
properties of polyelectrolyte systems. The project offers societal impact in
terms of fundamental scientific understanding of advanced materials of broad
technological relevance and use. One of the major components of the proposed
research is to train the next generation of scientific leaders in this area so
as to meet the growing global challenges and societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments and development of new
theories are proposed for polyelectrolyte dynamics, polyelectrolyte gel
dynamics, and electrical conduction in polyelectrolyte systems, by combining
single molecule electrophoresis, light scattering, rheology, statistical
mechanics, field theory, and several simulation techniques. Several
polyelectrolyte transport phenomena will be studied. Specifically, the project
addresses (a) translocation of synthetic branched polyelectrolytes, (b)
polyelectrolyte gel dynamics and diffusion of polyelectrolytes in
polyelectrolyte gels, and (c) electronic conduction in polyelectrolyte systems.
This project is aimed at building a new separation technique for
polyelectrolytes with different architectures, and discovering new conceptual
models for polyelectrolyte transport and electron transport in polyelectrolyte
systems. The results of this research will have impact in numerous applied areas
such as super-water absorbent goods, separation science, molecular sieves for
separation techniques, drug delivery platforms, organic photovoltaic devices,
organic light-emitting diodes, radio frequency identification tags, and
antistatic coatings. Training of graduate students in this research area is the
primary educational component of the proposed activity.