* 1504257
* Investigating Entrepreneurship Education as a Means to Developing the 21st Century Engineer
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Aileen Huang-Saad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 05/31/2018
* USD 249,947.00

This project at the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan in Ann
Arbor will help to ensure that engineers continue to drive economic development
and innovation by developing ways to measure and assess entrepreneurial ability
in undergraduate engineering students. Continued innovation is central to
national security and economic growth. Simultaneously the professional context
for the future engineer is changing. Graduates must be not only technically
proficient, but also able to identify unmet needs, solve unfamiliar problems
under time constraints, and adapt to an increasing rate of technological change.
Engineering graduates must be capable of serving as technological leaders in
diverse circumstances ranging from small start-up companies to globally-
dispersed corporations. In response to changing career needs, higher education
institutions are reforming how they train engineers, and training in
entrepreneurship is becoming more widespread in engineering education. This work
will develop assessment materials that can be used to help define and assess
entrepreneurial ability in engineering students as that ability is developed
within engineering-based entrepreneurship programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will fill an important need in promoting increased entrepreneurial
ability among engineering graduates. Traditional indicators of entrepreneurial
ability are based on large-scale business outcomes such as success of start-up
companies or ability to attract capital investment. Engineering programs seeking
to increase and develop the entrepreneurial ability of engineering students need
methods to identify and assess entrepreneurial ability in the developmental
stages in the context of technological innovation. To help engineering
entrepreneurship education bridge the gap between traditional business
entrepreneurship education and the career needs of the 21st century engineer,
this study will establish the fundamental concepts engineering students can gain
from entrepreneurship education; generate outcome measures aligned with the
goals of entrepreneurship education for engineers; conduct a pilot evaluation;
and develop teaching assessment materials that can be used by engineering
faculty. Work will be conducted through a collaboration between engineering
faculty with entrepreneurial experience and education researchers. The results
of this work will offer faculty and students a better understanding of the core
skills and learning outcomes that can be expected from an engineering
entrepreneurship curriculum.