* 1504449
* Electrical control of nontrivial textures in magnetic nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Sergei Urazhdin, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,150.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;The technological demand for smaller and
faster devices capable of new functionalities drives the scientific exploration
of the nontrivial states of matter that remain stable when scaled down to just a
few nanometers. The Project studies the skyrmions - nontrivial nanoscale
magnetic textures that cannot by annihilated by a continuous evolution of
magnetization. Such textures can be as small as a few nanometers, making it
difficult to study them by the conventional microscopy techniques, and
consequently very little is known about their properties or how they can be used
in nanodevices. The Project uses magnetoelectronic measurements in
nanofabricated structures to access the relevant length sales, and investigate
the possibility to use electrical current locally injected into ultrathin
magnetic films to create, manipulate, and detect skyrmions. The research is
integrated with the training for undergraduate and graduate students, and
contributes to the burgeoning broader nanoscience research, education and
outreach efforts in the Atlanta area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;The Project investigates magnetic skyrmions -
topologically nontrivial states in magnetic materials, which cannot be obtained
by a continuous transformation of "trivial" states, and thus exhibit higher
stability, unusual dynamical characteristics and response to perturbations. The
research utilizes nanofabricated magnetic nanostructures based on ultrathin
magnetic films with perpendicular anisotropy, and magnetoelectronic techniques
to generate, characterize, and manipulate both static and dynamical states of
skyrmions by electrical current. Materials science and magnetic engineering are
used to achieve a significant Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction capable of
stabilizing skyrmions in the absence of current. New measurement approaches,
such as three-terminal Hall effect , are designed specifically to investigate
phenomena on nanoscale not accessible with the established techniques. This
research provides fundamental insight into the effects of topological textures
on the material properties, and develops routes for their experimental
exploration as well as possible applications in nanoscale magnetoelectronic
(spintronic) devices. In addition to directly training two graduate students,
the impact of the Project is significantly enhanced by its role in supporting
the free shared condensed matter and nanoscience research facilities provided by
the PI to researchers at Emory University and in the larger Atlanta area,
research involvement of undergraduates and high school students, and
contribution the large special events such as the Atlanta Science Festival and
the Elementary School Science Day.