* 1504696
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: TAILORED INSTRUCTIONS AND ENGINEERED DELIVERY USING PROTOCOLS (TIED UP)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Vinu Unnikrishnan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2018
* USD 40,004.00

This project is aiming at effective course engagement in and out of a class room
through a Tailored Instruction and Engineered Delivery approach Using PROTOCOLs
(TIED UP). A team of STEM faculty is restructuring three engineering courses
into an integrated modular concept format using a model titled Re-structuring
Engineering Courses for E-Learning and Integrated Virtual Education (RECEIVE)
where complex engineering concepts are presented as networked sub concepts in a
webpage, creating a virtual neural space. Each of these inter connected sub
concepts is further linked to several learning tools, such as short video
lectures, animations, mandatory activities and quizzes whose designs are based
on a number of PROTOCOLs that leverage the latest insights from established
theories of neuro and cognitive science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROTOCOLs are
systematic procedures to be followed in a concept delivery using cognitive
learning principles. The goal of a PROTOCOL is to enhance students' capacity to
elicit patterns of meaning. Instructional PROTOCOLs for each concept are
searching for optimum strategies that possibly create neural networks and
synapses that essentially constitute the learning process. Modular breakdown of
a challenging engineering concept is providing a better learning experience to
students who learn at different paces. The TIED UP is systematically informing
students about what to learn in a course as well as how to learn each concept
using PROTOCOLs. The broader impact of this project is that it replaces
traditional instructional methods with an outcome oriented student centered
learning approach using engineered instructional strategies based on neuro-
cognitive leaning principles.