* 1504977
* Collective Phenomena in Neural Population Codes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Berry, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

In virtually every part of the brain, information about the sensory environment,
internal body states, or intended movements is encoded by more than one neuron.
This was apparent as early as the nineteenth century from the extensive
interconnectivity of nearby neurons and continues to be apparent from numerous
measurements of the tuning curves and correlation of nearby neurons. Despite its
fundamental importance, population neural codes are poorly understood. In this
project, the PI will combine large-scale neural recording methods with state-of-
the-art theoretical analyses to study collective phenomena in population neural
codes. The project will focus on the retina as a model system, where the quality
and completeness of experimental data is the greatest. The project will give us
a thorough and clear understanding of what are the "ingredients" needed at the
population level to give rise to criticality, which will be important in
generating hypotheses about what other regions of the brain might exhibit
criticality in their population codes. It will also explore a novel hypothesis
about how critical population states give rise to a discrete aspect of the
neural code and one that is highly robust to neural noise. This could give us
new insight into how we effortlessly divide the sensory world into objects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has an extensive track record in multi-electrode
recording from the vertebrate retina, along with applying maximum entropy models
to analyze states of network activity. The PI hypothesizes that the retinal
population code has an unusual and nontrivial structure that it analogous to the
critical state in physical systems. This structure leads to the definition of a
"collective mode" of neural activity, which is a set of neural activity states
that groups visual stimuli into discrete classes. These collective modes
constitute a novel hypothesis about population neural codes that is
qualitatively different from the view of information encoding at the single-
neuron level. The proposed projects aims are: understanding the origin of
criticality, including studying the role of correlations in the stimulus, using
adaptation to test how specifically retinal circuitry is tuned to give rise to
criticality, studying the pattern and strength of correlation required for any
network to give rise to criticality as well as formulating receptive field
models to see what degrees of overlap and functional heterogeneity are required
in defining collective modes of neural activity and studying what stimuli they
encode and how reliably they are activated by a given visual stimulus. The
broader impacts of the proposed work lie along three distinct directions:(i) the
potential to develop new concepts about population neural codes that could prove
applicable across many different brain regions; (ii) the development and
dissemination of software to perform maximum entropy fits to neural data, which
could help spur on the research programs of many labs that use these methods to
analyze neural populations; (iii) the broadening of our ideas about critical
systems in physics to include the kind of asymmetric, intermediate cases found
in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Cellular
Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.