* 1504846
* Viral coat protein arrays for rapid development and screening of anti-fusogenic antivirals against Ebolavirus
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Gary Whittaker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The Ebola virus infection begins when viruses enter specific cells in the body,
through a process involving binding to the cell surface followed by fusion
during which the virus releases its genetic material into the cell. If either
binding or fusion is interrupted, the virus will no longer be able to cause
infection. The main objective of this work is to develop therapeutics that block
virus fusion to the cell. To accomplish this, the PI will use a novel in vitro
platform that allows her to screen for virus fusion preventing compounds. At the
conclusion of this work, the benefit to society will be: 1) a screening tool
that can be readily adapted to discover compounds to combat future viral
outbreaks, and 2) antibody candidates that can be used to stop the progression
of the current Ebola virus disease outbreak. Additionally, the investigators
will interact with the public to provide information about the Ebola virus, its
infection process, and factors that contribute to outbreaks such as the current
one.

Technical Abstract: At present, there are no available screening tools that can
directly test the efficacy of anti-fusogenic compounds against Ebola. The fusion
step is an especially promising target for therapeutics, as the fusion domain of
Ebola virus spike protein (GP) evolves much slower than its binding domain. To
address the urgent national need to identify compounds that stop Ebola virus
infection, the PI proposes to (1) create a rapid screening platform for anti-
fusogenic compounds against Ebola virus; and (2) identify antibodies and
compounds that disrupt the fusion function of GP. The PI will adapt a
microfluidic virus fusion assay platform based on her previous work using single
particle tracking (SPT) approaches to investigate enveloped virus fusion. The
platform consists of a multi-channel microfluidic device with host cell mimics
coated on the channel walls (referred to as a supported lipid bilayer, SLB), and
virus (or virus-like particles, VLPs) containing Ebola virus GP protein that can
fuse with the SLB. This technology directly probes viral fusion in a high-
throughput manner and provides quantitative information on the fusion mechanism.
It is anticipated that this platform can be used for the rapid screening and
identification of anti-fusogenic antiviral compounds against Ebola virus. In
addition, the PIs will participate in public discourse about the virus,
providing information about the infection process and providing perspective
about the outbreak through such activities as presentations to the medical staff
at the regional hospital (Cayuga Medical Center) as part of their Continuing
Education Series and Ebola-response plan.