* 1504503
* Developing, Implementing, and Studying an Urban Field-Based Course to Improve Learning Outcomes in Undergraduate STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Susan Oxley, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 224,409.00

There is a critical need to provide undergraduate science students with
authentic research experiences in order to develop their scientific knowledge,
skills, and thinking. The Departments of Chemistry/Biochemistry, and
Physics/Environmental Science at St. Mary's University, a 4-year Hispanic-
Serving Institution located in San Antonio, Texas, will collaborate to develop
and implement a field-based undergraduate course and study the effects of
fieldwork on Chemistry and Environmental Science majors. Students participating
in the Field Program will characterize and monitor the chemical and physical
conditions at an urban stream site, Confluence Park, as it undergoes restoration
and rehabilitation as a city park. The Field Program will: (1) provide
scientifically rich academic experiences to Hispanic, first-generation and low-
income students; (2) enhance student learning outcomes through practical
application of key principles to an authentic real-world problem; and (3)
promote civic engagement and pride in the community, as well as foster science
literacy through outreach programs. By improving educational outcomes for this
group of students, the need to develop a more diverse STEM workforce will be
directly impacted. Thus, this project, funded through the National Science
Foundation's Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in the Education and Human
Resources Directorate (IUSE-EHR) program, the Engaged Student Learning-
Exploration track, will positively contribute to the intents of the IUSE-EHR
program which seeks to identify best practices to increase the number and
diversity of students participating in STEM fields, as well as improve STEM
learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Field Program is to
evaluate the effects of field-based methods on attitudes and learning outcomes
for a diverse group of undergraduate students engaged in Chemistry and
Environmental Science. Students in the program will engage in a team-based
project to characterize and monitor physical and chemical changes at an urban
site, Confluence Park, on the San Antonio River that will be undergoing
restoration and rehabilitation as a city park. The program capstone will be a
two-semester course in Field-Based Environmental Chemistry. The Field Program
will incorporate elements of experimental design, collaborative learning,
practical experience using industry standards and protocols, data analysis, and
communication of results to a diverse audience. By encouraging students to apply
Chemistry and Environmental Science principles in a natural setting, the Field
Program will provide a diverse group of students with an enhanced undergraduate
STEM learning experience. Surveys before and after the course will be used to
evaluate the impact of participation in the Field Program on student attitudes
and learning outcomes. The interdisciplinary nature of fieldwork will foster
collaboration, providing Chemistry participants with insights into the
complexities of characterizing natural systems, while Environmental Science
participants will gain an appreciation of the effort and uncertainties
associated with high-quality laboratory analysis. This model of what to expect
in a science career will enhance student commitment to a STEM discipline, which
directly affects persistence within the STEM workforce pipeline. Although this
program will be implemented at a specific site, the principles developed in the
Field Program are designed to be adaptable by other colleges, universities, and
school systems according to their own location and disciplinary interests. In
addition, through characterizing and monitoring of Confluence Park as it is
developed, participants will gain insights into the effects of restoration and
rehabilitation on the physical and chemical conditions of an urban field site.
These data will help identify restoration methods that are the most effective at
achieving the desired end state. The information gathered during this study will
be shared with the scientific community and other stakeholders in the
development of Confluence Park in San Antonio. Through this community-field-
based work, undergraduate students will not only gain scientific knowledge and
acumen, but they will also develop skills related to communicating science to a
broad range of people through their community engagement activities.