* 1504619
* IUSE:  EHR:  Enabling field experiences in introductory geoscience classes through the use of virtual reality
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Catherine Mobley, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2019
* USD 227,369.00

This project will investigate the use of virtual reality technologies to create
virtual field experiences for use in introductory geosciences classes. Although
field experiences are an important aspect of geoscience education, there are few
opportunities to provide physical world experiences to many undergraduate
students due to access, logistical, and financial constraints. Thus, geoscience
instructors must develop novel teaching and learning opportunities that closely
approximate the information, elements, and environment students would find on a
physical, in-person field study. The types of virtual experiences developed
through this project, while different from their physical corollaries, will give
learners the chance to engage with learning content and activities through
multi-modal interactions in the virtual environment. The use of virtualization
tools will create opportunities that give geoscience educators access to
interactive, contextualized teaching materials, and learners access to a space
for exploration and discovery. The development of virtual reality field
experiences will also create a pathway for a diverse audience of students to
encounter the earth sciences, particularly those from underrepresented groups,
resource-limited institutions, and majors traditionally not directly involved in
the earth sciences. Enhancing access to educational opportunities for these
groups will aid in developing the engaged, diverse and earth-science literate
population that is needed to address societal needs in a complex and changing
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a virtual reality field-
trip of the Grand Canyon that will be accessible to a wide audience in diverse
educational settings. Through the experience, students will develop core
geoscience concepts as they find and evaluate evidence that will help them piece
together the geologic history of the region. In the virtual experience, students
will apply their knowledge of rock and mineral properties, build their
understanding of spatial and temporal relationships between Earth processes,
learn how these relationships are recorded in the rock, and ultimately
synthesize their observations into a coherent geologic story that they will
encapsulate in lay terms as a virtual brochure for the Canyon. The project will
also develop a virtual reality toolbox for earth science educators that will
facilitate the future development of additional virtual field activities. The
project will utilize new innovations in the field of virtual reality, e.g.,
Oculus Rift technology, to provide geoscience educators the means to give every
student a first-person virtual field experience. The virtual field experiences
will be designed to emphasize key aspects of geoscience learning (i.e., temporal
thinking, spatial thinking, earth systems, and field learning) and integrate the
'Big Ideas' in geoscience proposed by the Earth Science Literacy Initiative. The
specific learning activities that will be developed in the project are strongly
grounded in the existing geoscience education, STEM education, and game-based
learning literature and will utilize built-in learning analytics for improved
assessment of student learning. By addressing both the affective and cognitive
routes to learning, this approach holds promise to increase student engagement
and concept retention in the classroom.