* 1504073
* Collaborative Research: Detecting Glacier Calving Events from Ocean Waves and Underwater Acoustics
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Fiammetta Straneo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 06/30/2017
* USD 238,995.00

Predictions of future sea level rise depend on accurate estimates of the rate at
which ice sheets deliver fresh water and ice to the oceans. These estimates are
provided by models, which, in turn, depend on our understanding of iceberg
calving, among other processes. Due to a lack of observations, our ability to
project rates of iceberg calving needs improvement. This project will provide an
inexpensive means of detecting and, potentially, characterizing such
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to workforce
development through provision of support for the training of a graduate student
and a post-doctoral associate. It will enhance community resources by releasing
the open source calving detection software, written in the R statistical
language, on a variety of web sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigators of this project will develop a method for detecting and
characterizing glacier calving events by measuring the surface waves generated
during the process. Development of the method will make use of data already
collected in Sarqardleq fjord in West Greenland. Following the project both the
data and the method will be made publicly available. In addition, they will
characterize the noise generated by calving events using underwater acoustic
data that was collected simultaneously with the wave data. The comparison of the
acoustic and surface pressure data, in conjunction with high temporal resolution
time-lapse imagery, will be used to improve understanding of the details of
acoustic signatures of glacier calving.