* 1504312
* Collaborative Research: The roles of plant roots, mycorrhizal fungi and uptake of deep nitrogen in the permafrost carbon feedback to warming climate
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Michelle Mack, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 754,433.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Release of carbon frozen in permafrost (frozen
ground) has been identified as one of the strongest and most likely positive
feedbacks between the biosphere and the warming climate. Permafrost nitrogen
release has the potential to stabilize the response of the carbon cycle to
climate warming because it is a negative, within-system feedback. It could
confer resilience to ecosystem-atmosphere interactions in a warming Arctic. The
research under this award will advance understanding of the arctic system by
incorporating this feedback into a terrestrial biosphere model used extensively
by the community for forecasting arctic environmental change and its links to
the Earth system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative nature of the project
will build partnerships between ecosystem ecologists and molecular biologists,
creating new knowledge about the role of plant-fungal mutualisms in Earth system
feedback cycles. The project will support career development of two female
arctic scientists at the postdoctoral or new faculty level. It will contribute
to the training of two graduate students in biogeosciences, ecology, and
molecular biology, and provide an authentic field or laboratory research
experience for about twenty undergraduate students. The project will contribute
to broadening participation of under-represented groups in ecological and
environmental
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 1,700 Pg of
organic carbon (C) reside in the permafrost soils and sediments of Arctic and
Boreal regions. Because this stock is more than twice the size of the
atmospheric C pool, there is considerable interest in understanding how the C
balance of permafrost ecosystems will respond to observed and predicted climate
warming. As permafrost soils thaw, organic matter that has been cryogenically
protected for hundreds to thousands of years is exposed to microbial
decomposition and released to the atmosphere as greenhouse gases. One key factor
that may strongly influence C balance in these ecosystems is the concurrent
release of nitrogen (N), the element most likely to limit plant productivity.
Release of N at or after thaw could increase plant N availability, stimulate
plant C uptake and offset or balance permafrost C emissions. Although scientists
acknowledge the key role N is likely to play in the permafrost C feedback to
climate, there have been few empirical studies of the factors that control its
fate in warming permafrost ecosystems. The objective of this project is to
develop a mechanistic understanding of the role of permafrost N in the C balance
of Alaskan tundra landscapes underlain by permafrost
soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on plant acquisition of
permafrost N because in most N-limited terrestrial ecosystems, plant uptake is
the dominant fate of N released by microbial processes. Plants depend on fungal
partners to access N beyond the reach of roots, so this research will also focus
on plant mycorrhizal status and fungal community composition to elucidate the
role fungal symbionts play in plant N acquisition. Finally, other fates of
permafrost N will be explored, including stasis and loss. Proposed research will
explore three general questions: What is the potential for release of plant-
available nitrogen from thawing permafrost soil organic matter; what proportion
of N released deep in the soil profile, at the base of the active layer, is
acquired by mycorrhizae and plants and what are the key biotic and abiotic
factors that control acquisition; and how will permafrost thaw and N release
affect net ecosystem carbon balance and net biogeochemical radiative forcing
from permafrost thaw at local and regional scales?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research approach includes three elements: observations of plants, fungi and
soils across a regional survey of upland tundra ecological landscape units on
the North Slope of the Brooks Range, Alaska; occupying intensive research sites
in cold and warm moist acidic tundra, where measurements of mycorrhizal fungi
and plant N acquisition and N loss will be made within long-term warming
experiments and well-characterized natural thaw gradients; and modeling and
regional integration with a terrestrial biosphere model specifically developed
to simulate C and N dynamics in high latitude systems.