* 1504883
* Transforming Instruction in Key Engineering Courses at the University of Texas at Austin
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* David Allen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

In the Cockrell School of Engineering at The University of Texas at Austin (UT
Austin), the greatest losses in retention are in the first two years and such
losses disproportionately affect students from historically underrepresented
populations. Evidence indicates that the learning experiences of first and
second year students could be greatly enhanced by transforming instructional
practices in key engineering courses to include context-driven, active learning
experiences. The project entitled "Transforming Instruction in Key Engineering
Courses at the University of Texas at Austin" will target two categories of
first and second year engineering courses to improve student outcomes. One
category is courses required by multiple engineering departments (e.g.,
Engineering Statics); the second is courses where the underlying concepts are
the same, but courses in different engineering disciplines apply the basic
principles in different ways (e.g., Thermodynamics). The course transformations
will be applicable in both university and secondary classrooms, and will likely
impact a large fraction of Hispanic students, thus improving their retention,
graduation, and ultimately, workforce placement. At the university level,
investigators will disseminate the results of the project through mechanisms
such as publications and workshops targeting, in particular, colleagues in other
colleges and schools of engineering at UT System institutions. Hispanic or
Latino students comprise 40 percent of all undergraduates across the UT System.
Because the targeted courses are common to engineering curricula nationwide, the
practices will also likely be of interest to other institutions, and will be
easily transferable. At the secondary level, the learning modules created will
be used to supplement "Engineer Your World," which is an innovative, design- and
challenge-based, year-long high school engineering curriculum (developed under
the leadership of the Principal Investigator of this project) that is currently
in 77 schools in 12 states. This will help foster interest and present
opportunities for engagement of high school students in engineering design, thus
preparing the next generation of prospective
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific aims of the project will be to: (1)
develop faculty learning communities to explore and adapt evidence-based
instructional practices for targeted courses; (2) perform "proof of concept"
activities for one or more examples in each of the two categories of courses
(i.e., common core courses taken by students in multiple fields of engineering,
courses covering common concepts that are taught separately in different
engineering departments); and (3) develop a theory of change that will inform a
strategic plan for widespread implementation of instructional transformations.
Anticipated outcomes include improved student mastery of concepts in targeted
courses, improved student performance and retention, increased and sustained use
of evidence-based instructional practices, sustained participation in faculty
learning communities, faculty beliefs about teaching and learning that are
better aligned with educational research, and development and preliminary
validation of a theory of change. Attainment of the outcomes will be evaluated
using a mixed-methods approach that will entail collection and analysis of data
reflective of improved student learning (e.g. concept inventories, course pass
rates, semester-to-semester and first-to-second year retention, etc.), faculty
engagement in instructional improvement (e.g. participation in learning
communities, faculty interviews, quality and quantity of applications for
internal curriculum improvement grants), and school and faculty readiness for
transformation.