* 1504092
* 2015 Gordon Research Conference and Symposium on the Science of Adhesion; Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts; July 25-31, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2015
* Anand Jagota, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 11/30/2015
* USD 9,860.00

The 2015 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Symposium (GRS) on
the Science of Adhesion will bring together top scientists in the field of
adhesion science, for in-depth technical discussions and collaboration. The
expertise of the Adhesion Science community has contributed over the years to a
number of areas, including structural adhesives such as those used in the
automotive and aircraft industries, in metals, ceramics, and polymer composites.
Two other areas where adhesion science has made major contributions are in
pressure-sensitive adhesives (soft materials) and particle adhesion. In recent
years, adhesion in soft active materials such as gels and elastomers, and in
biological applications have emerged as two exciting new problems to which the
adhesion science community is in a unique position to contribute. This award
will support the GRC/GRS conference and seminar to bring together a diverse set
of speakers and discussion leaders with a focus on soft/compliant materials, and
biomaterials. NSF support will be used to increase and broaden participation
among speakers, discussion leaders, and attendees from underrepresented group.
The active participation and involvement of junior attendees (graduate students
and post-doctoral associates) will be encouraged, particularly in the Gordon
Research Seminar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC/GRS on the Science of Adhesion
will focus on two (related) areas of strong current and future interest:
adhesion and surface properties of soft/compliant materials, and application of
adhesion science to scientific problems in biomaterials ranging in scale from
individual molecules to tissues. Over the last decade, soft materials and
biological adhesion problems have become a regular and growing part of the
Adhesion Science community. This GRC/GRS represents an opportunity to promote
rejuvenation and growth of the adhesion science community by cementing further
collaboration with biology &amp; bioengineering and the science of soft
materials. It will serve to incubate and catalyze research connections between
analytical, experimental, computational methods of adhesion science and pressing
problems in soft materials and biomaterials.