* 1504099
* Spin as a Probe into the Structure of the Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Renee Fatemi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 482,949.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons, protons and neutrons, are made
up of more elementary particles called quarks. The main physics program
supported by this grant is to measure how the magnetic moments of quarks
contribute to the total magnetic moment of the proton, along with contributions
from other subatomic particles inside the proton. In addition, this grant will
support research on an experiment at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory,
labeled E989, which will precisely measure the magnetic moment of a fundamental
particle, the muon, which is like an electron but with more mass. The goal of
these experiments is to compare experimental result with theoretical predictions
from the so-called Standard Model of Particle Physics. The studies described
here will provide graduate students with the necessary tools and knowledge to
obtain post-doctoral work at other large colliders or smaller non-accelerator
based collaborations. Undergraduate students funded by this award will continue
to have the rare opportunity to experience the scientific culture and
participate in experiments at National Laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
studies of proton spin structure measurements will be carried out at the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Longitudinally and transversely polarized proton beams necessary for these
experiments are only available at RHIC. Jet reconstruction techniques will be
used to measure asymmetries sensitive to the gluon helicity and quark
transversity distributions. This award will also support the new g-2 experiment
(E989) at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, which proposes to measure
the muon anomalous magnetic moment to 0.14 parts per million. A deviation from
the Standard Model prediction at the observed level could be explained by
several Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) scenarios and the improved precision
will significantly constrain key parameters in supersymmetry, one of the most
widely discussed BSM models.