* 1504307
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: IS NITROGEN FIXATION WIDESPREAD IN THE CHUKCHI AND BEAUFORT SEAS?
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Deborah Bronk, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 11/30/2018
* USD 477,988.00

The extent of summer Arctic sea ice loss is increasing and now occurs earlier in
the year. As a result, it is predicted that the rate of growth of phytoplankton,
the base of the marine food web that sustains subsistence marine harvests by
native populations, will increase within the Arctic seas. The limited amount of
available nitrogen, a required nutrient for phytoplankton, eventually will
restrict the level of growth. Nitrogen gas dissolved in the ocean can be
converted to a form readily utilizable by phytoplankton, but this has been
considered primarily a warm-water process. The principal investigators of this
project recently have observed this process in the Arctic Ocean, but there is so
little data that its extent remains highly speculative. If it is widespread, it
will change the way we think about future scenarios for the changing Arctic
marine ecosystem, subsistence fishing, and, potentially, commercial fishing in
the Arctic. The project will also contribute to workforce development. The
principal investigator is an early-career, female scientist. She will use the
project as a mechanism to entrain an undergraduate student into research. She
will also use the project to sustain an existing educational collaboration
between the Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences and Hampton University, a
historically black university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that
microorganisms capable of fixing N2 (diazotrophs) are present in the Chukchi and
Beaufort Seas, that they produce measurable rates of N2 fixation in near shore
and offshore Arctic marine waters and that diazotroph community composition will
differ between coastal sites, which are influenced by terrestrial inputs, versus
open water sites. The Chukchi and Beaufort Seas will be sampled during a cruise
in late summer 2016, when hydrographic and nutrient conditions are likely to
favor diazotrophic populations. The impact that N2 fixation will have on Arctic
ecosystems is dependent on its rate, spatial extent and the conditions that
favor it. As a consequence, on each cruise the PIs propose to determine
diazotroph community composition, examine their distributions based on the
presence of the nitrogenase gene (nifH), measure rates of primary productivity
and uptake of inorganic and organic N and C substrates using 15N and 13C tracer
techniques, and to compare these to hydrographic, nutrient, and overall
microbial community composition profiles made along cruise transects. The
proposed work will determine the extent of active N2 fixation within the region
in the context of other key biogeochemical and microbial community parameters.