* 1504964
* IUSE: Exploration of Journaling to Assess Design Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Linda Schmidt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 248,569.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project will help enhance the
ability of undergraduate engineering students to develop and document their new
ideas during the design process and will also help engineering faculty to assess
and evaluate the ability of students to generate and develop design ideas. In
the United States the development of new inventions is considered a critical
element in creating new industries and jobs, thus improving local and national
economies. However, at present, engineering education does not have well-
recognized methods to measure student ideation ability. Scores from regular
course homework and exams which comprise a traditional assessment of ideation
learning are not strongly linked to competence in generating and developing
ideas for engineering designs. The project focuses on development of design
journaling practices as a means to improve idea generation ability in the
context of engineering design projects. Methods and metrics through which
faculty can analyze and evaluate design journal entries will also be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design journalizing is generally recognized as
an effective method to develop and record ideas related to the development of
technological artifacts and systems. Many celebrated inventors throughout
history maintained extensive and detailed design journals. However, engineering
students today are generally disinclined to engage in effective journaling
during design projects. This work will help to develop design journaling
practices that engage students and provide effective learning experiences. In
addition, journaling assessment practices will be developed so that design
instructors can provide timely and effective design feedback and input,
especially during the ideation process. The research questions examined in this
project include: in what ways can journaling be used in design courses to
effectively assess individual ideation performance and learning in both
individual and team design scenarios; how do design journal entries reflect the
level of design engagement for an individual during a team ideation process; and
do variations such as different learning style approaches predict variations in
student journaling behavior in a design course? Design is a universal skill
needed by engineers and the results from this project will improve the ability
of students to create and document designs and faculty ability to assess design
learning. The project includes efforts to communicate the results of this work
to the broader engineering education community.