* 1504175
* I-Corps:  Tailored Amorphous Multi-Porous (TAMP) Bioactive Scaffolds for Tissue Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Himanshu Jain, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Tissue engineering is providing a superior treatment for dysfunctional tissues
or organs by stimulating the body to regenerate anew the defective part. This
preferred treatment, yet to be established for hard tissue (bone and teeth),
requires a bioscaffold, which must ideally have: (a) biocompatibility; (b)
biodegradability that matches tissue growth; (c) highly interconnected
macropores (100?s of microns) to promote ingrowth of cells, vascularization and
nutrient delivery; (d) superimposed nanoporosity to guide cell attachment,
migration and differentiation; and (e) bioactivity to catalyze the regeneration
process. No synthetic product in the market satisfies all these requirements,
including bioactive glass (BG) - the only manmade osteo-stimulating material for
hard tissue regeneration. This I-Corps team has developed technology for
fabricating a new class of bioactive material. The proposed technology provides
excellent osteoinductivity and superior degradability compared to competing
products, including those based on bioactive glass in the current market. It
gives one the ability to tailor the degradation behavior of the scaffolds to
specific patient types and nature of the defects without compromising the tissue
growth.

This I-Corps team has resolved the above challenges by introducing
interconnected nanoporosity superimposed on macroporosity using novel
fabrication methods: macroporosity to provide a basic substrate for tissue
ingrowth, nanoporosity to enhance cell response and, the ability to tailor the
scaffold?s degradation rate. The result is a novel fabrication technology
portfolio for producing 'tailored amorphous multi-porous (TAMP)' scaffold that
is matched to the needs of specific patient types. In vitro and in vivo tests
have already demonstrated the proof-of-principle and potential for improved
treatment of dental and orthopedic patients. The TAMP fabrication technology can
be readily applied to new BG compositions with additional functionality such as
antibacterial and anti-caries properties. When extended to fiber form, these
TAMP structures are mechanically flexible. Thus, TAMP material technology is
well poised for commercialization.