* 1504550
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Food Security in the Alaskan Arctic, an Ethnographic Investigation of Yup'ik Food Storage and Processing
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Liam Frink, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,156.00

The purpose of this study is to investigate Yup'ik Alaska Native subsistence
storage and preservation techniques - an absolutely essential component of
Yup'ik food preparation - and their potential mitigating influence on persistent
organic pollutant (POP) concentrations in subsistence foods in two village
communities in southwestern Alaska (Tununak and Chefornak). The Yup'ik are an
arctic hunter-gatherer population living in southwestern Alaska in 70 villages
dispersed throughout the delta of the Yukon and Kuskokwim rivers. Despite a
recent shift toward the inclusion of store-bought foods in the diet, Yup'ik
people still depend on locally harvested resources, primarily fish and sea
mammals. They retain and continue to utilize their extensive knowledge of ocean
hunting, coastal fishing, tundra gathering, and, most importantly for this
project, the processing and long-term storage of large marine mammals and
sizeable catches of fish. As a result of their marine-based diet, the Yup'ik
have health profiles that have attracted the attention of health researchers,
such as low rates of diabetes and good cardiovascular health. However, recently,
the diets of many Alaska Native groups have come under scrutiny because of
concern over persistent organic pollutants (POPs) that are commonly present in
seafoods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;POPs are chemicals that were produced by humans
during the chemical revolution in agriculture for their use as pesticides.
Despite discontinuation of the production of most POPs, they remain dangerous to
human health because they persist in the environment (for decades or more), can
travel long distances, and accumulate up the food chain. Although far from major
agricultural sites, arctic regions accumulate particularly high concentrations
of leftover POPs. This is due to a number of factors including the ability of
POPs to travel with ocean currents, the wildlife species that pass through the
arctic, and the fact that POPs accumulate in the bodies of animals highest up on
the food chain such as arctic seals, whales, and bears. The result has been a
mixed message regarding the safety of eating marine-based foods: nutritionists
promote their consumption because they are "heart healthy?"(i.e., high in
polyunsaturated fatty acids) and environmental toxicologists caution their
consumption because they accumulate POPs significantly more so than many other
foods. Unfortunately, the primary source of data for the toxicological and
nutritional profiles of fish and sea mammals that are frequently consumed by
Alaska Native peoples comes from unprocessed muscle samples (i.e., species that
are harvested, sampled, frozen for transport, and thawed for lab analysis).
However, Yup?ik people not only consume many other parts of animals aside from
the muscle tissue (blubber, organs, blood, small bones), but they rarely consume
freshly caught species and have a vast array of methods for processing, storing,
and preparing foods before they are consumed (for example, ninamayuk is a
popular food that involves one month of sun-drying and two to three months of
fermentation in rendered seal blubber before it is consumed). Nevertheless, the
potential effects of processing, storage, and local dietary traditions on the
nutritional and toxicological profiles of foods have received little attention.
The Yup'ik community is not only eager to know about the potential benefits and
hazards of the foods they eat, but also this information can shed light on
processes that may impact the safety of foods in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An examination of how Yup'ik food preparation and
storage affects the nutritional and toxicological profile of subsistence foods
will be achieved by 1) laboratory tests of foods that are prepared by Yup'ik
people in Yup'ik communities and of the unprepared tissues of the origin
subsistence species and 2) investigation, via direct observation and
documentation (where possible), interviews, and semi-qualitative surveys, the
ways in which the two staple marine foods in the study region (seal and herring)
are cleaned, processed, stored, prepared, and eaten by the Yup'ik today and in
the recent past. Alaska Native food processing and storage techniques have
generally been overlooked in contaminant research, particularly in food risk
assessments intended for present-day Yup'ik communities. However, there is
evidence in other contexts that processing technique, storage time and
conditions, and diet can have an effect on levels of various food toxicants
and/or their bioavailability. The many diverse techniques of processing and
storing foods in the circumpolar north have generally been limited to early
descriptions in historical documents, sparse traveler accounts and more recent
ethnographic (purely descriptive) accounts. The viability or recent memory of
many traditional subsistence practices in Yup'ik communities today presents
researchers with a unique opportunity to systematically investigate some of
these processes on which, until only very recently, the survival of people
absolutely depended. To date, no subsistence data on seal or herring exists for
the village of Chefornak and the data that exists for Tununak dates no later
than the 1990s. This study will provide new and needed subsistence data for both
villages and add to ongoing debates about the role of small-scale food storage
in human evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A general assumption in research on
indigenous health is that once hunter-gatherer populations become involved in
the market economy or become "Westernized" there is no turning back, and full
integration will soon follow. Alaska Native peoples, because of their continued
reliance on local subsistence hunting and gathering, question this assumption.
Nevertheless, there are many real concerns for them, and this research project
will make a risk assessment of Alaska Native foods by investigated the potential
mediating effects of food processing and storing. This research will contribute
to a better understanding and appreciation of Alaska Native life-ways, as well
as add to knowledge about a primary health concern in the region and contribute
to an understanding of key global health issues in general.