* 1504817
* Collaborative Research:  Developing a Framework to better engage students in STEM via Game Design
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Melissa Bilec, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 44,116.00

Arizona State University and the University of Pittsburgh will implement a
project entitled "Developing a Framework to better engage students in STEM via
Game Design," focused on active learning through game design approaches for
civil engineering and construction courses. The framework will be not only
modular and scalable, fitting into a variety of content areas, but will also
serve as a method of assessing student learning with minimal barriers to
classroom use. It will offer STEM instructors a relatively easy way to implement
active learning in the classroom, and rather than teaching through game play,
the project will require students to apply course content to the design of their
own games, in turn illustrating their mastery of course content. To do this, the
investigators will employ three approaches for game design implementation, and
compare these approaches within and across courses. The approaches include: (1)
asking students to re-purpose classic board games to reflect course content, (2)
modifying existing educational games to better reflect course content, and (3)
creating a new game with student-developed learning objectives. Topics will
include, but are not limited to, excavations and foundations, structural
systems, industrial ecology, energy use, emissions, resource scarcity, and
implications of environmental policies and factors related to resource
consumption. All of these topics have significant implications for public
safety, health and welfare. Additional broader impacts will be achieved through
promoting the game design framework and its effects on student learning and
retention, publishing and marketing student-created games as education resources
that are easily adoptable by faculty at various institutions, and by sharing the
games in K-12 outreach efforts, thereby promoting interest in civil engineering
and construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Games and game-based learning have been
used in many classrooms as an active learning strategy. They are well-documented
methods to engage and motivate students through course material in order to
improve student learning outcomes. The investigators have found that following
game play with game design easily moves students up the cognitive dimensions of
Bloom's taxonomy, from merely understanding to reflection, creation, and
evaluation. They will aim to discover if implementation of this framework
promotes increased student engagement, sense of community, metacognition, and
retention in STEM. The research questions to be studied are: (1) As a curricular
tool, does game design support student engagement, strengthen a sense of
community, improve metacognition, and increase intention to remain in
engineering? (2) What are the principles and characteristics of this approach
that make it successful for a given student level or program? (3) What are
effective practices for widespread transferability and scalability? Using the
outcomes of formative assessments such as observations, surveys, evaluations of
student work, etc., investigators will continuously refine the three approaches
that make up their framework to document and disseminate successful practices,
providing transformative curricular materials to other instructors in civil
engineering and construction.