* 1504918
* Improving Student Computer Programming Understanding and Engagement through Computer-Monitored Problem-Solving Discussions
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Kelvin Bryant, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 06/30/2018
* USD 248,501.00

The project's significance and importance lie in its focus on addressing both
the motivational aspects and conceptual learning barriers for students in early
computer programming courses. In these courses the concepts become difficult
with many computer science oriented students stalling in their college career.
The project will apply modern ideas of group exercises in a highly interactive
chat-room environment, where students will be accountable for helping each other
and individually accountable for learning. The project's system will record and
will then apply text analytics to student group interactions, summarizing for
the instructor how well the student groups are functioning both socially and in
problem solving.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals and scope of the project are to
develop new collaboration assignments that exercise Java programming language
analytic and conceptual skills. At the same time the project will study how
students engage with the exercises and how student enthusiasm can be increased.
These studies underlie further development of the text classifier technology to
monitor for cognitive, affective, and linguistic phenomena that are indicative
of enthusiastic students actively discussing and learning. Some measurements,
for example, whether the students evince enthusiasm, should be usable in a wide
variety of other pedagogical domains. The project will assess how well this
intervention succeeds in keeping students motivated, both within individual
exercises and in their student careers.