* 1504371
* Investigating Student Understanding of Chemical  Kinetics
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Marcy Towns, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 07/31/2018
* USD 267,872.00

One of the fundamental issues in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education is to better understand the conditions under which
students are able to effectively apply knowledge developed in one course or
discipline to understand and solve problems in another course or discipline.
This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education project will contribute to
understandings of how chemistry students integrate their knowledge of
mathematics (including algebra, calculus, and graphing) to solve chemistry
problems, specifically those related to how fast chemical reactions occur. By
observing and analyzing students' problem solving processes through the lenses
of mathematics and chemistry and how aspects of the two are blended, the
researchers will uncover the ways in which students apply their understanding of
mathematics to these chemistry problems, both effectively and ineffectively. The
results are expected to provide insights into how to improve undergraduate
instruction and student learning of chemistry.

To contribute to models of how students apply their understandings of
mathematics to solve chemistry problems, researchers at Purdue University will
investigate undergraduate students' problem solving in the context of chemical
kinetics in a second-semester general chemistry course and a more advanced
physical chemistry course for science and engineering majors (not including
chemistry majors). Students from each course who agree to participate in the
research will be recorded as they think aloud while working on sets of kinetics
problems outside of class and answer follow-up interview questions intended to
probe their understanding. Guided by a blended-processing framework, transcripts
of these sessions will then be coded to find patterns in students' mathematical
reasoning, chemical reasoning, and how students blend the two to solve kinetics
problems. Classroom observations, as well as analyses of course materials and
resources, will provide information about the instructional contexts in which
the students learn about chemical kinetics. The project is expected to advance
understandings of how students integrate and apply aspects of their mathematical
knowledge and chemistry knowledge to solve chemistry problems. The results will
also have the potential to inform improvements in chemistry instruction and
serve as a foundation for collaborations between chemistry and mathematics
faculty.