* 1504721
* Collaborative Research: Tackling the "right" problem: Investigating cognitive strategies used in understanding engineering problems
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Shanna Daly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 83,600.00

How do engineers find the 'right' design problem to solve, rather than the one
first presented? This project will identify engineers' cognitive strategies for
understanding design problems, called Problem Exploration Heuristics. The
project is investigating problem exploration in professional design settings and
in engineering classrooms through a combination of laboratory experiments and
field studies. Engineers at multiple levels of expertise (professional to
undergraduate students) working in differing settings are included to improve
the generalizability of the findings. The project includes three phases: 1) in-
depth interviews, observations, and protocol studies with engineering
practitioners; 2) classroom studies of engineering and design students'
perceptions of presented problems, and the ways in which they explore problems
as individuals and teams; and, 3) synthesis of the findings into teachable
heuristics to support STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the project includes identification of the nature of these cognitive
strategies as they occur in context (including when they are employed, and how
they impact outcomes), and will inform the creation of instructional materials
to promote innovation in problem exploration. The broader impact of this work
includes improvement in the variety, novelty, and quality of designs through the
use of problem exploration heuristics. The project findings directly support
better design practices to address the core engineering problems of the 21st
Century. In addition to support from the IUSE program, this work is also
supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development.