* 1504029
* Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Applications Inspiring Upper-Division Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Heather Moon, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2016
* USD 65,654.00

Today's digital environment is filled with a continuously increasing amount of
data stored as images and signals. Indeed, there is a critical need in America
for students to be prepared to enter the workforce with the ability to research
and solve current real-life problems - many of which are data-driven.
Investigators from St. Mary's College of Maryland (Lead Institution), Hendrix
College, Kenyon College, and Washington State University will collaborate to (1)
introduce current cutting-edge research and practical data problems from
science, industry, and government to students in undergraduate upper-division
mathematics courses and (2) lead these students to develop the problem-solving,
collaborative, and research skills that are so crucial in today's work
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project will be to create a
body of applied data-driven instructional modules that will center on image and
data analysis problems, including image denoising and deblurring, data
clustering, data registration, radiographic reconstruction, climate simulation,
diffusion, and wave propagation. These modules will motivate student research as
well as generate a deeper student understanding and appreciation of the
mathematical theory needed to solve these problems. The goals of the project are
to: (i) design, develop, implement, assess, and adjust (as necessary)
transportable modules to connect the computational and theoretical sides of
upper division Real Analysis and Linear Algebra; (ii) establish a professional
network for classroom testing and assessment of project modules and
instructional strategies; and (iii) provide and utilize varied venues for
student research collaboration. The project team will conduct research to assess
how this hands-on data driven approach provides new avenues for student-directed
study, helps prepare students for a workforce in need of research and data
skills, improves student engagement and learning, and inspires students to
pursue postgraduate study in theoretical and applied mathematics. Project
research methods will include the incorporation of beta testing the modules and
then collecting and analyzing quantitative and qualitative data. The research
will include measures of students' knowledge, such as course assessments, as
well as instruments to measure motivation and self-efficacy related to
mathematics. With faculty from four institutions across the country, the project
will also investigate the adaptability, to a variety of institutions, of the
materials and instuctional approach .