* 1504954
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing and Expanding Experiential Learning Modules across Disciplines and Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Karim Oweiss, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2018
* USD 90,000.00

This project will study the adaptation, implementation, and dissemination of
best practices in experiential learning in the core middle years of the
engineering curriculum where students take the bulk of technical fundamentals.
The study will involve two series of junior-year fundamental core engineering
courses; one taught at Northwestern University's Department of Biomedical
Engineering and other at University of Florida's Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering. The course sequences use similar tools and teach similar
topics geared towards building skills needed for success in the engineering
workplace or graduate school. The differences are in methods of delivery and the
types of experiential learning modules employed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
mixed method approach, the main goals of this proposal are to 1) assess each
course sequence in terms of How People Learn and assess how student experiences
and outcomes are linked to those attributes of each course and 2) enhance and
expand effective experiential learning modules for broader adoption and
implementation. The project will evaluate student learning preferences, student
engagement, retention of material in subsequent courses in their respective
sequences, transferrable skills between courses and learning of course concepts.
Both schools have highly selective engineering programs, but the student
demographics differ. These differences give the opportunity to consider more
demographic factors in assessing the courses and in designing materials to take
advantage of diversity. The knowledge will guide future design or development of
new interventions and their dissemination strategies.