* 1504728
* SciLAF: Scientific-based Learning Assessment Framework for Student Knowledge Tracking
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Gabriel Terejanu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 03/31/2018
* USD 249,736.00

This proposal is addressing the fundamental challenge of assessing individual
student's knowledge in cornerstone engineering classes with high student-to-
faculty ratios. The goal is to: develop a computational assessment framework
that easily integrates into an instructor's routine efforts to track student
knowledge, suggest remedial interventions, and guide future examinations. The
rationale is that individual student knowledge is a hypothesis/model that needs
to be tested using the scientific method. Similarly, assessment instruments are
just experiments to discover how well a student masters specific concepts. This
fits naturally with probabilistic methodologies such as the Bayesian inference
that formalize the scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main approach
taken is to track the progress of individual students by developing student
knowledge models based on Bayesian networks. This proposal addresses an open
fundamental problem in constructing and using knowledge models to assess
learning, namely how to relate curricular structure to knowledge models and how
to inform the models using assessment data. The proposed methodology emphasizes
the role of concept inventories to inform the construction of Bayesian networks
models and to extract information from these models to suggest informative
questions for future examinations. To facilitate ease of use and broader
adoption by faculty, the software artifacts will be made available under open
source licenses and the functionality of the framework will be integrated within
a widely used learning management system through the development of a prototype
plugin. The education and outreach aspects of this proposal include training
participants in effective educational strategies and mentoring of future
faculty.