* 1504851
* Development of a Concept Inventory for Functional Reasoning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Scott, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,863.00

This project at the University of Illinois at Chicago will help to improve the
ability of engineering students to design technological products by creating and
testing a means to assess functional reasoning capabilities. Functional
reasoning is the ability to conceive of a task required in an engineering design
problem as accomplished by a set of steps or functions. Functional reasoning
allows engineers to decompose a mechanical system and correctly analyze it in
terms of the functions performed by its subsystems and features. This project
will develop a validated method to assess student understanding of function.
Assessment of functional reasoning ability will improve engineering education
and increase retention of students in engineering by helping faculty to more
precisely determine the nature of the difficulties some students have in
developing functional reasoning skills. The work will include a collaboration
between faculty at the University of Illinois at Chicago and faculty at
community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will develop and validate a
concept inventory for functional reasoning as a means to help promote thoughtful
and effective teaching of functional reasoning to undergraduate students.
Project personnel will apply accepted best practices in the development of the
concept inventory. The approach will use Delphi study methods as a structured
means to solicit information from experts in the content of functional design
methods. While engineering function is often covered in senior-level engineering
courses, this project will consider the teaching of functional reasoning in the
context of design courses for first year engineering students. The project team
anticipates that facility with functional reasoning may correlate with certain
demographic variables; and a diverse and well-educated pool of engineers will
depend upon a thoughtful, considered approach to teaching and learning about
function. The project team includes engineering faculty with expertise in
engineering design methodologies as well as collaborators from the learning
sciences. The outcome of the work will be a concept inventory to assess
functional reasoning ability in engineering students.