* 1504874
* Instructional Laboratory for Experimental Training (INLET)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Chandralekha Singh, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 248,718.00

Numerous reports from government and industry have called for colleges and
universities to produce more -- and more capable -- STEM graduates. To attract
more students to STEM fields, faculty need to make the curriculum more engaging
and relevant. One important shift in instructional approach is to replace
traditional laboratory courses with discovery-based courses, giving students
exposure to research techniques and equipment. In this project, the
investigators will employ a set of design principles to reform three lab
experiments used in advanced physics lab courses. The design principles include
using research-grade techniques and equipment, encouraging exploration and
collaboration in teams, and having students learn to debug experiments by
following signals (optical, electrical, etc.) through the experiments as a
researcher would. The new labs will provide students an opportunity to design
experiments and explore outcomes, provide sufficient flexibility so that
students are challenged to take control and reflect upon the direction of the
experiments, and provide students an opportunity to perform progressively more
complex analyses of experiments. The reformed experiments will be implemented at
a reasonable cost and will include completely open hardware and software. The
investigators will assess the effectiveness of the reformed experiments by
comparing the performance and experiences of students completing the experiments
before and after the changes are implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
physics lab exercises often do not provide students with authentic experiences
to help them develop problem-solving, reasoning, and higher-order thinking
skills and learn to think like a physicist. The three reformed labs to be
developed in this project (i.e., acoustic resonance, Mossbauer spectroscopy, and
noise and filtering) will use a cognitive approach to instructional design and
will take into account students' prior knowledge in determining the level of
support provided at a given stage of exploration and analysis. In particular,
the investigators will apply a field-tested cognitive apprenticeship model in
which the instructor will model the criteria of good performance, coach students
and provide an appropriate level of scaffolding support, and then reduce the
support so that the students develop self-reliance in the design and
explorations in the labs. The principles, hardware, and software used in
redesigning the physics lab exercises can be adapted to redesign experiments in
other STEM fields.