* 1504217
* Center for Chemical Innovation: Center for Chemical Evolution
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Nicholas Hud, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lin He
* 09/30/2022
* USD 20,000,000.00

With joint support from the Center for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry at NSF and the Astrobiology Program at NASA, the Center
for Chemical Evolution (CCE) will coordinate and support the highly
collaborative research necessary to understand the chemical origins of
biopolymers, which may represent a fundamental advance in the understanding of
the chemical origins of life. In particular, CCE seeks to uncover how proto-
biopolymers, i.e. the earliest polymers of life, could have spontaneously formed
and initiated functional evolution. The work of the Center is divided into four
research themes: 1) Proto-Nucleic Acids, 2) Proto-Polypeptides, 3) Proto-
Polysaccharides, 4) Building Blocks and Alternative Environments. CCE aims to
impact society by identifying the molecules and processes necessary for the
formation of polymers with the ability to evolve function. Continued progress
towards this goal will provide new methods for the design, development, and
characterization of novel polymers, such as smart materials and therapeutic
agents, which could result in economic impacts and improvement of the human
condition. Enhancing the education and career development of students and young
scientists involved with the Center and making positive impacts on the public's
perception of chemistry are additional broad impacts to be realized through CCE
educational efforts. In particular, CCE will develop a fully integrated research
and educational program which includes a professional development seminar
series, an annual symposium, and a highly interactive mentoring culture that
fosters the development of students and postdocs into independent,
interdisciplinary innovators and educators. CCE has also identified unique
educational and public venues to work with children and young people to educate
and excite them about chemistry. CCE will continue to work with artists to
produce chemistry-relevant content for visual displays, short video animations,
radio pieces to be aired on national public radio, and interactive performances
to engage audiences of all ages and educational levels. CCE also plans to
continue its recruiting efforts to underrepresented minority groups by
collaborating with HBCUs, sponsoring research symposia at national diversity
conferences, such as NOBCChE and SACNAS, and partnering with student
organizations on full-day STEM events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unifying
scientific objective of CCE is to demonstrate that small molecules, within a
model prebiotic environment, can self-assemble into polymers resembling extant
biopolymers and undergo functional evolution. The four research themes of the
CCE are: 1) Proto-nucleic acids - studying proto-nucleic acids that are "forward
compatible" where sequence information can be maintained and transferred through
gradual evolution to contemporary RNA; 2) Proto-polypeptides - exploring
polyesters as possible precursors of polypeptides during prebiotic peptide
synthesis; 3) Proto-polysaccharides - studying polysaccharide synthesis under
plausible prebiotic conditions; and 4) Building Blocks and Alternative
Environments - identifying plausible prebiotic reactions, mineral sources,
mineral catalysts, and alternative milieus for other proto-biopolymer synthesis.
Progress on these research themes is expected to lead to the discovery of
molecules, reactions, and polymers with unique properties - properties that
could find a variety of innovative applications in the areas of organic,
polymer, supramolecular, and biomimetic chemistry. Defining the contents of a
model prebiotic chemical inventory also leads to the development of new tools
and approaches for dealing with complex chemical mixtures that are readily
transferable to many other areas of pure and applied chemistry. Ultimately
understanding the origin of biopolymers could represent a fundamental advance in
our understanding of the chemical origins of life.