* 1504584
* Ultrafast Quantum Control in Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Philip Bucksbaum, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 825,000.00

The wide-ranging properties of substances around us (their different colors and
smells, their taste, flammability, solubility, feel, toxicity) are tied closely
to different physical arrangements of the atoms that define the molecules of the
substance. When sunlight bleaches a shirt or aspirin relieves a headache,
changes in molecular structure are responsible. Physicists model these
arrangements of atoms in molecules as locations in a contour map called an
"energy landscape" or a "potential energy surface." The stable atomic
arrangements (the atomic arrangement for colored dye molecules, for example) are
located in the valleys of the energy landscape. Chemical change, such as the
change required to sun-bleach clothing dye, is a journey of the atomic positions
from one valley to another. This NSF research project proposes a new way to
guide the molecular journey by the use of laser light. Light doesn't move the
atoms, but it can do something that is even better: it can change the shape of
the energy landscape. Just like a bridge built over a gorge or a tunnel built
through a mountain can reduce the difficulty of a journey over land, the new
light-induced energy landscape can have shortcuts that encourage particular
chemical changes. This project examines light-induced shortcuts at naturally
occurring cross-roads in the energy landscapes. The new idea here is that laser
light near these crossings, which are called "conical intersections," can employ
quantum interference to guide the molecule. The remarkable prediction is that by
changing the properties of the laser light, the molecule will switch from one
path at the crossroads to the other. This basic scientific understanding about
how light can encourage or inhibit chemical change could lead to applications
such as light-activated pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate quantum control of trajectories nearby conical intersections (CIs),
brought about by interference between the non-Born-Oppenheimer (NBO) couplings
and laser-induced dipole couplings. The systems chosen for study are
dissociation of singly ionized water and isomerization of doubly ionized
acetylene. These are selected because they are hydrogen-rich small molecules
with large NBO couplings and strong dipole couplings. The atomic motion will be
launched by ionization of neutral water or acetylene using a high harmonics
source of tunable vacuum ultraviolet radiation. The control field will be an
ultrafast infrared laser pulse. The relative orientation of these NBO and dipole
vector couplings can be inferred by mapping the momentum of dissociating
fragments, or by Coulomb explosion imaging using a second intense infrared laser
pulse following the reaction. The goal is to demonstrate control of the output
channel via interference between NBO and dipole vector couplings, as revealed by
the dependence of the dissociation or isomerization yield on the polarization,
field strength, and frequency of the coupling field.