* 1504793
* Experimental Particle Physics Research at SUNY Albany
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Vivek Jain, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

This award will provide support for a group with one PI, a postdoc and a student
to work on the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a
particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC is a large, complex
machine that accelerates protons to unprecedented energies, allowing for
discovery of elementary particles more massive than any yet observed. One of the
LHC's recent discoveries was to find a candidate for the Higgs Boson, the last
particle in the historically successful "Standard Model" (SM) that accounts with
amazing accuracy for the observed interactions of particles forming the visible
matter in the universe. The next step is to capitalize on the LHC to look for
evidence for physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) to address difficulties
known to exist in the SM. This group will continue to work on the ATLAS
experiment to look for decays of the Higgs particle as the LHC begins operations
at twice the energy ever studied before. The PI will continue to communicate the
excitement that the Higgs discovery generated as a means of attracting students
into the study of science through such activities as giving lectures on Physics
at the LHC to high school students in Albany and the Honors College students at
the university, organizing and holding Q&amp;A sessions after the screening of
the movie "Particle Fever" in local area theaters, and participating in the
online "Adopt-a-Physicist" program run by the American Physical
Society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The LHC has completed one successful run. During
this, a candidate for the Higgs Boson was found, a major triumph. Though doubts
linger, many physicists believe the new particle is the Higgs Boson long
predicted by the SM. Nevertheless, more careful measurements of its rarer decay
modes need to be made. Surprises are possible, and could result from BSM
effects. Also, there could be more than one Higgs particle. This group has
expertise in analysis of the properties of Higgs decays. The group will continue
to work on the ATLAS experiment through Run2. Analyses will focus on decays of
the Higgs particle revealed in Run1 to t-tbar quark jet pairs. The group will
continue to improve and expand the software tools. They will also study layout
designs for the inner Silicon tracker, part of the ATLAS high luminosity
upgrade. These layouts will aim to maximize the efficiency for finding and
reconstructing charged tracks in the challenging ATLAS upgrade environment.