* 1504366
* Understanding and Overcoming Barriers to Using Mathematics in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Edward Redish, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 249,999.00

This exploratory project addresses a significant national challenge impacting
the success of STEM undergraduates, the difference between students learning
mathematics and students being able to use it productively. Much of the previous
work in this area has focused on identifying student difficulties. This project
will work to understand the mechanisms that underlie these difficulties.
Modeling physical systems using mathematics is a critical component of success
in all STEM disciplines. This project will study undergraduates who have been
successful in college level calculus as they take an Introductory Physics for
Life Sciences (IPLS) course. From studying why and how students do and do not
understand and use mathematics to model systems, the project will weave a thread
related to mathematical modeling to include: a coherent set of readings, quiz
and clicker questions, homework problems, and exam questions intended to build
students' modeling skills throughout the class in a variety of contexts. This
will help students both understand the structure of symbolic reasoning and its
value for their chosen careers. This mathematical modeling thread will then be
implemented in the IPLS course, and the effect on students' ability to use
mathematics in biology will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is both to identify the mechanisms underlying students' difficulties in
applying mathematics in biological contexts and to produce materials that can
help them learn to use mathematics productively as scientists. The study will
combine qualitative research (problem-solving interviews and focus-group
problem-solving) with quantitative studies of student responses to issues in
mathematical modeling. The primary context for the study is the NEXUS/Physics
IPLS course developed at the University of Maryland College Park (UMD-CP). It
serves a diverse population containing many students who have been successful in
calculus but have difficulty using mathematics in science. Students at the UMD-
CP (a large state land-grant institution) will be the primary subjects. Students
at two additional institutions using NEXUS/Physics materials will also be
studied: Montgomery College (a two-year institution) and Swarthmore College (a
four-year private institution). The project will use as its core analytic
structure the Resources Framework, developed in part with prior NSF support, to
create models of high-level thinking. This Framework takes a dynamic knowledge-
in-pieces approach that considers conceptual, epistemological, and affective
resources and how they interact with each other and with the student's
perception of their socio-cultural environment. It permits a dynamic, fine-
grained approach to student thinking that provides specific tools for
understanding the barriers to the use of mathematics in science and for guiding
construction of materials and test questions. It also gives insight into
modeling the cognitive elements and processes of learning the complex subject of
using mathematics in science. The Intellectual Merit of this project is in
developing a deeper understanding of the barriers STEM students face in learning
to use mathematics in science. The Broader Impact of this exploratory project is
that both what is learned by the research and the materials the project develops
could be used in many STEM classes in many colleges and universities.