* 1504410
* An Arctic Ocean sea surface pCO2 and pH observing network
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Michael DeGrandpre, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 03/31/2019
* USD 159,262.00

Global warming and other climate-related processes are rapidly changing the
Arctic Ocean. Summer sea ice is disappearing and the sea surface is warming and
becoming less salty. This changing physical environment is altering basic
biological processes and air-sea exchange of gasses. The carbon cycle is of
particular interest in the Arctic because it is unknown how carbon dioxide
sources and sinks are changing and whether these changes will lead to increased
greenhouse gas accumulation in the atmosphere. It is thought that with less ice
cover the Arctic Ocean will absorb more human-produced carbon dioxide. Higher
carbon dioxide levels cause the ocean to become more acidic because carbon
dioxide forms carbonic acid when it dissolves in water. The increase in the
acidity of the water can affect the food web by harming shell-forming organisms.
In spite of these important issues, not much is known about the carbon cycle in
the central Arctic Ocean basins. Nearly all measurements of ocean acidity have
been made on the Arctic shelves during the summer period when access is easy. We
will measure the amount of dissolved oxygen and carbon dioxide in the surface
water and its acidity in the central Arctic Ocean during a summer cruise on the
ice breaker Louis St. Laurent and on year-round oceanographic moorings. Outreach
activities include continued operation of an ocean acidification exhibit that we
developed for University of Montana?s science museum which has been seen by
thousands of museum visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
specifically support installment of a shipboard underway pCO2 system along with
deployment of pCO2, pH, and photosynthetically active radiation sensors on the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution time-series moorings in the Beaufort Sea.
The ship follows the same cruise track since the program began in 2003, starting
south on the Beaufort shelf and extending to the northern Canada Basin. Three
moorings are deployed annually with a subsurface profiler that measures
conductivity, temperature, depth, and dissolved O2. Our sensors are deployed at
~35 m depth, just below the subsurface float. These data will allow us to
compute air-sea CO2 fluxes and net community productivity during periods when
there is less than 100% ice cover and photosynthetically active radiation is
greater than zero. The quality-controlled shipboard and mooring data will be
made available to the scientific community by submission of the data to the
Arctic data repository (ACADIS).