* 1504989
* A NIMBLe Approach to Active Learning in Large Enrollment Introductory Chemistry Courses (NIMBLe = New Implementations of Massive Blended Learning)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,11/30/2018
* Michael Marsella, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 11/30/2018
* USD 249,685.00

In response to the fact that faculty at institutions of higher education across
the nation continue to seek evidence-based reforms to improve student learning
and retention in STEM disciplines, the PIs have designed a distinctive approach
to incorporating active learning in large-enrollment, general and organic
chemistry courses. The project will replace traditional lectures through the
implementation of new, on-line pre-lecture modules that will be linked to active
in-class experiences and lab experiments. The project will also expand the
library of socially relevant, case-based learning materials that have been
produced by the PIs through prior NSF support. This approach, which integrates
the Science Education for New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER)
philosophy of focusing on topics of significance to the community, has the
potential to be attractive to students who are traditionally under-represented
in the sciences. Moreover, the successful implementation of these new resources
in large-enrollment courses could influence the way that a broad range of
introductory STEM courses are taught at the college-
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the Organic Chemistry I and II sequence,
complementary in-class and pre-class materials on molecular bonding,
stereochemistry, and spectroscopy will be designed for lecture and lab courses.
Previously developed general chemistry cases will be adapted and new ones will
be designed to fit the blended learning format. SENCER topics, woven throughout
both classes, will include energy storage and production, chirality and the
origins of life, and medicinal chemistry/drug design among others. Formative and
summative evaluation will investigate the effectiveness of the project in terms
of increasing student interest in science, positively impacting student learning
gains, and raising the success rates of students in gateway introductory
chemistry courses. In-class materials will be published through the national
Center for Case Study Teaching in Science while the pre-lecture modules will be
made available on the institution's chemistry case study website. Project
outcomes will be disseminated through submission to the Journal of Chemical
Education or the Journal of College Science Teaching.