* 1504898
* Collaborative Research: Strategies for Learning: Augmented Reality and Collaborative Problem-Solving for Building Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Shahin Vassigh, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 201,449.00

Strategies for Learning: Augmented Reality and Collaborative Problem Solving for
Building Sciences, a collaborative project between Florida International
University and the University of Central Florida, will integrate Augmented
Reality (AR) with Building Information Modeling (BIM), visual simulations, and
interactive lessons to support collaborative learning. Specifically, the
research team will examine if and how Ecocon, a computer-based tool, can improve
students' problem-solving and collaborative learning skills leading to the
design of more sustainable and better performing buildings. Students enrolled in
architecture, civil/construction engineering, and mechanical engineering courses
will engage in four four-week units, and after each, will complete a
collaborative assignment in interdisciplinary teams. As there is little known
about how people learn and collaborate using the integration of new technologies
and AR, addressing the research questions of this project will potentially
contribute significantly to advancing the design of learning environments using
new and emerging media. The broader education of engineers and architects
emphasizing collaboration, leadership, and communication skills will also
potentially lead to increased innovation, enhanced sustainability, and reduced
cost of training once they enter the work force. Florida International
University has a proven history of providing science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education for underrepresented minorities that comprise
80% of the student population. Therefore, activities deployed in this project
including K-12 student involvement, seminars, presentations, and developed
courses will impact diverse student populations and serve as a foundation for a
diverse high quality building and construction workforce in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use a design-based research
approach to discover: (1) How does engaging with Ecocon impact students'
problem-solving skills and collaborative learning interactions? (2) How does
interaction with the project change students' understanding of building science
principles in their respective disciplines? (3) Does use of Ecocon enhance the
ability of students to successfully transfer the principles they have learned to
new situations? (4) What is the impact of the use and the project approach on
student motivation for further collaborative learning? A design-based
methodology was selected because the pedagogical experiments will be set in
real-world learning environments where there are many variables that cannot be
controlled, and this approach will allow the researchers to try to optimize as
much of the design as possible and to observe carefully how the different
elements are working. Assessment and evaluation will be conducted using mixed
methods, including, but not limited to cognitive assessments such as pre- and
post-tests and technical reports, and affective assessments such as pre-and
post-attitude surveys and exit interviews. Project outcomes and techniques will
provide guidelines to create similar multi-disciplinary learning tools for other
STEM fields. All project methods and tools will be easily accessible on a
dedicated open source website to allow other institutions to replicate and/or
modify the learning experience for their own circumstances.