* 1505413
* Research Inititation Award: Ouroboros-Investigation of Dynamic Reconfigurable Optical Network-on-Chip Architectures
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Lei Zhang, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,724.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.

The University of Maryland-Eastern Shore (UMES) holds the advantage of being the
only institution that offers engineering programs in the entire eastern shore
area of Maryland. The HBCU-RIA is aimed at improving future computing systems,
particularly through research on supercomputer system design. The project
addresses an innovative Optical Network-on-Chip (ONoC) architecture that can be
dynamically reconfigured to meet various application needs. This new
architecture, the Ouroboros Network, features a generalized open-topology
structure that can be reconfigured to any Eulerian Cycle based network.

In addition to contributing to UMES's research capability in computer science
and engineering, the project will integrate research and education by promoting
undergraduate STEM education more broadly through its dissemination efforts.
Dissemination activities include a project website, STEM conference
presentations, and published papers. Furthermore, the project will contribute to
STEM courses and curricula in computer engineering by integrating the research
into course teaching and the senior capstone design. Undergraduate and high
school students will also be incorporated into related research through programs
such as the area's active REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) and AEOP
(Army Educational Outreach Program) activities.