* 1505527
* RAPID: ASPiRe: Formative Assessment of Scientific Practices Research Practice Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Erin Furtak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 12/31/2017
* USD 199,836.00

Classroom assessment remains a significant challenge to most school districts
that decide to implement the practice standards set forth by the Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS). The Aurora Public School (APS) district is facing this
challenge head-on by engaging in a research-practice partnership (RPP) with
researchers at the University of Colorado at Boulder. Through this RPP entitled
ASPiRe, the two partners will engage in a long-term collaboration that is
intentionally organized to investigate problems of practice and generate
evidence based solutions for improving district outcomes (through changes in the
practices of teachers and students). The university-based team of faculty and
graduate students will work with district instructional leaders, science content
leaders, and science teachers to co-design formative assessments of scientific
teaching practices in the NGSS and Colorado Academic Standards for all middle
and high school teachers in the specific school district. The goal is to
determine how formative assessment design and enactment can work to sensibly
serve the many different participants and communities (district leadership,
scientific practice teams, school-based teacher learning communities, and
teachers) in ways that improve teaching and learning. This RAPID award
capitalizes on the opportunity for the university to engage in a RPP with a
whole school district that requested its assistance in using research-based
evidence to improve formative assessment driven instructional practices for
science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on evidence based
lessons from prior NSF funding where results showed that long-term professional
development linked to a learning progression can support teachers as they
iteratively design, enact, and reflect upon formative assessments linked to NGSS
practice standards. The project team will collaborate with, learn about, and
contribute to efforts underway by APS to determine the best approach to
integrate this intervention into science teaching and learning at the system
level. Through a design-based implementation research (DBIR) approach, data will
be collected at four levels of the district including classroom observations,
videotaped meetings, artifacts, and interviews. An advisory board composed of
nationally recognized education researchers will help guide the overall
implementation of the project.