* 1505989
* Using the Higgs Boson to Probe and Test the Standard Model at ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Jahred Adelman, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 06/30/2019
* USD 419,994.00

This award will provide support for a group with one PI, a postdoc and two
graduate students to work on the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) at CERN, a particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC is
a large, complex machine that accelerates protons to unprecedented energies,
allowing for discovery of elementary particles more massive than any yet
observed. One of the LHC's primary objectives was to find the Higgs Boson, the
last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model" (SM) that accounts
for much of the interactions of particles forming the visible matter in the
universe. Though doubts linger, many physicists believe the new particle is the
Higgs Boson long predicted by the SM. Nevertheless, more careful measurements of
its rarer decay modes need to be made. Surprises are possible, and could result
from effects beyond the SM that are yet to be discovered. This project will
focus on efforts to do this by looking at events that pair a Higgs boson with
another particle. Searches for extremely rare processes as will be sought in
this effort require the use of sophisticated software and computing tools,
modern machine learning techniques, data mining and the use of complex
statistical tool kits. These skills are useful not only in particle physics and
other STEM fields, but also outside of academia and the research world as
companies, non-profits and governmental organizations across the country look to
the large data sets newly available from social media and computing databases to
provide better products and more useful services to customers
and&lt;br/&gt;citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal supports work to be
done in Run2. This is about to begin at the full energy potential of the LHC of
13 TeV, almost twice that in Run1 and twice the energy ever studied with
precision before. This group will focus on events with a Higgs Boson accompanied
by either a t quark, a t-tbar pair or another Higgs. The PI has expertise in
such analyses in Run1 that may allow him some advantage in dealing with
different conditions likely to occur in Run2. The group will be working on the
ATLAS fast tracker (FTK) that will allow new triggers that might allow the
events of interest to be found more efficiently.