* 1505102
* NextGen Genome Solver
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Anne Rosenwald, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2018
* USD 228,794.00

Preparing students for 21st century employment in STEM fields is an important
goal for all undergraduate science faculty. The principal investigators (PIs)
will conduct a series of innovative portable workshops at selected sites around
the country as a means of providing Biology faculty with tools and techniques
proven to successfully engage students in research in two rapidly developing
fields in biology, bioinformatics and microbial genomics. The research skills
practiced at the workshops are accessible to all with a computer and an Internet
connection, making participation in the project cost-effective for anyone even
at severely resource-limited institutions. Bioinformatics studies facilitate
student understanding of evolution, information flow, structure and function,
and biological systems. Students exposed to the thinking necessary for tackling
bioinformatics problems gain experience in computational analyses and modeling,
both important to understanding how human beings and the world around them
function and interact. This project is significant and important because it will
enhance and expand a previous successful pilot effort to help biology faculty
introduce more computational approaches into both introductory and advanced
biology courses. A wide spectrum of institutions, ranging from community
colleges to highly selective doctoral institutions, will act as hosts or
participate in these workshops. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will add to
the research base on science education research about effective approaches to
faculty enhancement in undergraduate biology education and an important concept
in biology, horizontal gene transfer (HGT) as a driver of bacterial evolution.
The PIs previously developed and implemented the Genome Solver Community of
Practice, training faculty via face-to-face workshops conducted at the J. Craig
Venter Institute (JCVI) and developing an online forum for communication
(http://genomesolver.org). The community developed through that project is
exploring the rich DNA data sources emerging from the Human Microbiome Project
(HMP). The current project, called Genome Solver On-the-Go, will greatly expand
the reach of the workshops while reducing costs of individual workshops and
establish strong local nodes of expertise that can act as regional catalysts for
disseminating the information and skills imparted by the workshops. New features
that will be introduced in this phase of the project include engaging faculty
and students in a multi-dimensional, community bioinformatics project. Faculty
and their students will examine bacteria/phage pairs for evidence of HGT, then
submit their data to a centralized curated database. The biological question in
the HGT project is not one that can be easily approached by a small number of
researchers; understanding the extent to which HGT occurs between bacteriophages
and bacteria, and how this drives bacterial evolution, will require many
individual contributions to the centralized dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division
of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address
the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.