* 1505094
* Conference: 41st Northeast Bioengineering Conference, Troy, NY, April 17-19, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Juergen Hahn, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 01/31/2016
* USD 13,000.00

PI: Hahn, Juergen &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1505094&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports the 41st Northeast Bioengineering Conference (NEBEC) which will
be held at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, NY, from April 17-19. NSF
funds will be used to subsidize the cost of undergraduate and graduate student
registration. Rapid advances in engineering are facilitating an enhanced
understanding of biology and providing novel transformative solutions to
biomedical problems. The NEBEC will provide a multidisciplinary forum for
dissemination of these advances in biomedical engineering at all levels, and
facilitate the sharing of knowledge across interdisciplinary barriers. The
conference serves as an open forum for discussion of new directions, ideas and
approaches in research and education. The knowledge presented at the conference
will be captured electronically and broadly disseminated via abstract books, CD
ROMS, and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers website. Women
are extensively involved in the organizing committee and conference program;
students and investigators from underrepresented minorities and women will be
encouraged to attend. This proposal is co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering
Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
Division in the Engineering Directorate, and by the Biomaterials Program in the
Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 41th Annual Northeast Bioengineering
Conference will highlight emerging areas of bioengineering research, including
advances in Biomedical Imaging, Stem Cells &amp; Regenerative Medicine,
Biocatalysis and Metabolic Engineering, BioMEMS and On-Chip Devices,
Biomechanics, Biomaterials, Systems Biology &amp; Synthetic Biology, Tissue
Engineering, and Modeling and Control of Biomedical Systems. In addition,
workshops at the conference will focus on industry participation and public
advocacy to satisfy an important initiative to help translate basic research
into clinical treatments. Entrepreneurship is also an exciting area for
students, who more than ever are aware of the commercial potential of biomedical
developments. As a conference rich in tradition for educating the next
generation of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in
bioengineering, the 41st Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute will bring together a number of respected
researchers to inform and inspire students about progress and research
opportunities in the biomedical sciences.