* 1505870
* Searching for the Stochastic Gravitational-Wave Background with Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Vuk Mandic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Among the key predictions of Einstein's General Theory of Relativity is the
existence of gravitational waves (GW): ripples moving at the speed of light in
the geometry of space-time caused by the fast motion of large masses. Although
well tested in terms of their indirect effects, the direct detection of
gravitational waves incident on Earth poses an outstanding challenge. The
scientific rewards from achieving this ability would be enormous - ranging from
probing the extreme dynamics of exploding stars to gleaning information about
the state of the Universe almost at the moment of the Big Bang itself. The
effort to enable this new window on the Universe has occupied several decades of
experimental and technological developments that have pushed the boundaries
across diverse fields in the physical sciences. The year 2015 will mark a
highly-anticipated watershed moment for the goal of direct detection of
gravitational waves, as the second generation of gravitational-wave detectors is
commissioned at the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
(aLIGO). The sensitivity of the new aLIGO detectors will be ramped up to become
about ten times better than that of the first-generation detectors, opening up a
spatial volume for observing GW sources that will be 1000 times larger than
before. The aLIGO data will be used to search for a variety of astrophysical and
cosmological gravitational wave sources. This specific award will support
research that searches the aLIGO data to look for the background signals that
arise from gravitational-wave signals from many independent sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first observation data from aLIGO is expected in 2015,
with the sensitivity and duty-cycle of the detectors steadily increasing over
the following three years. This project focuses on the searches for the
stochastic gravitational wave background (SGWB), which arises from an incoherent
superposition of gravitational-wave signals generated by many independent
sources. The SGWB could be of cosmological origin: for example, in inflationary
models the SGWB is generated just moments after the Big Bang, implying that the
SGWB may contain unique information about the first moments in the evolution of
the universe and about the physics of energy scales not accessible in
laboratories. Similarly, the SGWB could be of astrophysical origin: for example,
summing up contributions from all magnetars or from coalescences of all binary
neutron stars and/or black holes in the universe leads to a stochastic
gravitational-wave "foreground" that contains information about these most
violent objects and events in the universe. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The SGWB
searches with aLIGO data will be conducted using cross-correlation techniques
that were developed and successfully used in the SGWB searches with initial LIGO
data. The searches for isotropic SGWB are expected to result in a measurement
about 1000x more sensitive than the current best upper limits. Similarly, the
searches for anisotropic SGWB will result in about 100x more sensitive
measurement than the current best upper limits. Such substantial advances will
result in a series of interesting cosmological and astrophysical implications,
including detection or new constraints on parity violation in the early
universe, evolution of the universe during the first minute after the Big Bang,
equation of state in neutron stars, rate of compact binary coalescences and its
evolution with redshift.