* 1505798
* Symplectic Topology, Symmetries, and Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Akram Alishahi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 139,384.00

This project pertains to an area of pure mathematics called symplectic geometry.
Modern geometry is centered around the study of manifolds, smooth objects that
at small enough scale look like the standard space of a fixed dimension; for
instance, the surface of a ball is a two-dimensional manifold. Symplectic
manifolds are equipped with extra structure that generalizes conservation laws
from classical mechanics. Also, some models in string theory, a branch of
physics, allow any symplectic manifold in lieu of space-time. This project
studies the question: What are the transformations (that is, global symmetries)
of a symplectic manifold? In particular, the investigator will use dualities
predicted by string theory to further our understanding of these
transformations.

This project aims to investigate symmetries of symplectic manifolds, using tools
from Floer theory, singularity theory, and mirror symmetry. The most naive such
symmetries are symplectomorphisms, i.e. diffeomorphisms which preserve the
symplectic form. These form a topological group, the connected components of
which give the symplectic mapping class group. This generalizes the "usual"
mapping class group for Riemann surfaces. This project studies structural
properties of symplectic mapping class groups, with a focus on four-dimensional
examples coming from singularity theory. The investigator will also aim to
understand the mirror phenomena in algebraic geometry. Symplectomorphisms induce
automorphisms of the Fukaya category, an algebraic strengthening of Lagrangian
Floer theory. The project will also consider "hidden" symmetries of symplectic
manifolds: automorphisms of the Fukaya category that are not induced by
symplectomorphisms, such as C*-actions.