* 1505074
* Sustainable STEM Learning Program (S2P): Promoting Systems Thinking to Aid Holistic Undergraduate Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Vivian Shyu, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,967.00

Faculty from three areas (engineering, psychology, and linguistics) will be
collaborating to design two engineering courses based on systems thinking,
sustainable engineering, and cultural understanding. They plan to research,
develop, and teach two courses in engineering to demonstrate that a new approach
based on systems thinking and spatial cognition applied to teaching and learning
may lead to changing the way educators and students think about STEM learning.
The importance of cultural awareness and global perspectives will also be
integrated into the new courses.

A systems approach to learning helps instructors and students understand the
complexity of the world and encourages them to think in terms of relationships,
connectedness, and context. Interdependent healthy learning practices are
therefore necessary and essential for the advancement of STEM academic
achievement in an increasingly global and complex world. A major hypothesis of
the Sustainable STEM Learning Program (S2LP) project is that when education is
viewed from an interdisciplinary, systems, and cultural perspective, learning
becomes student centered, holistic, and collaborative. The S2LP framework will
make important conceptual contributions towards promoting holistic learning
through spatial cognition and systems learning. In terms of the broader impacts,
the courses will emphasize the importance of understanding culture in a global
context in an increasingly diverse world. Courses to be developed may
potentially form a Science, Technology, and Society minor. Effectiveness of the
new approach will be tested against control courses. This holistic approach
should be of special relevance to international students and those with limited
language proficiency. Agreements with Minority Engineering and Science
Advancement (MESA) and a community college are in place to conduct workshops for
teachers and students. Both channels will engage members of underrepresented
groups and may help increase their enrollment in STEM majors. Dissemination
activities will include teacher workshops, conferences and papers, and the
delivery of one of the courses through the university's massive online open
course program.