* 1505594
* Ultrahigh Energy Particle Astrophysics at IceCube
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* James Beatty, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2019
* USD 294,000.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena.

The PI effectively mentors junior faculty, including women and members of
underrepresented minorities and is committed to enhancing diversity in STEM
fields through participation in an NSF ADVANCE program. The project provides an
excellent environment for students and postdocs, who are well-equipped to
contribute to scientific and economic progress in academia, government, and
industry. The award includes development of planetarium content on high energy
astrophysics, cosmic rays, and neutrinos. This will bring the excitement of
cutting-edge research to young students and the community.

IceCube incorporates an air shower detector, IceTop, a water Cherenkov detector
which covers the energy range from 10^15 to 10^18 eV where hadronic interactions
are better constrained by data from the Large Hadron Collider. The analysis work
funded by this award focuses on the problem of disentangling the composition of
the highest energy cosmic rays from hadronic interactions. The behavior of
ultrahigh energy cosmic ray air showers is not well-described by current models
of hadronic interactions. Resolution of this problem may result in
transformative improvements in our understanding of interactions beyond the
reach of terrestrial accelerators.