* 1505319
* Piezotronic Effect on Ultrasensitive Chemical and Biochemical Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Zhong Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,999.00

Nontechnical Description:

Sensors have numerous applications such as monitoring carbon monoxide near home
furnaces or fireplaces, detecting explosives for airport security, monitoring
harmful chemical vapors in industrial plants, and tracking air pollution
sources. Sensors fabricated using nanomaterials have been demonstrated to be
more sensitive than sensors made of large-size materials. This research project
combines piezoelectric semiconductor nanomaterials (i.e., materials that can
generate electric charges when subjected to mechanical forces) in the sensor
designs with the ultimate goal to achieve ultrahigh sensitivity. The fundamental
understanding on sensing mechanisms of these nanomaterials developed in this
research project is expected to further advance the sensor designs. Graduate and
undergraduate students in this project are trained in the growth and
characterization of nanomaterials as well as sensor device fabrication and
testing. The research findings are incorporated into two existing courses:
Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology and Advanced Nanomaterials, which enriches the
materials science curriculum at Georgia Tech. Outreach activities include
involving K-12 teachers in research through the existing programs on the Georgia
Tech campus.

Technical Description:

The typical functioning component of chemical and biochemical nanosensors is a
field-effect transistor structure made of nanowires. The current change in the
nanowires after exposing to gas molecules gives rise to the sensitivity. The
high sensitivity of these nanowire-based sensors results from the high surface-
to-volume ratio and a large number of available molecular binding sites to the
nanowires to change its conductance. Ohmic contacts are typically applied
between the semiconducting nanowire/nanotube and the metal electrodes in these
sensors. Instead, this project focuses on the Schottky contact in nanowire
sensors because of the ultrahigh sensitivity and fast-response compared to the
nanowire nanosensors with the Ohmic contact. Combining the piezotronic effect,
the transport of charge carriers across a metal-semiconductor barrier or p-n
junction is modulated by piezoelectric charges. Specifically, the localized
piezoelectric charges alter the free charge carrier redistribution and band
structures near the interface, and further impact the charge carrier transport
properties. Electron holography and in-situ transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) are used to quantitatively map the piezoelectric charges/potentials at the
metal/semiconductor interface. This study provides fundamental understanding of
the sensing mechanisms of these nanosenor materials, by providing key
microstructural and electrical properties at the metal-semiconductor interfaces.