* 1505086
* Distance Learning Labs for Introductory Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* David Sokoloff, Chemeketa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 192,460.00

This project will develop important laboratory experiments for the mechanics
portion of introductory physics courses. The experiments are specifically
targeted at distance learning courses where very few physics laboratory
opportunities exist. This lack of access to gateway laboratory courses limits
students' educational opportunities across all STEM disciplines. This
particularly hampers entry to working adults seeking to upgrade their education,
students in remote locations, and the mobility-impaired. Equipment costs further
limit accessibility for those unable to attend a traditional campus setting. The
labs will make use of an inexpensive prototype device and software known as
IOLab that allows measurement of a wide variety of physical parameters. The
project will measure the learning gains of the labs as well as student attitudes
toward them.

There is a tremendous need for research-validated distance laboratory
experiences of high quality, especially in physics. This project plans to
address this need by using the inexpensive IOLab tool for Newtonian mechanics in
the introductory calculus and algebra-based physics courses. The primary goal of
the project is to develop, implement, test, and disseminate a complete set of
low-cost, research-validated, distance-learning labs. Two secondary goals are to
assess student attitudes toward these labs (studying the differences and
similarities in these between distance learning and on-campus implementations)
and to provide useful input for improvement of the introductory laboratory
learning experience for all. The use of the commercial IOLab hardware and
software mitigates the cost and technical risk, making widespread adoption among
colleges and universities both feasible and likely. The IOLab also makes it
feasible to implement a more constructivist learning approach in the entire
course, by incorporating hands-on activities prior to the in-class or distance
learning lecture portion. Dissemination will include reports on the learning
outcomes and pedagogy presented at conferences and it is hoped that eventually
the method can be expanded and used beyond the introductory laboratory. The
distance learning laboratory approach will serve as a model for other science
disciplines and provide a transformational opportunity for making quality
physics laboratory experiences available to a large number of students.