* 1505716
* Forward Meson Production and Spin Asymmetries at RHIC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Steven Heppelmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 90,000.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons, protons and neutrons, are made
up of more elementary particles called quarks. The main physics program
supported by this grant is directed at the study of the quark structure of
nucleons and nuclei. Research will be carried out at the Brookhaven National
Laboratory as part of a collaboration called STAR. This collaboration is focused
on the scattering of high energy polarized protons from nuclei with the goal of
understanding the structure of the proton. The proposed research will use the
forward electromagnetic calorimeter, called FMS, which is part of the STAR
detector system to measure neutral particles that are produced at small
scattering angles. The measured rates of such particle production have been
found to depend strongly on the direction of polarization of the proton beam, an
effect that has confounded attempts at a theoretical understanding based on the
fundamental theory of the strong force, Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). Further
studies of this particles detected using the FMS will guide future theoretical
develpments and help us to understand more about the quark and gluon structure
of nucleons.

This proposal supports the Penn State group to operate the FMS detector in the
STAR experiment for polarized proton RHIC runs and to analyze data from those
runs. The STAR FMS is an electromagnetic calorimeter that detects collision
fragments produced in the forward pseudo-rapidity region. Particles observed in
this region are associated with the interactions of the most energetic and most
polarized quarks. For transversely polarized protons, the large dependence of
the cross section on the sign of polarization is a long-standing mystery. While
the QCD Lagrangian is known, our ability to use it to predict observables is
still limited. In contrast to the electromagnetic force, where the role of spin
constituents of an atom is fairly well understood, the role of spin among the
partons (constituents of a bound state proton) remains near our knowledge
frontier. The most useful model for scattering by the QCD force is perturbative
QCD, or pQCD, which is applicable when the collisions between protons
constituents exchange large momentum. The goal of this research is to determine
experimentally where pQCD applies and how to modify models to extend
applicability.