* 1505061
* Collaborative Research: Flow and Nutrient Exchange Driven by Pulsating Coral
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Shilpa Khatri, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2019
* USD 203,114.00

Coral ecosystems are of significant interest to conservationists because of
their remarkable diversity. Coral reefs, in comparison to colonies of soft
corals, are composed of hard corals with calcium carbonate skeletons. One
significant difference between the two corals is that the soft coral of the
family Xeniidae actively pulse, and this energetically expensive behavior has
been shown to enhance photosynthesis rates by an order of magnitude. The central
goal of this proposal is to describe how these active movements might give soft
coral a competitive advantage through augmented photosynthetic rates under
certain environmental conditions. The broad focus of this project is to
determine how active movements of flexible organisms enhance particle capture
and nutrient exchange. In particular the PIs will study species of the family
Xeniidae, the pulsing soft corals, using a combination of mathematical modeling
and experiments. This work will develop mathematical models to represent
poroelastic structures representative of the feathery tentacles of the corals.
The PIs will also develop adaptive numerical methods for handling the flux of
nutrients at these moving elastic boundaries. Two graduate students and four
undergraduates will be trained at the interface of scientific computing,
mathematical modeling, and experimental biology. The PIs willrecruit a diverse
group of undergraduate students through established mechanisms at each
institution. Several educational activities will be implemented to promote
computation in biophysics, including the development of quantitative biology
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following specific aims will be addressed in this
project: Aim 1: Determine how the pulsing dynamics of a single polyp affects the
bulk transport of fluid past the organism and the small scale mixing around the
surface of the organism. Aim 2: Determine how the pulsing action enhances
particle capture, the exchange of nutrients, and removal of waste. Aim 3:
Determine whether or not the group pulsing dynamics are optimized for exchange
using network analysis and computational fluid dynamics.