* 1505087
* BOOST:Bridge Opportunities Offered for the Sophomore Transition
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Adel Sharif, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2018
* USD 249,917.00

Current education research identifies a critical need for students to develop
their "engineering identity." The literature points to solutions that help
students explore engineering and encourage peer-to-peer as well as student-to-
faculty interaction to promote early assimilation into engineering colleges. The
College of Engineering, Computer Science, and Technology (ECST) at California
State University Los Angeles (CSULA) has recently institutionalized a high
school-to-freshman Summer Transition to ECST Program (STEP) to support
engineering freshmen, a majority of whom are low-income, underrepresented
minorities (URMs), and first-generation college students. STEP has successfully
led to significantly higher levels of math and English placement, and yet, the
ECST sophomores are no exception to the pervasive "sophomore slump" experienced
nationwide. Unlike typical bridge programs, the Bridge Opportunities Offered for
Sophomore Transition (BOOST) project will target engineering students
transitioning between the freshman and sophomore years. BOOST will fit nicely
between an existing college-funded freshman-to-sophomore bridge program, a
first-year experience that will be created in ECST with new funding from the
Chancellor's Office to reduce the achievement gap, and a grass-roots revamp of
the sophomore engineering core. The literature identifies the large population
of URM students that leave science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) majors as one of the main sources of potential STEM professionals. BOOST
has the potential to create an innovative model for ensuring the success of
rising URM sophomores in engineering. In addition to giving students a foretaste
of engineering, BOOST will also provide community engagement, as well as career
development opportunities, which are expected to motivate ECST's largely URM,
first-generation engineering student body to persist and excel in engineering
while ultimately positively impacting the nation's ability to increase and
diversify its STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
explore the impact of design-focused, urban-centered service learning on the
development of engineering identity and ultimately on the retention of
engineering students. The project will include the development of a research
tool that will help to identify at-risk students early, so as to better target
students who can most benefit from the additional support from BOOST. The
investigators will address not only whether but also how BOOST will help their
students to succeed in engineering as well as whether or not they are targeting
the students who will benefit most from the additional support of BOOST. To do
so, they will develop an adaptive artificial neural network (ANN) that will
model the relationships among various student factors and the probability of
student success. The research will address the questions: what aspects of the
program (service learning, urban setting, practical design experience, exposure
to engineering concepts are needed in subsequent courses, what is the optimal
program timing between freshman and sophomore year, what collaborations (as
members of a team) are most beneficial to students' development of engineering
identity and ultimately, to their success? Assessment and evaluation will be
conducted using mixed methods, including, but not limited to, cognitive
assessments such as course examinations and concept inventories, and affective
assessments such as questions on the College Pedagogical Practice Inventory. The
anticipated local outcome will be a 10% to 15% improvement in second year
retention and six year graduation rates in ECST. The project will potentially
lead to a model for improving student success at other similar institutions.