* 1505819
* Theoretical Study of Few Body Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Don Madison, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 07/31/2018
* USD 210,000.00

Collision physics is currently enjoying an incredibly exciting time as a
consequence of recent new experimental advances. One of these advances is the
COLTRIMS (cold-target recoil-ion momentum spectroscopy) method which can be used
to obtain full three-dimensional pictures of a collision process. These 3D
pictures contain very detailed information about the fundamental forces
controlling nature on the atomic/molecular level and the challenge for theory is
to see if our theoretical models can accurately predict what is observed
experimentally. One of the most sensitive probes of the important fundamental
forces is charged particle ionization of atoms/molecules. Problems of this type
are called the few-body problem. For two particles, the problem is completely
solved since we have exact quantum mechanical solutions. For three particles,
there is no exact quantum mechanical solution so this is one of the important
fundamental unsolved problems in physics. The only way to study the problem is
to develop theoretical models and compare the predictions of the model with
experimental measurements. Although significant progress has been made for
understanding the 3-body problem, there is still much work to be done
particularly for collisions with larger atoms and molecules, interactions that
are important in numerous gas-phase processes in Nature and in applied fields of
research. The 4-body problem is significantly more difficult than the 3-body
problem and, so far, the amount of work done on the 4-body problem is limited.
The purpose of this project is to theoretically examine several open questions
in the field of charged particle ionization of atoms and molecules for both the
3-body and 4-body problems and for both electron-impact and heavy-particle
impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two types of theoretical approaches
which can be used for these problems - perturbative and non-perturbative. Non-
perturbative methods can be used for collisions with small atoms and small
molecules and they are generally more accurate than non-perturbative. For larger
atoms and molecules, the only approach that is currently feasible is the
perturbative approach which is proposed for this work. Previously, the PI has
shown that an approach called the 3-body distorted wave (3DW) for atoms or
molecular 3-body distorted wave (M3DW) for molecules predicts results which are
in very good agreement with experiment with experiment for some atoms (He, Ne)
and some molecules (H2, N2), relatively good agreement with experiment with
experiment for some atoms (Ar, Kr) and some molecules (NH3, CH4), qualitative
agreement for some molecules (formic acid (CH2O2), pyrimidine (C4H4N2),
tetrahydrofuran (THF C4H8O), tetrahydrofurfuran alcohol (THFA, C5H10O2),
tetrahydropyran (THP, C5H10O), and 1,4-dioxane (C4H8O2)), and very poor
agreement for some other molecules (SF6). One of the objectives of the proposed
work is to improve the M3DW model for electron-impact collisions with molecules.
There are fewer detailed experimental measurements for heavy-particle collisions
than for electron-impact collisions and the theoretical models tend to be less
sophisticated. Another objective of this work is to improve the theoretical
models for both 3-body and 4-body collisions for heavy particles for both atoms
and molecules.