* 1505794
* Polarized Electron Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Timothy Gay, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 642,714.00

Electrons have the fundamental property of "spin," which is analogous to that of
a spinning toy top, and is associated with their angular momentum. This project
studies collisions between polarized electrons, which have their spins aligned
in one direction, and so-called "chiral", or "handed" molecules (such molecules,
of which DNA is an example, are characterized by a spiral, or helical geometry).
These experiments address physics questions about the dynamics of electron-
chiral molecule scattering, particularly with regard to the role played by the
electron spins. They will also provide important clues about the origins of
biological homochirality--the fact that all naturally-occurring DNA spirals in
the same direction. Atoms of zinc are also being used as targets, to check the
results of an experiment done recently by an Australian group in which zinc
atoms excited by polarized electrons emitted light in a way that is forbidden by
all known theories of atomic collisions. If the Australian result is reproduced,
much of our basic theoretical knowledge on this topic will be shown to be in
error. Improved sources of polarized electrons are also being developed, with
the goal of "turnkey" ease of use. This project focuses on two particular ways
to make polarized electrons: the first involves electron collisions with
rubidium atoms in which spin is transferred from the rubidium to the free
electrons. The second uses multiphoton ionization of semiconductors such as
gallium arsenide to give the electrons a preferential spin direction. This
research done to develop polarized electron technology holds the promise of
providing new analytical tools that can be used for biological and materials
research, and for industry.

The experiments involving collisions between polarized electrons and chiral
molecules will extend previous work that showed chiral sensitivity in both
quasi-elastic and reactive scattering with halocamphor targets. Now that such
sensitivity has been observed, our goal is to demonstrate such effects in
molecules that have biological significance, such as cysteine, and to study the
effect of the maximum target nuclear charge and location of the target's chiral
center on the chiral asymmetries we observe. The goal in the zinc experiments is
to check whether the rather large value of canted linear polarization
(polarization fraction P2) observed in fluorescence from excited zinc atoms is
reproducible. No extant theory of electron-atom scattering, including the state-
of-the-art "R-matrix with pseudostates" approach, has been able to confirm this
result, even though they make quantitatively accurate predictions of other
collision parameters for this system. Source development work will be based on
the successfully demonstrated "rubidium spin-filter" design by our group, in
which optically-pumped rubidium undergoes spin-exchange collisions with an
incident unpolarized beam of electrons. This project will focus on improving the
vacuum system, the rubidium target reliability, and the optical pumping
protocol. It will also study a variety of buffer gases to understand the complex
physics of the interaction between the electron beam and the rubidium vapor. In
the gallium arsenide experiment, unamplified pulses from a femtosecond titanium-
sapphire oscillator are used to photo-emit electrons. First experiments will
investigate the intensity and polarization of the electrons emitted from bulk
gallium arsenide and tip-like gallium arsenide shards. Then targets of gallium
arsenide cusp arrays will be considered.