* 1505532
* Collaborative Research: Interfacial Water Restructuring: An Unrecognized Contribution to Mineral Surface Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Catalano, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Jeffrey G. Catalano of Washington University in
St. Louis and Professor Sara E. Mason of the University of Iowa to investigate
how the arrangement of water molecules near a mineral surface affects the
adsorption of contaminants. Adsorption is a key chemical process at
environmental interfaces that directly controls contaminant fate and nutrient
availability and is an important precursor step in the nucleation and growth of
precipitates, surface-catalyzed redox reactions, and microbial and ligand-
promoted dissolution of oxide minerals. While adsorption mechanisms and the
effect of surface potential on interfacial reactions are well established,
little is known about the role of interfacial water. The information gleaned
from these studies is expected to provide insight into fundamental reaction
mechanisms involved in important environmental processes such as contaminant
fate, transport, and degradation, nutrient bioavailability, carbon dioxide
sequestration, and nanoparticle mobilization. This project integrates graduate
students, undergraduate students, and high school student interns into the
conduct of the research and supports new educational and outreach activities. A
graduate student at Washington University will be trained in STEM pedagogies and
then develop new active learning activities for a course on the environment and
human health. At the University of Iowa, an annual museum exhibit will be
prepared to educate K-12 students on the societal importance of geochemical
surface science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
characterize adsorbate-induced interfacial water restructuring on mineral
surfaces and its dependence on surface structure, surface charging, and fluid
composition. Preliminary data shows that arsenate adsorption on aluminum oxide
surfaces alters interfacial water structure. Wholesale restructuring occurred on
a surface with weak initial water ordering whereas a small structural
perturbation was observed on a surface with strong ordering. Such structural
transitions of interfacial water are expected to affect the energetics and
kinetics of interfacial reactions. This investigation integrates experimental
and computational studies of interfacial water behavior on aluminum and iron
oxide surface during arsenate adsorption. More specifically, the work integrates
synchrotron-based surface crystallography techniques, laboratory measurements of
adsorption isotherms and kinetics, density functional theory calculations, and
ab initio molecular dynamics simulations to study how the structure of
interfacial water responds to the adsorption of the contaminant arsenic and how
such effects vary with mineral surface structure and charging. This study is
anticipated to reveal a previously unrecognized mechanism that affects the
energetics and kinetics of interfacial reactions.