* 1505826
* Electronic and Magnetic Phenomena in Iron-based Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Carmen Almasan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 433,350.00

Nontechnical description: Two major themes in condensed matter physics are
quantum critical phenomena and unconventional superconductivity. A quantum phase
transition takes place at zero temperature and describes a phase transition
between competing ground states driven by an external parameter such as chemical
composition, pressure, or magnetic field. The recent studies of unconventional
superconductors show that superconductivity develops in proximity to a
magnetically ordered phase. This raises the possibility of quantum phase
transitions in these systems arising from competing types of such orders. The
present studies of iron-based superconductors mainly focus on the understanding
of the normal state properties of these superconductors and on the mechanism of
superconductivity. These studies enhance our fundamental understanding of the
extent to which a quantum phase transition controls the finite temperature
properties of these superconductors and promise insight into the mutual
interplay between superconductivity and magnetism. They could also offer clues
about other unconventional superconductors, such as the cuprates, and contribute
to a more global understanding of the novel phenomenon of high temperature
superconductivity. This highly interdisciplinary project allows graduate and
undergraduate students, postdocs, and visitors to benefit from exposure to a
diversity of experimental techniques, a variety of different physical systems
and phenomena, and forefront topics in condensed matter physics. The diversity
of the expertise gained by the participants in this research program is a
substantial advantage in today's knowledge based, technology driven economy,
being beneficial to a future career in industry, government, or academia.
Professional mentoring is provided for the postdoc and graduate students. A
female Ph.D. student participates in this project, hence, the project increases
diversity within the field. The international collaborations with scientists in
Romania and China contribute to the nation's infrastructure for research and
education. The principal investigator develops teaching lab modules for a senior
laboratory that verifies experimentally counterintuitive physical phenomena
learned in Quantum Mechanics. She also addresses the professional development
needs of science teachers in grades 6-10 by developing the physical science
component of a new physical and life science graduate course. Finally, she
provides middle school and high school physics teachers and their students
workshops and lab tours.

Technical description: This proposal addresses a major theme in condensed matter
physics: unconventional superconductivity in Fe-based superconductors. The
proposed research significantly enhances our fundamental understanding of charge
conduction and magnetism of iron pnictides/chalcogenites, addresses issues
related with the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity, and
contributes to a more global understanding of the novel phenomenon of high
temperature superconductivity. The goals of this research are to: (1) study
novel electronic quantum states with real-space texture in iron
pnictides/chalcogenites superconductors with either an antiferromagnetic Mott
insulator or antiferromagnetic spin density wave parent compound; (2) reveal the
microscopic coexistence of antiferromagnetism and superconductivity and its
evolution with doping; (3) study quantum criticality in order to reveal possible
quantum phase transitions induced by control parameters, elucidate the phase
boundary between the paramagnetic and antiferromagnetic phases inside the
superconducting state, and generate a phase diagram that provides direct
evidence for a quantum critical line inside the superconducting phase; (4) study
the symmetry of the superconducting gap in order to unambiguously distinguish
between different pairing symmetries and reveal any universality in the doping
dependence of the gap; (5) reveal the origin of the pseudogap region; (6)
facilitate the training of highly qualified personnel through comprehensive and
multifaceted research, improve STEM education through educator development at
6-10 grade levels, and perform outreach activities. The methods that are used in
these studies are resistivity, magnetoresistivity, current-voltage, torque, and
magnetization measurements. Understanding the intrinsic electronic, magnetic,
and magnetotransport mechanisms in these complex materials may be a key
component in understanding their unique and potentially useful physical
properties. With iron pnictides/chalcogenites and cuprates to compare and
contrast, the proposed research could contribute to finally uncovering the vital
clues that theorists need to solve the mystery of high-temperature
superconductivity. More broadly, the results from these basic investigations
provide further understanding of the interplay between magnetism and
superconductivity of other unconventional superconductors and insight into
appropriate doping schemes to facilitate applications to electronic sensors and
devices.