* 1505176
* HBCU-UP RIA: Genetic Evaluation of Structural Determinants of Dopamine Transporters
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Phyllis Freeman, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Clytrice Watson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 227,955.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs
including junior faculty who are starting to build a research program and mid-
career faculty returning to the faculty ranks after holding an administrative
post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program. Faculty members may
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home institution,
and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Fisk University will conduct neuroscience
research using the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans). This research
project will help sustain the professional growth and productivity of the
faculty involved, expand Fisk University's research capabilities, and enhance
the educational and research experiences of the students at this small liberal
arts college. This project has the potential to be a model for increasing the
number of African American students pursuing STEM degree programs and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed research is to reveal
structural features of the C. elegans dopamine (DA) transporter (DAT-1) that
dictate transporter function and that integrate regulatory signals to achieve
appropriate motor-sensory activity in vivo. These studies will exploit recently
established nematode strains derived from the Million Mutation Project (MMP)
that carry single nucleotide variants at the dat-1 genomic locus which alter
transporter coding sequences. The objectives of this project are to: 1)
determine the impact of dat-1 missense alleles on in vivo DAT function and
localization and 2) utilize reverse genetics to refine understanding of the
structural bases for in vivo effects of MMP mutations on DAT-1 function and
localization. Findings from this work will deepen our understanding of DAT
structure/function relationships and demonstrate functionality from the
trafficking of transporter proteins to the behaviors of living animals. The
infusion of the project research in the Genetics and Molecular Cell Biology
undergraduate courses at Fisk University will help foster increased interest in
STEM research and careers.