* 1505509
* Research Initiation Award: An Intelligent Optimization, Clustering and Classification Framework for High Dimensional, Overlapped Classes, and Imbalanced Data
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2015,09/30/2020
* Nian Zhang, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 09/30/2020
* USD 239,997.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to the University of the District of Columbia (UDC) has potential broader
impact in a number of areas. The expansion of data availability in many large-
scale, complex, and networked systems leads to a need to advance the
understanding of learning from unbounded size and imbalanced data to support
decision-making processes. An effective imbalanced learning system developed for
the highly overlapped imbalanced classes involving rare diseases, abnormal
behavior, or even trace explosive, can save money and human life. The knowledge
developed from this project will contribute to improved clustering and
classification algorithms. This project will also enhance the research
experience and training of undergraduate students at
UDC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a computationally
cheap context-sensitive intra-class clustering approach to overcome class
overlapping problems by generating non-overlapping sub-clusters using context
class data as a boundary. This novel algorithm can separate an arbitrary data
distribution into non-overlapping unimodal clusters, while utilizing intervening
context data distributions to further separate the clusters. A new swarm
intelligence-based hybrid global optimization learning model will be developed
to simultaneously optimize the feature subset and the tuning parameters of the
least square support vector machine. Moreover, a novel particle swarm
optimization self-organizing algorithm will be created to improve the
classification performance through obtaining useful knowledge from the limited
and underrepresented minority class data.