* 1505664
* Breakthrough: CPS-Security: Towards Provably Correct Distributed Attack-Resilient Control of Unmanned-Vehicle-Operator Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Minghui Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Inherent vulnerabilities of information and communication technology systems to
cyber-attacks (e.g., malware) impose significant security risks to Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS). This is evidenced by a number of recent accidents.
Noticeably, current distributed control of CPS is not really attack-resilient
(ensuring task completion despite attacks). Although provable resilience would
significantly lift the trustworthiness of CPS, existing defenses are rather ad-
hoc and mainly focus on attack detection. In addition, while network attacks
have been extensively studied, resilient-to-malware distributed control has been
rarely investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to bridge the gap.
It aims to investigate provably correct distributed attack-resilient control of
CPS. The project will focus on a representative class of CPS, namely unmanned-
vehicle-operator networks, and its four main research thrusts are: (1) The
development of a distributed attack-resilient control framework to ensure task
completion of multiple vehicles despite network attacks and malware attacks, (2)
The synthesis of novel distributed attack-resilient control algorithms to deal
with network attacks, (3) The design of estimation algorithms to detect malware
attacks on vehicles, and computationally efficient algorithms which allow clean
vehicles to avoid the collision with the vehicles compromised by malware, and
(4) The validation of the cost-effectiveness of the proposed distributed attack-
resilient control framework via a principled systematic evaluation
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research findings profoundly impact CPS security
of a variety of engineering disciplines beyond unmanned-vehicle-operator
networks, including smart grid, smart buildings and intelligent transportation
systems. The proposed research is interdisciplinary and involves interactions
among security, control, distributed algorithms and robotics. This will lead to
educational and training opportunities that cross traditional disciplinary
boundaries for high-school, undergraduate and graduate students in STEM.