* 1505437
* Excitonic Coupling in Molecular and Polymeric Aggregates: Beyond  Conventional J- and H-aggregation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Francis Spano, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY Organic molecules and polymers continue to receive
attention as semiconducting materials in a wide array of practical applications,
including paper electronics, solid-state lighting, solar cells and scaffolds for
tissue growth. Most devices benefit from rapid energy transport, which is
dictated by how fast an electronic excitation on one molecule can be transferred
to a more distant molecule. However, despite the more than five decades of
intensive experimental and theoretical research, there are still many questions
regarding the nature of the electronic excitations in organic molecular
aggregates, thin films and crystals. The main objective of the proposed research
is to develop a theory of electronic coupling between molecules which takes into
account the organization of molecules relative to each other. This theory will
provide information about the rate of energy transfer and will reveal important
information about the properties of the electronic excitations, information that
can be used to design more efficient devices. The PI's group will also explore
the use of optical microcavities for controlling material properties.
Microcavities consist of two mirrors separated by a very short distance of the
order of one millionth of a meter. The interaction between light and matter is
greatly amplified for materials inserted between such mirrors. The proposed
research will benefit from collaborations with the experimental groups at the
University of Massachusetts and the University of Montreal. The broader impact
of the proposed research will be in an enhanced understanding of the
photophysical and transport properties of a technologically important class of
materials. The commercial impact of organic electronic devices is expected to
dramatically increase over the next decade through products like flexible
displays, electronic labels, solid-state lighting and solar cells. The wide
array of photophysical and transport behaviors afforded by molecular aggregates
studied in this proposal could provide the basis for novel design paradigms for
efficient solar absorbers and light emitting materials.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The main goal of the proposed research is to develop a theory
for the photophysical response of molecular aggregates which accounts for the
simultaneous presence of long-range Coulombic interactions and short-range
charge-transfer (CT) interactions between the constituent molecules. The theory
will consider the electronic coupling, the electronic-nuclear coupling, and
diagonal and off-diagonal disorder on equal footing and will extend the
conventional J- and H-aggregate model of Kasha to systems such as molecular pi-
stacks, in which the very close proximity between neighboring molecules allows
for significant overlap between molecular orbitals. Investigations are planned
to understand the photophysical and transport properties of different aggregate
types and how such aggregates evolve into conventional H- and J-aggregates as
the adiabatic CT exciton is tuned away from the parent Frenkel exciton. Studies
will also be undertaken to determine how aggregate properties are altered by
immersion into a tuned optical microcavity. The analyses will be based on
Holstein-like Hamiltonians represented in a one- and two-particle basis set.
Fundamental excitations and their spectral signatures will be evaluated using
numerical matrix techniques. Specific applications will be made to rylene pi-
stacks which have been studied as dye pigments and electron-transporting
materials, as well as poly(3-hexylthiophene) pi-stacks which make excellent
exciton transporting materials in photovoltaic devices. The proposed research
will benefit from collaborations with the experimental groups at the University
of Massachusetts and the University of Montreal.

The broader impact of the proposed research will be in an enhanced understanding
of the photophysical and transport properties of a technologically important
class of materials. The commercial impact of organic electronic devices is
expected to dramatically increase over the next decade through products like
flexible displays, electronic labels, solid-state lighting and solar cells. The
wide array of photophysical and transport behaviors afforded by molecular
aggregates studied in this proposal could provide the basis for novel design
paradigms for efficient solar absorbers and light emitting materials.