* 1505192
* Spin-orbit Interaction Driven Phenomena in Magnetic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2018
* John Xiao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 09/30/2018
* USD 405,326.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recent breakthroughs in the field of
spintronics, where scientists explore the spin or magnetic properties in
addition to the electric properties of electrons, have created opportunities for
future generations of memory and logic devices. It is found that an electrical
current passing through a heavy metal such as platinum or tantalum can create,
in the traverse direction, a pure spin current where electrons of opposite spin
directions move in opposite directions. This pure spin current diffuses into a
neighboring magnetic layer and exerts torque on spins in the magnetic layer,
leading to an effective method of controlling the properties of the magnetic
layer. The project aims towards acquiring a fundamental understanding of how a
pure spin current traverses through materials and interfaces and interacts with
spins in the magnetic layer. With novel approaches in experimental detection
methods that are immune to artifacts and with interface engineering, the
research team can separate and quantify various contributions arising from the
bulk and interface effects. The research may also lead to new materials that
provide more efficient control over nano-magnets, key ingredients in memory and
logic devices. The project, leveraging on the creation of a nanofabrication
facility at the University of Delaware, also aims to train undergraduate and
graduate students and professionals via nanofabrication courses and
certification programs. The educational activities also include outreach
programs focusing on K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Spin-orbit interaction (SOC) driven phenomena, such as
current-induced magnetization switching and domain motion in magnetic
heterostructures involving heavy metals, have attracted great attention. These
phenomena arise from an intricate combination of effects including the Spin Hall
Effect (SHE), interfacial Rashba SOC, and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction
(DMI), which are strongly correlated with SOC in materials and at interfaces. It
is essential to understand the underlying physics responsible for these recent
exciting discoveries in ferromagnetic heterostructures in order to unleash their
true potential in spintronic applications. There is a lack of experimental
techniques that can unravel the entanglement of torques from the SHE and Rashba
effect. With designed interfaces that are nearly transparent to spin currents
but significantly modify the Rashba effect and innovative 3D MOKE spin torque
magnetometers that can measure torques on magnetization at arbitrary directions,
the research proposes a comprehensive experimental effort to understand the rich
SOC-driven phenomena in these ferromagnetic heterostructures. The project
objectives are to: (1) develop 3D MOKE spin torque magnetometers capable of
measuring SO torques on magnetization at an arbitrary angle, (2) quantitatively
separate the SHE and Rashba SOC contributions to the SO torques, and relate them
to the interface SOC, (3) characterize and optimize DMI, particularly in
structures with large voltage controlled interface magnetic anisotropy, and (4)
search for new material systems that possess preferred SOC-induced effects.