* 1505038
* Dynamic nuclear polarization at 7 Tesla to enable and enhance the study of chemical structures and surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Song-I Han, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2019
* USD 699,599.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professor Song-I Han at the University of California-
Santa Barbara to pursue the development of advanced instrumentation and
methodologies to exploit solid-state dynamic nuclear polarization (ssDNP)
enhancement at 7 Tesla and liquid helium temperatures to significantly enhance
the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) signal. The proposed research activities is
desigend to provide up to 4 to 5 orders of magnitudes of NMR signal enhancement.
If successful, this new apparatus will enable characterization of interfaces and
surfaces in a way not feasible before. Consequently, the largest impact of the
proposed research lies in the characterization of chemical systems and materials
of interest to society; namley, catalysts and energy-related and/or
biocompatible materials. The proposed research also offers interdisciplinary
training opportunities to next generation graduate and undergraduate students by
providing them with hands-on experience in technology and hardware development
from the ground up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research goal is to
advance ssDNP-enhanced NMR as a chemical characterization tool, with the focus
on resolving local signatures of nanometer-scale domains and solid surfaces,
where chemical processes occur and that are critical for material function. The
intellectual merit of the proposed work is to address fundamental roadblocks in
and mechanisms of ssDNP performance via studies of the temperature and microwave
power dependence of DNP enhancements, frequency profiles and build-up time
curves, as well as electron and nuclear spin relaxation times. Contemporary
chemical systems from nanostructured hydrogels, mesoporous catalysts to
supported catalysts will be studied, with the aim of selectively characterizing
surface signatures and spatially heterogeneous solute/solvent composition. The
prospect for DNP to transform NMR from offering atomistic details, but averaged
over the entire sample into a surface sensitive and selective tool, is
promising.