* 1505477
* Research Initiation Award: Seasonal Mobilization and Acid Stress Response of Opportunistic Enteric Pathogen Communities in Freshwater Ecosystems
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Gabriel Swenson, Paine College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2019
* USD 193,034.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs
including junior faculty who are starting to build a research program and mid-
career faculty returning to the faculty ranks after holding an administrative
post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program. Faculty members may
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home institution,
and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Paine College
will conduct research on the role that rainfall plays in mobilizing bacterial
pathogens which are linked to human health. The project will help build the
research capacity at Paine College and will have a major impact on a large
population of minority students. The research opportunities and modification of
existing curricular offerings will provide undergraduate students with advanced
skills in environmental science and enhance teaching and learning at Paine
College. In addition, Paine College will enhance its outreach activities to the
community by training students majoring in Education who will develop an online
teaching module for high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
integrate water quality surveillance, microcosm studies, environmental sampling,
traditional culturing and quantitative molecular analysis to assess the
ecological implications of rainfall events on mobilization of four opportunistic
enteric pathogens and elicitation of acid stress response (ASR) within a
freshwater floodplain. The principle objectives are to: 1) characterize the role
of rainfall events in mobilization of sediment associated bacterial communities
into a seasonal wetland, and 2) characterize ASR elicitation of the bacterial
community within a wetland and riverine system. Findings from this work will
strengthen understanding of bacterial community structure and function in
aquatic ecosystems, may aid in identification of seasonal environmental "hot
spots" of bacterial pathogenicity and may transform paradigms of seasonally
influenced bacterial diseases. This project has the potential to transform
current mechanistic linkages of opportunistic pathogen mobilization into
seasonal wetlands and the contributions of these aquatic ecosystems in
conditioning bacterial pathogenicity and community structure.