* 1505824
* Compact Objects and Gravitational Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Pablo Laguna, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 630,000.00

The General Theory of Relativity discovered by Einstein tells us that the
familiar, everyday force of gravity is a manifestation of something much
stranger: the bending of the geometry of space-time by matter. Among the key
predictions of the theory is the existence of gravitational waves (GW): ripples
moving at the speed of light in the geometry of space-time caused by the fast
motion of large masses. Although well tested in terms of their indirect effects
on binary systems of compact stars, the direct detection of gravitational waves
incident on Earth poses an outstanding challenge. The scientific rewards from
achieving this ability would be enormous - ranging from probing the extreme
dynamics of exploding stars to gleaning information about the state of the
Universe almost at the moment of the Big Bang itself. The effort to enable this
new window on the universe has occupied several decades of experimental and
technological developments that have pushed the boundaries across diverse fields
in the physical sciences. When the Advanced Laser Interferometric Gravitational
Wave Observatory (aLIGO) reaches designed sensitivity as scheduled, the burst of
radiation that may become the first detection of gravitational waves is already
closer to the Earth than the closest star, Alfa Centauri. The gravitational
waves in this first detection, and others following soon after, were very likely
produced during the merger of binary systems involving black holes and/or
neutron stars. There is realistic optimism that, at the turn of the decade,
enough of these and other sources will be observed to state with confidence that
proper observational gravitational wave physics has arrived. This will of course
depend on having in place exquisite interferometric engineering, clever analysis
of extremely noisy data, and state of the art source modeling. Regarding the
latter, it is imperative to continue exploiting the tools of numerical
relativity to model not only as many gravitational wave source scenarios as
possible, but also to improve the physics content captured by the simulations.
The science in this project supports directly this enterprise, namely numerical
relativity modeling to enhance our understanding of sources of gravitational
radiation and of gravitational phenomena driving electromagnetic signatures. The
proposed research will have an impact beyond the confines of gravitational wave
physics and numerical relativity. Achieving success in the multi-messenger,
computing, and data-analytics projects in this project necessitates an
interdisciplinary environment reaching across astrophysics, computing science
and even engineering. The Center for Relativistic Astrophysics at Georgia Tech
will be capable of providing such an environment since its mission is to foster
research and education linking high-energy astrophysics, astro-particle physics,
cosmology and gravitational wave physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research focused on the computational modeling of black holes and
neutron stars as sources of gravitational radiation. The proposal considers
several projects that involve astrophysics with a common denominator -- the
crucial role played by dynamical gravity and the curvature of space-time. The
astrophysical phenomena in these projects arise from a marriage between general
relativistic gravitation and complex multi-physics involving fluid flows,
electromagnetic fields, radiation transport and realistic equations of state.
The effort also aims at enhancing our comprehensive understanding of
astrophysical phenomena beyond what gravitational waves alone will be able to
tell, in other words, electromagnetic and gravitational wave phenomena leading
to multi-messenger observations. The research is organized into two areas: 1)
Compact object binaries and a sandbox of simulation data; and 2) Tidal stellar
disruptions by massive black holes. The proposed work will give postdocs and
students the opportunity to interact with researchers in computing science and
engineering, to develop and implement numerical algorithms for magneto-
hydrodynamics, work with large data sets and to participate in a variety of
outreach activities. The experience gained in high performance computing,
optimization, data analytics, and software engineering will further the careers
of young researchers participating in the effort, acquiring valuable skills that
are in demand in a broad range of professions.