* 1505861
* Support of LIGO Data Analysis Activities at the University of Texas at Brownsville
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Joseph Romano, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The General Theory of Relativity discovered by Einstein tells us that the
familiar, everyday force of gravity is a manifestation of something much
stranger: the bending of the geometry of space-time by matter. Among the key
predictions of the theory, which includes the expanding Universe and the
existence of black holes, is the existence of gravitational waves (GW): ripples
moving at the speed of light in the geometry of space-time caused by the fast
motion of large masses. Although well tested in terms of their indirect effects
on binary systems of compact stars, the direct detection of gravitational waves
incident on Earth poses an outstanding challenge. The scientific rewards from
achieving this ability would be enormous - ranging from probing the extreme
dynamics of exploding stars to gleaning information about the state of the
Universe almost at the moment of the Big Bang itself. The effort to enable this
new window on the universe has occupied several decades of experimental and
technological developments that have pushed the boundaries across diverse fields
in the physical sciences. The year 2015 will mark a highly-anticipated watershed
moment for gravitational-wave physics: The two advanced Laser Interferomenter
Gravitational Wave Observatory (aLIGO) detectors will start their initial data
taking runs, followed by the commissioning of the advanced Virgo gravitational
wave observatory in Europe. The sensitivity of the aLIGO detector will be ramped
up to become about ten times better than that of the first-generation detectors,
opening up a spatial volume for observing GW sources that will be 1000 times
larger than before. Along with these tremendous advances in instrumentation, it
has been known from the very inception of the gravitational wave physics effort
that the envelope of statistical data analysis techniques must also be pushed
further to enable the detection of weak and rare signals embedded in noise. It
is in this area that the research funded by this grant will make significant
contributions. By supporting graduate students, this grant will help to grow the
community of researchers in this field. Since the University of Texas at
Brownsville (UTB) is an Hispanic serving institution, the research activities
will expose students who are traditionally under-represented in STEM areas to
forefront science. Ongoing major education and outreach activities at UTB will
leverage these activities to create awareness among high-school students about
exciting projects such as LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports
research projects in the following major data analysis areas. (i) An algorithm
will be developed and implemented that allows the construction of sky maps of an
anisotropic background of stochastic gravitational waves with minimal prior
assumptions. Using methods originally developed in the context of pulsar-timing-
based gravitational-wave searches, the new approach will vastly extend the
capabilities of existing model-dependent searches. A Bayesian alternative to the
standard frequentist stochastic search will also be developed that will leverage
existing code for Bayesian inference in the context of detector characterization
and noise estimation. (ii) A smoothness-regularization-based coherent network
analysis method will be implemented that significantly improves the detection
and characterization of burst gravitational wave signals having non-compact
time-frequency (TF) signatures. Such signals are expected to arise in a variety
of astrophysical scenarios but are known to pose a significant challenge to
existing methods. (iii) A new method, derived from the Harmonic Regeneration
Noise Reduction (HRNR) technique developed in acoustical signal processing, will
be integrated with existing network analysis pipelines to boost their
sensitivity to post-core-bounce-phase supernova signals. By improving both
signal waveform and sky location estimation, this will lead to better multi-
messenger follow up of such a rare but dramatic event. (iv) The characterization
of detector noise and non-gravitational wave signals ("glitches") in the data is
necessary for improving detection confidence for genuine gravitational-wave
signals. In this context, the Self Organizing Map (SOM) method will be used for
instrumental glitch classification, and glitch characteristics relevant to aLIGO
will be catalogued. An independent approach will use the BayesWave Bayesian
inference pipeline to identify and study glitch signals.