* 1505962
* I-Corps:  The Domestic Violence Treatment Knowledge Bank
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Briana Barocas, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The United States (US) leads the way in formulating theories, court practices,
and treatments to combat the epidemic of domestic violence (broadly defined to
include abusive behavior perpetrated against an intimate partner or by a family
member against another). Despite these efforts, violence against intimate
partners or family members remains widespread. Every state in the US currently
criminalizes domestic violence and most courts rely on Batterer Intervention
Programs (BIPs) as their primary intervention to address this crime. However,
high recidivism rates among offenders who have completed BIPs points to a need
for further innovation in this field. Many states in the US now allow providers
to offer alternative treatment approaches for domestic violence crimes, and
victims and perpetrators across the country are seeking these treatment options
both in and out of court. Yet courts and service providers lack the necessary
resources to respond to this demand. Few, if any, services collect and present
information about domestic violence treatment approaches in an accessible, user-
friendly format. This I-Corps team will develop a digital knowledge bank on the
implementation, service provision, and evaluation of domestic violence treatment
programs with a primary focus on perpetrators and a secondary goal of addressing
the needs of victims. This service has the potential to improve the overall
quality of service provision for domestic violence perpetrators and victims in
terms of psychological wellbeing, client satisfaction, and recidivism rates, by
increasing the understanding and accessibility of alternative, empirically
informed treatment options.

The proposed service would provide customers (judges and service providers -
both agencies and individuals in private practice) with the practical
information needed to introduce new treatment options into their communities.
More specifically, the service will include: 1) The latest research and
reference materials on domestic violence treatment in a simple format; 2) A list
of treatment options available across the country and the relevant resources for
contacting those programs; 3) Educational resources and online training modules
on alternative treatment approaches; 4) Networking services to facilitate
interaction between the various groups providing services to perpetrators and
victims; 5) A state-by-state analysis of the relevant laws, ensuring that
perpetrators that are court mandated to treatment satisfy state legal
requirements and that any new proposed innovations are consistent with state
law. The proposed service would enable customers to access and exchange crucial
information that is presently both scattered and difficult to access. As it is
digital, this service will enable the exchange of information across geographic
boundaries and allow clients to access information and training materials from
any remote location. The service would promote and foster alternative treatment
approaches for addressing domestic violence that are safe and potentially more
effective than the standard treatment option offered in each state, bridging the
gap between domestic violence research and practice.