* 1505407
* Research Initiation Award: Improving Molecular-Based Research Skills While Investigating the Biodiversity of Parasites in Raptors to Better Understand Transmission Processes
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Alexa von Dohlen, Johnson C. Smith University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 233,942.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Johnson C. Smith University (JCSU)
will conduct research aimed at understanding the biodiversity of parasites in
birds of prey. This project will be used to enhance teaching and learning at
JCSU and thus, help motivate underrepresented minority students to pursue
graduate studies and careers in biological sciences. The research and
educational efforts will contribute to the University's goal to increase the
number of minority students receiving BS degrees in STEM fields. In addition,
this project will help JCSU continue to build its reputation as an urban HBCU
capable of producing professionally ready graduates and those that are well-
prepared to manage graduate school.

The goal of the proposed study is to examine the biodiversity of encysted
protozoans in raptors and to begin to unravel the lifecycles of Sarcocystis
species that use raptors as definitive hosts. The specific aims of this project
are to: 1) Determine the prevalence of encysted protozoans from the muscles of
naturally infected raptors by histological and molecular methods; and 2) Collect
intestinal tracts from raptors containing Sarcocystis oocysts & sporocysts and
determine the presence of S. calchasi by bioassay in cockatiels, Nymphicus
hollandicus. This study has the potential to identify new avian infective and
potentially pathogenic species. The findings from this study will improve
knowledge of the species of protozoan parasites infecting raptors. This project
will be conducted in collaboration with the Carolina Raptor Center and Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University.