* 1505000
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling Cerebral Connectivity with Diffusion MRI, Microscopy and Statistical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Douglas Rosene, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,067,697.00

A better understanding of the relationship between brain structure and function
is an integral component of the on-going efforts aimed at developing a better
understanding of the human mind. Fundamental research is required to accelerate
the development of new technologies for neuroscience and near engineering in
order to address important societal needs with respect to the development of new
ways to treat, prevent, and cure brain disorders. In this larger context, this
collaborative project will extend methods of statistical physics to bridge from
microscopic neurobiological observations of neurons, axons and dendrites to the
mesoscopic images of brain organization seen in diffusion MRI images of the
entire primate brain. A particular focus will be to address the question of how
the processes of the brain might exploit this special architecture for the
representation and processing of information, and in particular, how this
regular structure might support time-coding and synchronization of information
across the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joining a physics laboratory, a
neurobiology laboratory, and an MRI laboratory, this team will investigates the
hypothesis that brain connectivity is geometrically organized, with connectivity
generally aligned with the axes of a curved, but essentially orthogonal
coordinate system or 3D grid. The idea that the brain of all species with
bilateral symmetry is based on an orthogonal plan is not new. It has been
recognized in embryology and evolutionary biology for nearly 100 years and more
recently has been validated in detail in studies of gene expression. Preliminary
studies have suggested that this orthogonal motif pervades the structure of the
brain, and particularly connectivity, from macroscopic down to a cellular level.
In this interdisciplinary project, the investigators will quantify this
phenomenon by looking at structural data from both diffusion MRI and advanced
methods of 3D light microscopy and then apply the ideas and tools of condensed
matter physics to characterize the structure and circuits of the brain as
organized matter. As a first example, having observed 3 orthogonal fiber
directions at each point in the brain that vary smoothly, it is natural to model
this as a liquid crystal with a deformation energy and temperature. Then, one
can investigate its scaling in the brain, and transitions such as those from
white matter to gray matter. Functionally, we hypothesize that this rectilinear
grid, may provide a new mechanism for neural activity to be temporally
correlated, owing to its extremely high degeneracy of path lengths and
transmission delays, which we will model as a directed percolation.