* 1505541
* Collaborative Research:   Routine Formation in Organizations: Theory and Experimental Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2014,02/28/2017
* John Duffy, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 02/28/2017
* USD 42,630.00

Organizational routines are persistent sequential interaction patterns among the
members of an organization. Such routines are believed to be responsible for the
efficiency advantages of organizations as structures for collective decision-
making. Nevertheless, to date there has been little formal modeling or evidence
collected as to how organizational routines emerge, endure and adapt to change.
This project proposes an agenda for studying the emergence, maintenance,
adaptability and optimality of organizational routines that combines game
theoretic analysis with experimental evidence. The baseline model is a novel but
simple "harvesting game" wherein teams of agents repeatedly harvest a grid over
several periods with full information about all past choices. The team's goal is
to uncover as many novel outcomes on the grid as possible in the time allowed
but without the ability to communicate with one another. The absence of
communication proxies for specialization by team members that makes
communication difficult or for settings where communication is impractical, for
example during an emergency response. In such environments there are easily
identifiable optimal routines and this study examines both theoretically and
experimentally which routines emerge, how long it takes them to emerge, whether
they are stable once they emerge, and if agents make short-run sacrifices in the
interest of promoting the emergence of optimal routines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will build upon and extend the baseline
model by studying routine formation in variants where 1) there is no information
about past choices, 2) the complexity of the decision task is increased, 3) more
players are added, 4) some players have private, payoff-relevant information
that may naturally position them as team leaders and 5) players have the ability
to communicate with one another prior to making their harvesting decisions. The
new framework will broaden understanding of how members of organizations learn
to form routines in a variety of different environments that are all amenable to
theoretical and experimental evaluation. Thus will bring game-theoretic analysis
and rigor to the organizational routine literature which to date has been
studied using the methods of psychology and organizational behavior researchers.
The game-theoretic framework allows one to assess the extent and source of
deviations in routine formation from the rational choice ideal so that there is
a better understanding of the role played by bounded rationality in routine
formation. In addition, data on organizational routines are difficult to measure
or observe -- the experimental tests proposed using the methods of experimental
economics, where subjects earn payments based on their own choices and the
choices of other members of their same team, provides an excellent framework in
which to study organizational routines. The experimental designs, programs, data
and findings resulting from this proposal will be made freely available so that
other researchers can build upon the new framework and instructors can teach
this new approach to organizational routines in the classroom.