* 1505961
* Physics with New Molecular Systems: Quantum Interactions, Cooling, and Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* John Doyle, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

Atoms are the basic building blocks of nature and their behavior is governed by
a microscopic theory of matter called quantum mechanics. Our understanding of
nearly everything we see in nature relies on quantum mechanics as applied to
atoms and their close cousins, molecules (two or more atoms stuck together by a
chemical bond). From humans and other living things to computers and the
internet, physical systems can be explained only by knowing how atoms and
molecules behave in detail. Yet, although quantum mechanics has been very
successful in describing very simple atomic systems, we do not yet know how to
apply the theory quantitatively to describe all the phenomena that we see. In
particular, to invent new technological and biological substances, we need to
understand the quantum mechanics of atoms and molecules better. The eventual
goal of much of physics (including atomic physics) is to have a complete
understanding of all matter and the tools to invent new types of matter. This
project is a step toward developing a detailed quantum understanding of the
interactions between atoms and molecules in a gas at a very low temperature.
When cooled, the quantum nature of atoms and molecules is greatly amplified,
exposing its nature to careful study.

The essential experimental approach to this work is to use magnetic trapping of
atoms and molecules to study their collisions using laser spectroscopy. The
technical method will be to use buffer-gas cooling to form a beam of atoms and
molecules, which will be optically pumped into magnetically trapped states as
they pass through the trapping region. Half the molecules in the beam are
originally in the low-field-seeking quantum state. These molecules lose energy
as they approach the magnetic field maximum of the trap, where they will be
optically pumped into their high-field-seeking state. These molecules then
continue to lose energy as they travel toward the trap center. Near the trap
center lasers pump the molecules into their trapped state. Only two photons are
scattered in this process and this (along with energy loss as the molecules pass
through the trap) leads to irreversible trap loading. We will trap molecules of
calcium monofluoride and other small molecules into a magnetic trap using this
method. Atoms can also be co-loaded with molecules, at high enough density for
evaporative cooling. We will co-load lithium and/or potassium atoms and study
collisions between them and the trapped molecules, testing molecular theory and
investigating a route toward ultracold molecules using sympathetic cooling.
Spectroscopy will reveal both the state distribution of the molecules, as well
as their number and temperature. Investigation of trap loss can be used to study
spin-relaxation collisions (for which there is detailed theory for some atom-
molecule pairs). The longer term goal of this work is to enable observation of
exchange of energy and other phenomena in increasingly complex atom-molecule
collisions, starting with diatomic and triatomic molecules. This will add to our
fundamental understanding of nature and help science to design new physical
systems and new tools for chemistry and biology.