* 1505557
* Accurate Methods for Ultracold Reactions with Product Quantum State Resolution
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Balakrishnan Naduvalath, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

Ultracold molecules offer unprecedented opportunities for high-resolution
molecular spectroscopy, quantum information processing, and controlled
interrogation of molecular events, including chemical reactivity in the ultimate
quantum regime. A quantitative description of their collisions and interactions
requires a quantum mechanical approach, but it is computationally challenging
for many molecules of interest to current cooling and trapping experiments. The
primary difficulty is the proliferation in the number of quantum states and
degrees of freedom to be included in the calculations and the sensitivity of
results to both short-range and long-range intermolecular forces. This work will
develop new theoretical and computational tools that go beyond existing models
for the treatment of chemical reactions at temperatures below 1 degree Kelvin.
It will significantly enhance theoretical capabilities for the description of
chemical reactions at cold and ultracold temperatures and provide an efficient
tool for quantized studies of chemical reactions at low temperatures. The
proposed research transcends disciplinary boundaries, and the computational
algorithms developed will also be equally applicable to molecular processes in
diverse environments ranging from atmospheric chemistry to astrophysics. Funding
of this project will also contribute to future workforce development in Science
and Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with the development of
accurate and efficient methods to study chemical reactions and energy transfer
in cold molecular collisions. The full Close-Coupling (CC) method will continue
to be developed and optimized. A hybrid method that uses full CC at short range
and Multi-Channel Quantum Defect Theory (MQDT) at long range will also be
developed and benchmarked. These methods will be applied to a number of
reactions including F + H2 and OH + H. In addition, the PI will explore the
importance of the geometric phase in chemical reaction dynamics using the O + OH
reaction at the ultracold limit as a illustrative case.