* 1505592
* UNS: Purification of plasmid DNA using enhanced ultrafiltration systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Andrew Zydney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 314,014.00

1505592 (Zydney)

The overall objective of the proposed research is to develop enhanced membrane
processes for the purification of supercoiled plasmid DNA, the biologically
active form of DNA of interest in therapeutic applications. Experiments will be
designed to develop and test novel membranes with unique pore structures
specifically designed to elongate the DNA and enhance the overall separation. In
addition, small molecules that are known to selectively bind to DNA will be used
to fine tune the separation characteristics by altering the elongational
flexibility of the DNA molecules. These results will provide fundamental
insights and practical guidelines for the development of membrane systems for
purification of supercoiled DNA for therapeutic applications.

The proposed research will address both of these issues through: (a) the
development and testing of membranes with tapered or gradient pore morphologies
that can effectively pre-stretch the DNA and thus minimize DNA trapping at the
entrance to the small pores, and (b) the use of selective binding ligands to
alter the elongation flexibility and thus enhance the separation between
different plasmid isoforms. Membranes with tapered (conical) pores will be
produced by differential etching of tracked polycarbonate membranes. Membranes
with gradient morphologies will be produced by electrospun nanofibers or by
layering membranes with different pore size characteristics into an effective
composite membrane. Initial experiments will be performed with solutions of the
individual plasmid isoforms, using a series of plasmids with different numbers
of base pairs. Experimental results will be analyzed using available theoretical
models for polymer elongation, appropriately extended to account for the tapered
pore structure. Actual plasmid separations will be performed using linearly-
scalable filtration modules operated in a diafiltration mode, with feed and
permeate samples analyzed using both agarose gel electrophoresis and affinity
chromatography. These studies will provide fundamental insights into the effects
of DNA elongation on membrane pore structure and separation as well as practical
guidelines for the development of membrane systems for purification of
supercoiled DNA for therapeutic applications. In addition, the proposed research
program will provide graduate and undergraduate students with hands-on
experience dealing with membrane processes and biomolecule purification, skills
that are critically needed to support the efforts of the U.S. biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries.