* 1505058
* PERKS: Power Electronics Refined learning via affordable Kit and Software tutor
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Robert Olsen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2018
* USD 249,995.00

Power electronics is an enabling technology for the smart power grid. However,
students often struggle in power electronics courses because it requires mastery
and simultaneous application of concepts from several earlier courses. To
address this educational challenge, the objectives of this project at Washington
State University (WSU) include designing (i) a software tutor to help students
translate visual information (circuit diagrams) to written information
(equations) and analyze a power electronic converter circuit and (ii) an all-in-
one low cost prototype circuit kit for hands-on experimentation with power
electronic converters that run off the USB port of a laptop without needing
extra equipment. These boards promote an anywhere, anytime, living-with-the-
laboratory paradigm. This work makes electrical engineering students more
employable by making them competent in an area where many graduates struggle.
The designs and prototype products developed with this project have the
potential to reach students in universities worldwide through collaboration with
an extensive commercial distribution network. Four universities (WSU, Georgia
Institute of Technology, University of Idaho, and University of Manitoba) will
implement and utilize the developed curricular material in their power
electronic courses, with a total expected enrollment of 150 students per year.
The outcomes of this project are not only of interest to the power electronics
education community, but they also pave the road for developing similar tools
for other multidisciplinary courses. The accessible web-based nature of the
developed material can affect a broad population.

The products of this project support a visual learning style, the preferred
learning style of many engineering students, thereby increasing their
understanding and ultimately, their retention. The software tool developed in
this project uses an interactive well-established pedagogical approach
(scaffolding) to improve student learning and problem solving skills.
Scaffolding provides students with a template and dynamic feedback to assist
them in their early stages of learning. As a result, student self-confidence
will improve, which is expected to improve students' choice of careers in power
engineering. This project will be transformative because it develops a novel
approach that mixes scaffolding, visual learning, and formative feedback to
transform power electronics education into a significantly more engaging
experience. An external evaluator will gauge the effectiveness of the developed
material in overcoming conceptual difficulties and improving students' attitudes
toward power electronics. A mixed-methods approach that emphasizes qualitative
understandings supplemented by quantitative data will be used, including a
within-subjects experimental design. In addition to the collection of background
information (e.g., gender) and baseline measures (e.g., prior knowledge and
motivation and attitude toward power electronics), the students will be given
two sets of problems with similar difficulty levels and asked to solve them with
and without the scaffold provided by the software tutor. Students' approaches to
problem solving will be recorded and analyzed quantitatively, e.g. completion
time, correctness of subcircuits, correctness of equations, and correctness of
the final solution. Pre- and post-assessment tests of the students' technical
knowledge will be administered and student responses on homework assignments,
mid-term tests, and final exams will also be analyzed.