* 1505066
* Crossing the Threshold by Supporting Writing Transfer as Engaged Learning in Introductory Engineering Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Wendy Olson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,613.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project conducted at
Washington State University Vancouver will help to improve the writing ability
of engineering students. The project will focus on facilitating transfer of
writing skills developed in first-year English composition classes into
engineering courses. Writing is a critical skill needed by engineers and an
ability frequently cited by industry as area in which graduates need
improvement. The goal of this exploratory project is to investigate how an
approach focusing on writing transfer enhances students' writing in technical
courses.

The project will investigate the writing practices of engineering students as
they move from first-year composition (FYC) courses into introductory
engineering laboratory courses. The project will utilize a writing approach that
emphasizes genre awareness rather than a traditional modes approach. Also
included will be training for faculty and teaching assistants that introduces
rhetorical approaches to writing and teaching for transfer. Analysis will
include quantitative and qualitative data to inform the impact of the
instructional modules as an effective intervention to support student learning.
Key questions include identification of evidence of transfer of engineering
students' rhetorical writing knowledge from first year composition into
introductory engineering laboratory courses; and how knowledge of transfer
mechanisms can inform pedagogical approaches and strategies to improve writing.
The project is based on preliminary results which indicate a substantial
percentage of engineering students do not improve in any rhetorical aspects
(invention, rhetoric awareness, arrangement, and style) except convention, which
is more related to disciplinary knowledge rather than rhetorical knowledge. This
suggests that familiarity with the rhetorical characteristics of genre may be
more productive than the traditional case study approach often employed in
engineering writing instruction. Given the ubiquity of first-year English
composition classes, the results of this work have the potential to be broadly
applicable across undergraduate STEM education.