* 1505950
* Tuning the Photovoltaic Performance of Benzodithiophene and Benzodifuran Polymeric Semiconductors by Molecular Design
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Mihaela Stefan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 239,996.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new technologies
that exploit the potential of renewable energy sources such as solar power is
currently one of the most targeted research directions. Polymer solar cells
developed in the PI's research group at the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD)
are being explored as feasible alternatives for low cost, lightweight, large
area, and flexible solar panels. The proposed research will aim toward the
synthesis and characterization of novel organic semiconducting polymeric
materials with good performance in organic solar cells. Its overall objective is
to establish a correlation between structure and opto-electronic properties for
new types of semiconducting polymers. This award will support the
interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students at the
interface between chemistry, materials science, and semiconductor technologies.
Other broader educational and diversity-enhancing impacts include mentoring of
high school students over a one-year period to complete a science and
engineering project. The PI is also participating in a highly successful program
at UTD which gives high-school students the opportunity to participate in summer
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will allow the PI to extend and
consolidate the interdisciplinary research and education program at the
interface between polymer chemistry, materials science, and semiconductor
technologies which she started through an NSF CAREER award. The overall
objective of the proposed research is to establish a structure / opto-electronic
properties correlation for benzodithiophene and benzodifuran donor-acceptor
semiconducting polymers. Benzodithiophene and benzodifuran will be employed as
building blocks for the synthesis of donor-acceptor polymers with tunable opto-
electronic properties. The planned research program targets the synthesis of the
monomers and their corresponding polymers, followed by their structural,
morphological and opto-electronic characterization and the testing of the
materials in bulk heterojunction solar cells. The experimental data obtained
from solar cell testing will be used to fine-tune the structures of donor-
acceptor semiconducting polymers. The research program will have a broadly
integrated approach, where students will gain expertise in organic/polymer
synthesis, characterization, and solar cell fabrication and testing. The PI will
capitalize on prior experience in polymer science and organic electronics, but
also expand skills in morphological characterization of the active layer of bulk
heterojunction solar cells. The PI's research program will be tightly integrated
with an education component by training graduate and undergraduate students who
will develop expertise in organic/polymer chemistry, thin-film characterization,
and solar-cell fabrication and testing. It will also be coupled with an outreach
and diversity-enhancement program toward high-school students.