* 1505881
* PACIFIC Symposium September 14-20, 2015 at the University of California Gump Station, Moorea, French Polynesia.
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Alexander Kusenko, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide participant support for early career scientists and
graduate students to participate in the PACIFIC ?Particle Astrophysics and
Cosmology Including Fundamental InteraCtions? 2015 Symposium. It will be held
September 14-20, 2015 at the University of California Richard B. Gump South
Pacific Research Station, located on the island of Moorea in French Polynesia.
The title reflects the scope of the conference, which will target the rapidly
developing field at the interface of particle physics, astrophysics, and
cosmology. Thanks to the ample new data and a plethora of theoretical ideas, the
field of astro-particle physics has become the source of excitement and
discoveries. The symposium will bringing together researchers from the United
States, Asia, Australia, South America, and Europe. This symposium will focus on
the latest developments at the interface of particle physics, astrophysics, and
cosmology and on their ramifications for understanding fundamental interactions,
providing students and early career scientists an opportunity to both become
aware of the latest developments and become acquainted with the global community
in the field.

For Broader Impacts, the NSF support provided through this award has a
particular focus on early career scientists and graduate students. To make the
symposium more accessible to the general public, the organizers have also
integrated a public lecture by one of the symposium speakers into the schedule.