* 1505875
* Quantum Effects for Black Holes and Analog Black Holes and the Validity of the Semiclassical Approximation
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Paul Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 136,660.00

Phenomena relating to microscopic (quantum) effects which occur during and after
the formation of a black hole will be studied. The results will test predictions
made using simple models in which the black hole exists in one space dimension
and may provide insight into the important question of what happens to the
information about how a black hole forms. If a system of very cold atoms called
a Bose-Einstein condensate has its properties configured correctly, then quantum
effects will occur which are in some important ways similar to those which occur
for black holes. The difference is that Bose-Einstein condensates can be studied
in the laboratory. An investigation of such systems will be made with the goal
of making predictions for effects that could be observed in the laboratory. The
validity of an important approximation called the semiclassical approximation
that is used as a bridge between macroscopic (classical) and microscopic
(quantum) phenomena will be studied in two cases. One is the effect of particle
production on the dynamics of the universe for an important model in which the
universe begins by contracting and later expands. The other is for the effect of
particle production on a strong electric field. One or more graduate students
and probably some undergraduates will participate in some aspects of the
research, continuing a long history of their training in numerical and
analytical research techniques and co-authorship on publications.

The research proposed will investigate questions related to the information
about how a black hole forms; the existence of quantum effects in analog black
hole systems related to the existence of a horizon, which can be observed in
laboratory studies; and the validity of the semi-classical approximation in
certain cases where quantum effects are significant. In the case of black hole
evaporation the objectives include determining the importance of quantum effects
in the interior of a black hole and investigating the details of particle
production in the exterior region during gravitational collapse to form a black
hole, in order to gain insight into the question of what happens to the
information about how a black hole forms and to check the accuracy of similar
calculations in two dimensional dilaton theories of gravity. For Bose-Einstein
condensates, which can serve as analogs for black holes, the goal is to
determine whether undulations or other new observable effects that require the
existence of a horizon are predicted to occur. The validity of the semiclassical
approximation will be studied for one important model (de Sitter space) in which
the contraction is to a minimum size and is followed by an expansion. Numerical
computations of the stress-energy of quantum fields will be made in the black
hole and cosmological investigations and in the cosmological case the
backreaction on the spacetime geometry will be computed.