* 1505569
* Biological Cell Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Seok (Andy) Yun, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract Title: Biological cell lasers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Since the first laser human ever made was demonstrated
a half century ago, numerous types of lasers have been developed and made a
tremendous impact on modern science and technology. In medicine and biology,
various lasers have been adopted and being applied. For example, lasers allow
physicians to remove diseased tissues, seal damaged areas with high precision,
and activate drugs in specific target organs for treatments. In all these cases,
lasers are commonly used as devices and instruments that are separate from the
patients. The goal of the proposed research is to invent a new type of laser
that is made biologically compatible and readily amenable to living organisms
and human body. Such bio-lasers can be integrated into the biological systems
and thereby have a potential to offer new ways of using laser light in
biomedical sensing and diagnosis, as well as therapy. This project also provides
the opportunity to educate and train graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
in the highly vibrant and multidisciplinary environment at the Wellman Center
for Photomedicine. The graduate students and undergraduate students will have
the opportunity to participate in this project, learn how to work across
boundaries between disciplines through creativity and inspiration, and present
their research in a conference, with support from this project. The outcome of
this project is expected to inspire the general public, particularly children,
and make them aware of the far-reaching impact and joy of science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The previous NSF funding led to the first
biological laser based on single human cells or bacteria. This proposed project
will push the envelop of the field to the next significant level, with two
specific aims to develop (1) microfluidic cell laser-on-a-chip with high
controllability and high throughput for applications to intracellular sensing
and cytometry and (2) stand-alone cell lasers that are operational in tissue
without external cavities. This project continues to explore the new territory
in the field of laser and show how the unique properties of cell lasers can be
harnessed to develop novel photonic devices and technologies. The experimental
approach is highly interdisciplinary as it brings together physical and
biological sciences and engineering. This work will increase our understanding
about the design, operation, and applications of cell lasers, and points to a
way to realize "living laser", where all three basic elements, i.e.
amplification, resonance, and pumping, are achieved with biological materials in
vivo. The intrinsically biocompatible cell laser has the potential to make a
transformative impact on the way light is used in biomedical applications. For
example, lasing within the tissues and inside the cells may offer new
possibilities of intracellular sensing and nonlinear microscopy for biological
analysis and medical diagnosis. The ability to generate laser light in vivo may
enable new approaches in light-controlled therapy and drug activation.