* 1505970
* AF: Medium: Collaborative research:  Advanced algorithms and high-performance software for large scale eigenvalue problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Yousef Saad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 06/30/2019
* USD 360,690.00

Scientists and engineers in areas ranging from physics, chemistry, computer
science, to economics, and statistics focus considerable attention on computing
"eigenvalues" and "eigenvectors" of matrices. They are central to the study of
vibrations when building earthquake-resistant structures, to energy computation
in solid-state physics, and to ranking web search results. In spite of the
enormous progress that has been made in the last few decades in solution methods
for large eigenvalue problems, the current state-of-the-art methods remains
unsatisfactory when dealing with the new generation of problems that need tens
of thousands of eigenvectors for matrices that can have sizes in the tens of
millions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years a new class of techniques has
emerged that can compute wanted eigenpairs of large matrices by parts. In these
methods, 'windows' or 'slices' of the spectrum can be computed independently of
one another and orthogonalization between eigenvectors in different slices is no
longer necessary. When the number of eigenpairs to be computed is very large
this divide-and-conquer approach becomes mandatory because orthogonalizing very
large bases is prohibitive. The resulting interior eigenvalue problems arise in
a number of other situations and are now considered by the linear algebra
community to be among the most challenging numerical problems to solve, and
solution methods for handling them are still lagging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to advance the state of the art in solution methods for
interior eigenvalue problems. The main thrust of the project is the development
of novel algorithms based on a combination of Krylov or block-Krylov projection
techniques and complex rational filters. A starting point in this investigation
is the FEAST approach. This project addresses many interesting questions in
several areas, starting with methodologies for solving eigenvalue problems, to
approximation theory questions for designing rational filter functions, and
ending with effective parallel implementations. Methods based on a domain
decomposition framework will also be considered to deal with the common
situation where the matrix (or pair of matrices in the generalized case) is
(are) distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project highlight the impact on training, the dissemination of new efficient
software, and the use of the software by-products in specific applications. All
general-purpose codes that are developed under this project will be freely
distributed into the public domain. This project will have an impact on the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in a field that is vital to the
needs of academia, industry, and government laboratories.