* 1505309
* WSC-Category 1: Decision Processes, Climate Change, and Water Resources in the Agricultural Midwest
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Adam Ward, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 599,383.00

Covering approximately 40% of the world's landscape, modern agriculture feeds a
growing human population and has undeniable impact on Earth's water system.
Agriculture affects the supply of clean water to support human activities and
ecosystems. A changing climate is a further compounding factor that directly
impacts agricultural practices and consequently water quality and quantity. This
research will quantify how decision-making by agricultural land managers is
influenced by local governance organizations, such as Watershed Management
Authorities, and will model the impact of these organizations on water quality
and quantity. The research team will construct numerical models to examine the
consequences of future scenarios of climate, land management, and land use.
Model results will be made accessible to focus groups on a web-based platform,
and decision-making forums. To inform future planning, the research team will
develop narratives about the social-economic drivers and model-based
consequence, strategies for involving governance organizations, advocacy groups,
and the general public in policy decisions. This project will integrate teaching
and research through the Iowa Initiative for Sustainable Communities. The public
will be engaged through decision-making forums and by crowdsourcing hydrologic
data. Outcomes from this research will inform local decision making through
partnerships with Watershed Management Authorities and directly sharing results
with state legislators in multiple forums. A web-based interface will be created
for stakeholders to interact with data and models, which is an experiment that
can be extended to other regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall scientific
objective of this research is to project future scenarios for the agricultural
Midwest given changes in climate, land management practices, and local
governance. The central hypothesis poses that water resource governance
structure and economic concerns supersede changes in climate, flooding, drought,
or water quality in influencing land management practices and resultant
environmental outcomes. The specific research plan includes quantifying how land
management activities affect human and environmental outcomes under a changing
climate, assessing the influence of watershed governance in the decision-making
process by agricultural land managers, and identifying future scenarios for the
region in response to changes in land management and climate.