* 1505114
* Nanostructure Synthesis at the Liquid-Substrate Interface: A New Strategy for Obtaining Plasmonic and Chemically Active Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Svetlana Neretina, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 12/31/2016
* USD 389,999.00

Non-technical Abstract The key enablers for transformative nanotechnologies are
breakthroughs in both the synthesis of nanomaterials and an understanding of the
chemistry and physics which guides their formation. Applications typically
require that the nanomaterials be suspended in liquids or immobilized on planar
substrates such as glass or silicon. While substrate-based nanostructure
synthesis techniques have undeniably given rise to an impressive list of
technologically relevant nanomaterials, the scope and scale of this success is
dwarfed by the many accomplishments of liquid-based syntheses. With financial
support from both the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program and the
Electronic and Photonic Materials program in the Division of Materials Research,
the research project aims to remedy this disparity through a new synthetic
strategy reliant on forming nanostructures on substrates while immersed in a
liquid medium. If proven successful, the approach will allow the solution-based
chemistry which has proved so successful to be practiced directly on substrates
and, in doing so, establish the science needed to support applications in
sensing, photovoltaics and catalysis. Research activities are being integrated
with undergraduate education through the supervision of summer undergraduate
research internships. Outreach initiatives are being directed toward the
matriculation of women into the Engineering profession.

Technical Abstract This research project seeks to determine whether synthetic
protocols reliant on seed-mediated colloidal chemistry are adaptable to a
substrate-based platform reliant on substrate-immobilized templates. The
overriding goal is to define the chemical controls and mechanistic framework
needed to form organized surfaces of noble metal nanostructures and then
establish their technological relevance by demonstrating the functionalities of
the plasmonic and chemically active surfaces formed. Three thrust areas
advancing additive, subtractive and multistage template-assisted growth modes,
which are reliant on heterogeneous nucleation and/or galvanic replacement
processes, are being used to isolate the exact roles played by the substrate,
reaction kinetics, pH, template material and template surface modifications in
determining the reaction product. Being targeted are synthetic protocols able to
define periodic arrays of: (i) core-shell structures with advanced
functionalities derived from the integration of materials with dissimilar
physical and chemical properties into a single nanostructure architecture, (ii)
caged nanostructures offering intense plasmonic near-fields and tunable spacings
between the nanostructure and its cage and (iii) substrate-based nanoframes
written into patterns with predetermined layouts. These synthetic trials,
combined with simulations and the use of characterization techniques which are
unique to the substrate-based platform, are providing the means to form
intricate nanostructures whose shape and composition are engineered to realize a
desired response.