* 1505422
* Breakthrough: Enhancing Privacy in Smart Buildings and Homes
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2019
* USD 502,524.00

The design of smart electric grids and buildings that automatically optimize
their energy generation and consumption is critical to advancing important
societal goals, including increasing energy-efficiency, improving the grid's
reliability, and gaining energy independence. To enable such optimizations,
smart grids and buildings increasingly rely on Internet-connected sensors in
smart devices, including digital electric meters, web-enabled appliances and
lighting, programmable outlets and switches, and intelligent HVAC systems.
However, a key barrier to the broad adoption of energy-related optimizations is
that prior work has shown that Internet-connected sensors inadvertently leak
sensitive private information about user behavior. For example, a high or
variable home energy usage typically correlates with a home being occupied. To
address the problem, this research will design low-cost, non-intrusive, privacy-
enhancing techniques that reduce the sensitive information leaked through smart
sensor-driven devices, while still permitting the sophisticated analytics,
control, and verification necessary to enable energy optimizations for smart
grids and buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research includes developing both
consumer- and utility-driven mechanisms to preserve sensor-data privacy. The
consumer-driven mechanisms leverage batteries, elastic appliances, noise
injection, and renewable energy sources to obfuscate private information in
externally visible energy usage data at low cost. The utility-driven mechanisms
leverage cryptographic techniques within the devices themselves to enable
utilities to implement critical electric grid optimizations, such as demand
response, time-of-use billing, and fault localization, without requiring
consumers to provide utilities, or other third-parties, with their raw sensor
data. The research also develops an approach to controllable privacy, which
enables users to control the amount of information smart devices leak to third
parties. In this case, consumers voluntarily use smart devices, which are able
to verify that consumers engage in some particular energy-efficient behavior
without directly revealing sensitive information. The research includes
implementing and evaluating the techniques in a prototype programmable building,
which includes programmable smart devices, batteries, and renewable energy
sources. The research and prototype provide awareness of smart grid privacy and
its implications on public policy, and contribute to both graduate courses on
smart grids and energy, as well as undergraduate research projects.