* 1505377
* Research Initiation Award: Effects of atomic-scale disorder on carrier transport in photovoltaic cells under concentrated sunlight
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrey Semichaevsky, Lincoln University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 216,756.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, has potential broader impact in a
number of areas. The goal of the project is to study carrier transport in
polycrystalline silicon solar cells and in solar cells that include low-
dimensional quantum dot structures under high incident optical power densities.
The research is expected to be an integral part in the development of a new
Engineering Science program at the university and will be linked to
undergraduate students' coursework and capstone research.

The carrier transport in disordered semiconductors, in particular in silicon,
when the optical illumination is varied, is not understood well, compared to
that in monocrystalline materials. This project proposes a new approach to
theoretical modeling of solar cells made of polycrystalline silicone and quantum
dot solar cells, which will combine existing theories of charge carrier dynamics
near grain boundaries with a computational method that is based on both
semiclassical Boltzmann and quantum mechanical wavepacket Monte Carlo methods.
The project will incorporate experimental data about the material microstructure
into the models and then compare the experimental and the computational
characterization results. The expected application is a better design of
inexpensive photovoltaic systems that use concentrated sunlight.