* 1505885
* Photochemical Strategies with Supramolecular Assistance to Monitor Cellular Dynamics in Living Organism
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Francisco Raymo, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 12/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

This project aims at the design and preparation of molecules that can be
transported to target locations in organisms and emit light only after
stimulation with an activating optical beam. Subsequent detection of the emitted
light offers the opportunity to locate the position of the activated molecules
in a sample of interest and follow their movements in real time. These light
emitters can ultimately become analytical tools for biological studies, such as
the tracking of moving cells during the growth of the organism, and contribute
valuable insights on organismal development. These fundamental studies in
chemistry may have implications in biology and medicine. Additionally, the
activities teach the participating undergraduate and graduate students how to
prepare molecules from commercial reagents, characterize their structures and
investigate their interactions with light. Furthermore, they contribute to
strengthening an existing educational collaboration between the laboratory of
the principal investigator at the University of Miami and a faculty member of
Miami-Dade College. This collaboration exposes high-school and undergraduate
students to research. Considering that both institutions have minority
enrollments in excess of 50%, these training opportunities may have a
significant educational impact on members of underrepresented groups.

The goal of this research is the development of biocompatible probes with
photoactivatable fluorescence in the deep-red and near-infrared regions of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Specifically, this project involves the synthesis of
molecules incorporating a fluorescent borondipyrromethene chromophore and a
photoswitchable oxazine auxochrome, together with their
photochemical/photophysical characterization and incorporation within polymer
nanoparticles. Upon illumination at an appropriate activation wavelength, the
photoinduced and irreversible opening of the oxazine heterocycle of these
compounds is expected to extend the electronic conjugation of the adjacent
borondipyrromethene chromophore. This structural transformation is designed to
bathochromically shift the main absorption band of the latter component and
allow its selective excitation at a suitable wavelength with concomitant
fluorescence. On the basis of these operating principles, the translocation of
the photochemical and emissive product, across a given sample of interest, can
then be probed in real time with the sequential acquisition of fluorescence
images. These light emitters can ultimately become analytical tools for
biological studies, such as the tracking of moving cells during the growth of
the organism, and contribute valuable insights on organismal development.