* 1505498
* Research Initiation Award: Mathematical model of the impact of social behavior in the transmission dynamics of HIV epidemics
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Aprillya Lanz, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 218,153.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at her home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Norfolk State University has potential broader impact in a number of
areas. The project will focus on constructing a mathematical model to
investigate the role of social behavior in the transmission dynamics of HIV
epidemics. The outcomes of this work can inform public health officials when
analyzing and determining the impact of social behavior in the transmission of
HIV epidemics. This project will also enhance the research experience and
training of undergraduate students at Norfolk State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on developing
mathematical models, in the form of deterministic systems of nonlinear
differential equations, to qualitatively and quantitatively analyze the role of
risky behavior on the transmission dynamics of HIV/AIDS in a population. Studies
have established a strong correlation between risky behavior and the acquisition
of HIV infection. Some of these behaviors are associated with substance abuse.
Although it is understood that there are different degrees or stages of
substance abuse, the impact of such heterogeneity on the overall disease
transmission process has not been rigorously studied. This project will
investigate these dynamics and their role in the transmission dynamics of
HIV/AIDS in a population. To achieve this objective, new realistic mathematical
models, which incorporate the essential features of HIV disease as well as the
dynamics of relevant risky behaviors, will be developed. These models, which
will be rigorously analyzed using techniques from nonlinear dynamical systems,
such as asymptotic stability and bifurcation theory, to gain insights into their
dynamical features, will be parametrized using available relevant public health
and demographic data. Detailed uncertainty and sensitivity analysis, using
suitable sampling techniques such as Latin Hypercube Sampling and Partial Rank
Correlation Coefficients, will be carried out on the parameters of the models to
assess the impact of uncertainty in the estimates of the parameter values used
in the simulations on the overall simulation results obtained, and determine the
most important parameters that drive the disease transmission process.