* 1505130
* Controlling Charge Transport of Organic Semiconductors and Molecules via Edge-On Gating Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Luping Yu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on synthesis of model
molecular transistors and investigation of their physical properties. The
research can help to find answers for the limitations faced in miniaturization
of electronic systems. Synthetic approaches to these molecular systems are shown
to be feasible and techniques for electric measurements on single molecules are
operational. Preliminary results indicate proper chemical functions can switch
electric current on and off, similar to functioning of transistors. With support
from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, this research team is pursuing extensive synthetic efforts
to prepare a series of new compounds with different structures and functions.
Theoretical studies are performed to calculate and understand the electric
properties of molecules. This project provides an excellent educational platform
for students, especially an effective incubator to encourage minority students
into a career path of scientific research. This project includes a plan for
recruiting these students. The proposed work is an interdisciplinary effort that
integrates chemistry, materials science, physics and nanoscience to explore new
science and materials, and requires extensive innovations in synthetic
approaches and applications of modern characterization techniques to gain
insight into the electronic properties of molecular materials. It thus offers a
broad spectrum of research and educational opportunities for students. Students
working in this program gain necessary knowledge and training to be future
leaders in the area of organic/material chemistry and organic electronic
materials. New materials generated can have potential impact on electronic
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This
project is aimed at synthesis of model molecular transistors based on cyclophane
building motif, and investigating the edge-on chemical gating effect on
electronic properties of semiconducting molecules and materials. The cyclophane
moiety contains a perpendicular pyridine unit that is connected to the
conjugated semiconducting molecules with two vinyl groups. Thus, the pi-system
in pyridine ring is orthogonal to that in semiconducting wire. The gating end is
not directly conjugated with the semiconducting entity, closely resembling a
gate electrode in FET. The molecular system developed resembles a field effect
transistor, but allows using break-junction Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy
techniques to investigate the gating effect. The research effort is focused on
edge-on chemical gating effect, by which various functional groups with
different electronic properties are introduced to the para-position of the
perpendicular pyridine ring. These substituents behave like applied gating
voltage, allowing for detailed physical investigation to gain insight into in
controlling charge transport. This project devotes extensive synthetic efforts
to prepare a series of new compounds with different gating moieties, conjugation
lengths, and electronic properties. This team has set up a Scanning Tunneling
Spectroscopy system to characterize the charge transport behavior of molecules,
which include single molecular conductance, electron tunneling barriers and
chemical gating correlation with functional groups. Theoretical studies help to
calculate and understand the charge density changes in the gating pyridine
moiety, which was shown to be a parameter correlated to the charge transport
conductance. Ideas for possible applications of the gating effect are pursued,
including proton triggered switch and photoinduced switch