* 1505214
* Engineered Protein-Lipid Systems for siRNA and Small Molecule Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jin Montclare, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Divison of
Materials Research to New York University is to develop biomaterials capable of
dual gene and drug delivery system, for potential treatment of multi-drug
resistant cancer cells. This award is cofunded by Particulate and Multiphase
Processes program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems (Directorate for Engineering) and the BioMaPS program. The
proposed experiments would lead to the generation of novel agents for
biomedicine, and transform the traditional view of therapeutics. These systems
will also impact biotechnology as the lessons learned from these studies that
can be employed for delivery of other genes and agents with applications
extending to non-medical industries including personal care, cosmetics and
agriculture. This multidisciplinary research will train the next generation
students, scientists and engineers to employ cutting edge technologies in
biomaterials, chemistry, engineering and cell biology. In addition to teaching
and mentoring graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, the PI will
supervise underrepresented undergraduates and high-school students in laboratory
research. The PI is also planning to integrate technology and social media into
both undergraduate and graduate courses, and exposing these students to cutting-
edge research. For outreach, the PI will continue to participate in the Applied
Research Innovations in Science and Engineering program in engaging local NYC
10th and 11th grade students to biomaterials research. As director of the Summer
Bioengineering Program, the PI will be actively recruiting underrepresented high
school students to participate in a biologically inspired materials
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Nucleic acids and small
molecule therapeutics possess critical instructions for controlling biological
processes with tangible implications in fundamental cell and organismal studies,
biotechnology and medicine. However, the intracellular delivery of nucleic acids
and small molecules has been a challenge predominantly due to the plasma
membrane barrier. The goal of this project is to develop a multifunctional
engineered protein-lipid system (lipoproteoplexes) capable of: 1) effectively
complexing with siRNA; 2) encapsulating a small molecule drug (curcumin,
doxorubicin, etc.) without the need for covalent modification; and 3) triggering
release of the dual payload once inside the cell leading to a programmed
cellular outcome. In order to produce a vehicle capable of delivering both gene
and therapeutic small molecule, the PI proposes an innovative approach to re-
engineer the coiled-coil domain of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein so that
it is able to complex with nucleic acids and small molecules in conjunction with
lipids based on PI's initial success in introducing positive charge on the
surface through protein engineering. Innovations in these engineered
lipoproteoplexes include: 1) the ease of integrating mutations enabling rapid
optimization; 2) dual drug and gene encapsulation; and 3) control over the
delivery and self-assembly. The versatility of the proposed engineered protein-
lipid systems will not only prove useful for delivering small molecules and
siRNA to treat multi-drug resistant cancers, but also for delivering a variety
of chemical agents and genes alone or in combination to gain insight into cell
functions.