* 1505492
* Strong Field and Ultrafast Atomic and Molecular Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Anthony Starace, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 548,398.00

This project focuses on understanding theoretically the interaction of intense
coherent laser radiation with electrons, atoms, and molecules and on
investigating the use of ultrafast laser or electron pulses to image time-
dependent electronic processes in atoms and molecules. The basic research
supported by this project contributes broadly to our understanding of means to
control matter on an atomic scale. Investigations involving ultrashort pulses of
electrons may lead to ways of resolving electron motion in atoms and molecules
both temporally and spatially. In "seeing" how electrons move and interact with
light, scientists will be better able to eventually control the electron motion,
thereby leading to important applications in improving the efficiency of such
key processes as solar energy conversion and photosynthesis, and in combining
optical and electronic processes (e.g., the emerging new field of
optoelectronics) to make much faster switches that in turn would enable much
faster computers. The analyses of ways to increase the intensities of high order
harmonics may one day lead to sources of coherent x-rays, thus providing a new
means for visualizing living biological structures as well as nanoscale
materials structures. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers involved
with this project are given a broad education in theoretical atomic physics,
first-hand experience in all aspects of scientific communication, and in
teaching undergraduates at a large Big 10 Land Grant university. Project results
are not only published in leading physics journals and presented at national and
international meetings, but are also periodically distilled and integrated with
related work by others in review articles written by the PI and collaborators.
All graduate students and postdoctoral researchers involved with this project in
the past have been sought after by a variety of other employers, including
technology companies, medical researchers, and other leading AMO theory
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes included in this project are
difficult to treat theoretically because the interactions of electrons with both
intense laser fields and with atomic and molecular potentials are difficult to
describe accurately; also, their interactions with ultrashort laser or electron
pulses must be described time-dependently. This group has developed a number of
theoretical approaches to overcome these difficulties. In particular, they have
solved essentially exactly the problem of a weakly bound electron in a short-
range potential interacting with an intense laser field, and the results
obtained for this particular system can be accurately generalized to the case of
other atomic and molecular systems. They have also developed theoretical
approaches for simulating the interaction of ultrashort electron pulses with
time-dependent states of atoms and molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
investigations supported in this project include: (1) using ultrashort duration
electron pulses as both temporal and spatial probes of electronic motion in
atoms; (2) investigating intense laser-assisted or laser-induced electron
scattering, electron recombination, and electron bremsstrahlung processes; (3)
developing analytic formulas for high-order harmonic generation for molecules
for both long and short laser pulses in the long-wavelength approximation,
investigating analytic formulas for two-color harmonic generation spectra in
atoms, and investigating analytically zeptosecond interference features in
harmonic spectra produced by long-wavelength lasers; and (4) investigating
finite pulse effects in intense laser acceleration of electrons bound in highly-
charged ions, and developing a combined quantum description of tunneling
ionization with a classical relativistic description of laser acceleration of
electrons initially bound in highly-charged ions.