* 1505232
* I-Corps:  BMEHeathReach learning manipulatives, games and modules
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Wendy Newstetter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Frequent school absences, pain, malaise, and disease symptoms put chronically
ill children at a scholastic disadvantage and render them an underserved
educational population. Populations affected by these diseases spend many hours
in clinic, hospital and doctor office waiting rooms, places generally bereft of
any educational materials. This I-Corps team believes these are significant but
unrecognized locales for STEM learning. Waiting time could turn into learning
time and problems with compliance could be addressed as children, parents and
siblings develop a better understanding of their disease as manifest in the most
complex system of all, the human body. In essence, the team proposes creating a
model for transforming hospital rooms, doctor's offices and clinics from places
where children and their parents wait, to places where they can engage in STEM
learning. These are novel settings, informal environments with attentive captive
audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to inspire the pediatric
patients as well as their siblings to become future researchers, physicians, and
engineers who, because of their disease, will develop a true passion for science
and math. The proposed BME HeathReach active learning manipulatives and modules
can be used and adapted to learners of different ages. BME HealthReach seeks to
engage this population, their parents and their siblings by offering innovative
science and math learning modules using a child's own disease as the context for
learning. Middle school science and math teachers as well, could approach common
core standards through the window of disease, often a very compelling entry
point.