* 1505305
* Monodromy Theorems, Affine Quantum Groups, and Meromorphic Tensor Categories
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Valerio Toledano Laredo, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2020
* USD 160,656.00

Quantum groups are deformations of the most basic symmetries in nature. They
were discovered in the mid-eighties as symmetries of one- and two-dimensional
statistical mechanical models describing, for example, thin layers of ice.
Amazingly, quantum groups have recently arisen as the symmetries of four-
dimensional gauge theories, which describe the interaction of elementary
particles such as quarks, and their five- and six-dimensional generalizations,
as well as the constraints of a class of counting problems in geometry. Braid
groups are another pervasive class of symmetries that arise in the mathematical
study of knots, the analysis of three-dimensional shapes, the statistics of
elementary particles constrained to move in two dimensions, and quantum
computing. Because the presence of symmetries greatly constrains these systems,
the mathematical study of the intrinsic and extrinsic structures of their groups
of symmetries is key in understanding their physical and mathematical
properties. This research project will lead to a deeper understanding of the
relationship between the quantum groups corresponding to the plane, the sphere,
and the torus. These have been traditionally thought to sit on distinct rungs in
a ladder of increasing complexity. Research in progress is uncovering the
striking fact that these quantum groups are, in fact, equivalent. Such
equivalences are interesting in themselves, but they also allow precise
characterization of the appearance of braid groups in disparate mathematical and
physical contexts.

This research project centers on infinite-dimensional quantum groups associated
to one-dimensional algebraic groups: Yangians, quantum loop algebras, and
elliptic curves. The project builds on the equivalence of finite-dimensional
representations of Yangians and quantum loop algebras. The PI and collaborators
will promote this equivalence of finite-dimensional algebras to an equivalence
between infinite-dimensional quantum loop algebras and elliptic quantum groups,
thereby elucidating the structure of the latter, which is still little
understood outside type A. These equivalences may be thought of as q-deformed,
meromorphic versions of the Kazhdan-Lusztig equivalence between affine Lie
algebras and finite-dimensional quantum groups. A key aspect of this project is
the study of the meromorphic braided categories of representations of these
affine quantum groups, which provides new examples of such categories. Using the
newly derived equivalence, the monodromy of rational affine, trigonometric, and
elliptic Casimir connections will be computed in terms of quantum Weyl group
operators in a way reminiscent of the Kohno-Drinfeld quantum group. This
research will have applications to Yangians, quantum loop algebras and elliptic
quantum groups, quantum integrable systems, and questions in enumerative
geometry.