* 1505609
* Collaborative Research: Modifying oxide surfaces with functional atomic-layers for nano-engineered catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Matthias Batzill, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 358,259.00

Collaborative Research: Modifying oxide surfaces with functional atomic-layers
for nano-engineered catalysts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemical and thermal
stability of metal oxides make them ideal materials for harsh environments and
for supporting metals as catalysts in applications such as fuel cells or
refinement of chemicals. Under some conditions, the oxide support plays as
active role in the chemical process, and in this case understanding the oxide
properties is crucial for developing new catalytic systems and determining how
they work. Under high oxygen pressure, the metal catalyst particles can oxidize
and react with their oxide support to form a mixed metal oxide surface layer to
create a system that is very different than that observed on bulk materials. In
this collaborative project between the University of South Florida and
Pennsylvania State University, Drs. Batzill, Janik and Van Duin are coupling
sensitive surface characterization techniques with computational modeling
methods that predict the formation of mixed metal oxide surfaces formed by
oxidizing transition metals deposited on oxide supports. They predict the oxide
phase stability and reactivity in heterogeneous oxidation catalysis, and in the
process discover some new catalytic materials with interesting and superior
chemical catalytic properties. This research project provides training
opportunities for students at high school, undergraduate and graduate levels,
and establishes collaborations with Brookhaven National Laboratory. Furthermore,
the project is working with existing University programs to increase the number
of underrepresented science and engineering advanced degree
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Dr. Batzill of the University of South Florida and Drs. Janik and van
Duin of Pennsylvania State University for the investigations of surface-confined
mixed-metal oxide phases. The oxide phase of late transition metals in
heterogeneous catalysts are the active phase for certain oxidation reactions.
The interaction of these oxide phases with another metal oxide support has the
potential to lead to novel mixed surface phases that provide additional tunable
redox functionality for transition metals supported on oxides. In this project,
single atomic layers of oxidized transition metals (e.g. Pd, Co, Ni) are
supported on thermodynamically more stable oxides (e.g. ZnO, TiO2) and their
stability and chemical functionalities are explored. Combining advanced first
principles density functional theory methods with new developments in reactive
force field (ReaxFF) Monte Carlo simulations enables them to span length- and
time-scales to reach conditions relevant for describing these complex systems in
gas environments of various oxygen chemical potentials. Reliable computational
tools are essential for screening of materials systems that support the kind of
novel monolayer catalysts that then are synthesized and studied experimentally.
Single crystalline oxide samples are prepared by pulsed laser deposition under
various oxidation environments. The monolayer oxides are investigated with
state-of-the-art scanning probe microscopy methods and their chemical
functionality probed by a modified molecular beam experiment. Integration of
predictive computational tools with experimental verification provides a
framework for a quantitative description of the formation of novel single atomic
layer, chemically-active oxide phases. This research project provides training
opportunities for students at high school, undergraduate and graduate levels,
and establishes collaborations with Brookhaven National Laboratory. Furthermore,
the project works with existing University programs to increase the number of
underrepresented science and engineering advanced degree students.