* 1505530
* Research Initiation Award: Understanding Concentrated Fiber Suspensions and Deformation of Flexible Fibers in Fiber Reinforced Composite Materials Processing
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Xiaobo Peng, Prairie View A & M University
* Continuing Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,686.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Prairie View A&M University has potential broader impact in a number of
areas. The goal of the project is to understand concentrated fiber suspensions
and deformation of flexible fibers in fiber reinforced composite materials
processing and advance the design and manufacture of composite materials. The
outcomes of these research activities have potential applications in areas such
as fiber reinforced composites processing, drug delivery, blood cell transport
and air dust drift. Undergraduate students will be involved in the research and
the fiber motion tracking system will be an important laboratory facility for
teaching purposes.

The objectives of the research are to develop a new finite element based model
in understanding concentrated fiber suspensions and fiber deformation in a
viscous fluid; design a novel constitutive equation governing fiber interaction
and deformation; and provide the experimental validation of the model. These
objectives will be achieved by developing a finite element based simulation
package to physically model the interactions among dense fibers with random
initial orientations and separations, qualitatively and quantitatively
establishing the correlation between fiber alignment rates and fiber-fiber
interaction as well as fiber deformation, and setting up an experimental system
to validate the model. This project will provide a systematic model capable of
addressing fiber-fiber interaction and fiber deformation, critical areas that
are currently unresolved in composite materials manufacturing. The developed
constitutive equation will offer composites researchers a new model to predict
and control fiber motion so as to produce the final products with excellent
performance.