* 1505385
* Developing a Combined Vibrational Spectroscopic and Optical/Fluorescence Imaging Approach for Simultaneous Orientation and Activity Measurement of Immobilized Biomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Zhan Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Zhan Chen of The University of Michigan is
constructing an analytical platform that combines several spectroscopic and
imaging analytical techniques together for the&lt;br/&gt;purpose of developing a
general methodology to determine the structure of surface immobilized enzymes
and peptides and measure their activities simultaneously. The understanding of
structure-function relationships of surface immobilized biological molecules
provides&lt;br/&gt;fundamental knowledge for the preparation of biocatalysts for
biofuel production, biosensors, and biochips with improved performance. An
outreach program developed by Professor Chen to teach surface chemistry to high
school students promotes the students' interests in science. The broader impacts
of this work include developing a widely applicable analytical platform, aiding
in the development of better biocatalysts, biosensors, and biochips, and
educating young researchers including female&lt;br/&gt;students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of a
systematic approach by simultaneously applying linear/nonlinear vibrational
spectroscopic and optical/fluorescence imaging techniques to elucidate the
structure-function relationships of surface immobilized enzymes and peptides. An
analytical platform which integrates sum frequency generation vibrational
spectroscopy, attenuated total reflectance FTIR, optical microscopy, and
fluorescence microscopy is constructed and allows for the simultaneous
investigation of the structure and function of surface immobilized enzymes
(e.g., beta-galactosidase and beta-glucosidase) and antimicrobial
peptides&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., MSI-78).