* 1505615
* The Study of Nuclear Physics with Intermediate Energy Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Ralf Gothe, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,200,000.00

Although ninety-eight percent of the mass of ordinary matter is due to the
strong nuclear force, the present theory of that force (Quantum Chromodynamics)
is still not fully understood. This award supports the study of the strong
nuclear force by probing the substructure of matter. Almost the entire mass of
an atom is concentrated in its tiny nucleus, which is made of nucleons that are
either positively charged (protons) or electrically neutral (neutrons). These
subatomic particles, however, are not elementary but are themselves composite
objects made of quarks held together by glue particles (gluons). The structure
of nucleons is a manifestation of the strong nuclear force, which is the
strongest force known. This research will help advance discovery and
understanding in nuclear physics, and promote teaching, training, and learning.
The preparation of junior scientists plays a central role in the supported
activities.

The nuclear physics research program at the University of South Carolina (USC)
is mainly based at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in Newport
News, Virginia. There, the group uses high-energy electron and photon beams
along with sophisticated particle detectors that were developed, in part, at USC
as powerful microscopes to study the subatomic world. The group is also
preparing the MUSE experiment at the Paul Scherrer Institute in Switzerland.
This experiment will address the proton-radius puzzle by scattering muons and
electrons off the proton. Through detector development, simulations, management
of complex experiments, and data analyses, they will shed light on some of the
most profound questions like: What is the structure of the nucleon? What are and
how can we excite its internal degrees of freedom? Once excited, in which way
does the nucleon decay back to its original state? Does the structure of the
nucleon change if it is embedded in dense nuclear matter? The experimental study
of these properties gives insight into the nature of the strong force and allows
for rigorous tests of the underlying theory.