* 1505852
* Novel transport phenomena in two-dimensional crystals beyond graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Hui Zhao, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Bon-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductors have revolutionized out lives.
Recently new types of semiconductors, such as single atomic layers of transition
metal dichalcogenides and black phosphorus, have become available. This project
studies several types of novel transport phenomena in these materials. These
transport phenomena, such as collision-free ballistic transport and coherent
plasma oscillation, play important roles in nanoscale electronic devices. This
project provides fundamental information about these transport phenomena, and
reveals rich physics involved in nonequilibrium transport in solids.
Furthermore, the studies of several novel spin transport phenomena provide
information for application of these materials in spin-based electronics. This
project achieves broader impacts by training graduate and undergraduate
students, involving K-12 teachers, broadening participation of underrepresented
groups, and enhancing research infrastructure on nanotechnology and renewable
energy technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific problem studied in this project is nonequilibrium ballistic charge
and spin transport in two-dimensional crystals, including transition metal
dichalcogenides and phosphorene. The methods and approaches of this project are
based on three ultrafast laser techniques: a quantum interference and control
technique that can instantaneously inject ballistic charge and spin currents, a
differential pump-probe technique that can resolve sub-nanometer motion of
electrons, and a second-harmonic generation technique for ultrafast and direct
detection of the velocity of electrons. The goals of this project are to
understand and control several novel transport phenomena in two-dimensional
crystals, such as coherence plasma oscillation, ballistic charge transport,
ballistic pure spin transport, spin Hall effect, spin-polarized charge
transport, and spin Gunn effect.