* 1505502
* An Experimental Investigation of the Synthesis of Complex Organic Molecules in Interstellar Analog Ices
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Ralf Kaiser, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 338,979.00

This project studies how complex organic molecules (COM) -- organic molecules
containing atoms of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen -- are formed in the
material between the stars (the "interstellar medium", or ISM). The team will
use laboratory experiments to study how COMs form on ice-coated grains like
those expected to exist in the ISM. Some of these COMs might serve as 'molecular
clocks' allowing us to unravel the history of cold molecular clouds and star
forming regions. The PI and his students will experimentally determine just how
complex we should expect interstellar molecules to become. Any COM discovered in
these laboratory simulations will a candidate for future astronomical searches
of this molecule in the ISM. This project might also bring us closer to
understanding the extent to which key classes of COMs might have been
manufactured in the ISM and eventually delivered to the young Earth via
meteorites. The PI and his students will also organize interdisciplinary
"laboratory astrophysics" workshops, work to broaden participation of native
Hawai'ians in research and educational activities, and engage in public outreach
activities.

These goals will be achieved by systematically replicating the conditions of
ice-coated interstellar grains within cold molecular clouds and toward high- and
low-mass star forming regions. The team will utilize an ultra-high vacuum
surface scattering machine to expose interstellar ice analog samples in various
simulated environments, with temperatures as low as 10 K, and including exposure
to ionizing ultraviolet (Lyman-alpha) radiation. The novel technology of
fragment-free vacuum ultraviolet photoionization within a space simulation
chamber, along with several complementary detection schemes, will be used to
probe the synthesis of COMs in ISM conditions.