* 1505446
* Research Initiation Award: Resonance Raman Spectroscopic Studies on the Dynamic Structures  and Long-Range Electron Transfer of Di-Heme
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Manliang Feng, Tougaloo College
* Standard Grant
* Clytrice Watson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 199,920.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Tougaloo College will conduct
research to understand how heme proteins function in biological systems and what
factors regulate their functions. The research project is an interdisciplinary
project which will involve students and faculty in the areas of chemistry,
physics and biology. The project is expected to expand the research capacity of
the College and to promote student and faculty engagement in STEM disciplines.
It will contribute to the College's efforts to produce more qualified STEM
workers and researchers, especially from underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: 1) study the
dynamic structure of the di-heme enzyme, MauG, and some mutant MauG proteins; 2)
determine the relationship between the dynamic properties and the enzyme
function; and 3) identify key structural features that control the dynamic
structures and long-range electron transfer properties of the enzyme. Resonance
Raman and FTIR spectroscopy along with kinetic studies will be used to achieve
these goals. Findings from this work will provide clues as to how the protein is
self-regulated to perform the catalytic function while protecting itself from
oxidative damage and may also help to elucidate the electron-transfer and
catalytic mechanism of other multi-active center proteins or protein complexes.
This work is expected to extend the understanding of the structure-function
relationship, especially the roles of remote residue in electron transfer. This
project will also provide training in variable temperature techniques, and
protein expression and purification techniques for undergraduates. These are
valuable skills that will allow students to distinguish themselves in the job
market and/or give students a competitive edge when applying to graduate
schools.