* 1505458
* Drell-Yan Studies at Fermilab
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Wolfgang Lorenzon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 913,057.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons, protons and neutrons, are made
up of more elementary particles called quarks. The main physics program
supported by this award is directed at the study of the quark structure of
nucleons and the nuclei that are made up of these nucleons. Research will be
carried out at the Fermilab Laboratory near Chicago as part of a collaboration
called SeaQuest. This collaboration is focused on the production of pairs of
particles called muons, which are like electrons but more massive, used as a
probe of the anti-quark distributions in the nucleon (and whether these
distributions are modified in nuclei). This information will provide direct
input to theoretical models of the proton, and shed light on the origin of the
proton's spin. A related study, using a polarized proton beam, will provide new
information on symmetries of the quark distributions based on predictions from
the fundamental theory of Quantum Chromodynamics. In addition, the Michigan
group will lead the operation of the low-temperature hydrogen targets at the
SeaQuest experiment, and participate in the development of a polarized hydrogen
target for a next-generation experiment. Education and training of both
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as outreach aimed at the general
public, is an important aspect of this research program.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The SeaQuest experiment at the Fermilab Laboratory near Chicago will
provide a better understanding how light anti-quarks are distributed in nucleons
and nuclei, on the physical mechanism that generates the sea of the nucleon, and
how orbital angular momentum might contribute to the nucleon spin. A smaller,
but very important effort will be spent on developing a polarized Drell-Yan
program at Fermilab that is complementary to the spin physics programs at
Brookhaven National Lab and Jefferson Lab. This program builds on the expertise
the group has gained, and is a natural extension of the group's work over the
past years. It allows them to play a major role in the Drell-Yan experiment at
Fermilab now, and to lead the way towards a polarized Drell-Yan program at
Fermilab in the future.