* 1505060
* Promoting Foundational Scientific Literacy Skills in Introductory Psychology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Melissa Witkow, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 248,454.00

A rising tide of calls for improved science education underscores the importance
and significance of incorporating stronger training of scientific thinking
skills into first-year college science courses. This project addresses that need
by developing, evaluating, and disseminating a set of scientific thinking
teaching materials with proven efficacy in a variety of college settings. The
materials will use core topics in Introductory Psychology in combination with
real world issues and controversies to train students' scientific thinking
skills. The project builds on cognitive psychology research on human learning
and established best-practices for science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goals of the project are to develop, evaluate, and disseminate a set
of flexible, research-based teaching modules to improve the training of
scientific literacy and quantitative reasoning skills in Introductory
Psychology. The project will develop a set of scientific thinking instructional
modules, keyed to the major topics covered in Introductory Psychology. A unique
element of the project is its intentionally collaborative framework, which
involves a network of faculty from four academic sites in Oregon including two
community colleges (CCs), a large four-year Research 1 institution (R1), and a
selective, liberal arts undergraduate college (SLAC). This inter-institutional
network will collaborate on the development and formative assessment of all
resources, including identifying adaptations of modules for different course
formats and student needs. A comprehensive assessment plan will provide a
summative assessment of the effectiveness of the teaching modules at all three
institution types (CC/R1/SLAC) prior to broader dissemination to the psychology
teaching community.