* 1505388
* I-Corps:  WorkReadyGrad application
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2015
* Caitlin Dooley, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Economists and educators are grappling with how to best prepare students for a
rapidly changing economic landscape. Research suggests that changing workforce
needs will require students to develop transferable knowledge and skills through
deep learning connections between school, work, and life. This I-Corps team will
explore the launch of an application called WorkReadyGrad.com which seeks to
close the skills gap by elevating the quality and frequency of dialogue between
students and potential employers. The proposed work is a web-based social
networking and electronic-portfolio tool that facilitates this connection, and
connects students to professionals for career and educational mentoring in STEM
fields. Made for students in middle school through college and professionals
across a wide range of careers, the tool can connect students with information,
resources, and potential employers. Complementing this student service, the
proposed tool will enable employers to communicate future hiring needs and to
groom new talent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific to this I-Corps application,
WorkReadyGrad intends to engage in customer discovery by engaging companies and
civic institutions to build a more diverse pool of STEM workers. By launching in
Atlanta, WorkReadyGrad is able to connect colleges and employers with an
underserved, under-utilized workforce that is more than 50% African American..
Short-term success will be gauged by skill sets and certifications that students
obtain and the growth of their professional networks. Short-term success will
also be gauged by the number of professional mentors enrolled from public and
private employers and the quality of their engagements within the WorkReadyGrad
environment. Long-term success will be measured by enrollment and completion of
post-secondary education and by the quantity and quality of job placements from
post-secondary institutions. It is anticipated that the time horizon to short-
term impact is approximately 3-12 months and to long-term impact is
approximately 2-10 years.