* 1505728
* Synergy: Collaborative: CPS-Security: End-to-End Security for the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Dan Boneh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Computation is everywhere. Greeting cards have processors that play songs.
Fireworks have processors for precisely timing their detonation. Computers are
in engines, monitoring combustion and performance. They are in our homes,
hospitals, offices, ovens, planes, trains, and automobiles. These computers,
when networked, will form the Internet of Things (IoT). The resulting
applications and services have the potential to be even more transformative than
the World Wide Web. The security implications are enormous. Internet threats
today steal credit cards. Internet threats tomorrow will disable home security
systems, flood fields, and disrupt hospitals. The root problem is that these
applications consist of software on tiny low-power devices and cloud servers,
have difficult networking, and collect sensitive data that deserves strong
cryptography, but usually written by developers who have expertise in none of
these areas. The goal of the research is to make it possible for two developers
to build a complete, secure, Internet of Things applications in three
months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on four important principles.
The first is "distributed model view controller." A developer writes an
application as a distributed pipeline of model-view-controller systems. A model
specifies what data the application generates and stores, while a new
abstraction called a transform specifies how data moves from one model to
another. The second is "embedded-gateway-cloud." A common architecture dominates
Internet of Things applications. Embedded devices communicate with a gateway
over low-power wireless. The gateway processes data and communicates with cloud
systems in the broader Internet. Focusing distributed model view controller on
this dominant architecture constrains the problem sufficiently to make problems,
such as system security, tractable. The third is "end-to-end security." Data
emerges encrypted from embedded devices and can only be decrypted by end user
applications. Servers can compute on encrypted data, and many parties can
collaboratively compute results without learning the input. Analysis of the data
processing pipeline allows the system and runtime to assert and verify security
properties of the whole application. The final principle is "software-defined
hardware." Because designing new embedded device hardware is time consuming,
developers rely on general, overkill solutions and ignore the resulting security
implications. The data processing pipeline can be compiled into a prototype
hardware design and supporting software as well as test cases, diagnostics, and
a debugging methodology for a developer to bring up the new device. These
principles are grounded in Ravel, a software framework that the team
collaborates on, jointly contributes to, and integrates into their courses and
curricula on cyberphysical systems.