* 1505271
* Research Initiation Award: Next generation sequencing (NGS) of Freedom Giant Miscanthus (Miscanthus giganteus)-associated fungal communities
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Keerthi Mandyam, Alcorn State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 239,852.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Alcorn State University will
conduct research to examine the fungal communities associated with energy
grasses such as the giant miscanthus. The project will enhance the research
capabilities of the principle investigator as well as teaching and learning at
Alcorn State University. Undergraduate students will benefit from the
collaborations with university and industry partners and the research
experiences and training in fungal ecology. This experience will help to build
the competency of the undergraduate students and support the nation's efforts in
building a robust STEM workforce.

The aim of the proposed study is to examine the giant miscanthus fungal
communities and the role of root endophytes in enhancing feedstock production.
Specific objectives are: 1) to employ next generation sequencing (NGS) tools
(locus targeted Illumina MiSeq sequencing) to examine the composition, diversity
and richness, and the seasonal and temporal variation of fungal communities of
the shoot, root and rhizosphere; and 2) to isolate and identify root colonizing
fungal endophytes and to select mutualistic and parasitic/pathogenic fungal
endophytes by growth chamber studies. Findings from this study will: 1) provide
a blueprint of the fungal biome associated with an important C4 energy grass; 2)
identify abiotic drivers of fungal diversity and composition and their spatial
structuring; 3) lay the foundation for dissecting the contribution of arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi towards high nitrogen sustainability of giant miscanthus; 4)
identify the impact of root fungal endophytes on the host. This study will
prepare the foundation for future university-industry partnership to conduct
larger collaborative investigations on the microbial symbiosis of giant
miscanthus. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Kansas State
University.