* 1505581
* Search for Dark Matter with Xenon-based Technology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Luca Grandi, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2019
* USD 526,940.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund an
integrated research and educational program centered on the search for dark
matter. Partnerships with a local minority public high school and the Adler
Planetarium will genuinely engage students, educators, and the broader public in
the mystery of dark matter and the status of current research, via regular
classroom visits, field trips, mentoring, teacher immersion experiences, and in-
the-museum programming. This will have a deep and broad impact, directly
reaching teachers, planetarium staff, hundreds of URM students, and thousands of
museum visitors (hundreds of thousands indirectly). The research program offers
excellent opportunities for training undergraduate and graduate students, making
them part of a cutting edge project in fundamental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow the PI to contribute to
XENON1T, a direct detection WIMP experiment deployed at the Gran Sasso
laboratory built underneath the Apennine Mountains in Italy (LNGS), in the
assembly, commissioning and early operations of the detector, scheduled for
summer 2015. The PI also plans to develop refined analysis strategies which are
expected to enhance the performance of the ionization/scintillation
identification methods that are exploited in XENON1T to suppress the dominant
ã/â background. To achieve this goal, the PI will make a series of dedicated
measurements with a small-scale xenon detector designed to collect pure samples
of nuclear and electron recoils. This will permit an exhaustive investigation of
the ionization and scintillation processes that govern low-energy interactions
in liquid xenon. These data, which are not easily extractable from XENON1T
directly, will then be used to increase the sensitivity to WIMPs through
improvements in the calibration and rejection of backgrounds.