* 1505135
* Unconventional Noble Metal Nanoparticles with Enhanced Catalytic Properties: A Combined Experimental and Theoretical Study
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Simon Humphrey, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 391,128.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, the goal of this project is to prepare new metal
nanoparticle catalysts for energy and environmental applications. Many large-
scale catalytic processes are responsible for the formation of fuels, polymers
and textiles, drugs and food additives, and are used in the remediation of
toxins and environmental pollutants, and many of these require precious metal
catalysts. Precious metals are both scarce and expensive. It is, therefore, of
critical importance to find ways to prepare catalysts that require less precious
metal, whilst maintaining the catalytic performance and also reducing the amount
of waste by-products that are formed. Metal nanoparticles are discrete entities
consisting of just a few hundred to a few thousand atoms. They might appear to
be small fragments or as pieces "cut-away" from bulk metals. However, they are
known to have properties that are superior to bulk metal, including enhanced
catalytic behavior. For important chemical reactions that occur on metal
surfaces, precious metal nanoparticles are very attractive because they have
very large surface areas compared to their volumes, resulting in improved
efficiency. In this project, the research groups of Dr. Simon Humphrey and Dr.
Graeme Henkelman at the University of Texas at Austin are combining their
expertise to prepare precious metal nanoparticles with previously unstudied
structures, and to explain how the structures result in improved catalytic
properties. A major goal of this research activity is to prepare nanoparticles
based on mixtures of metals (alloys) that permits the dilution of very expensive
metals with cheaper and more available metals, while also achieving improved
catalytic properties. Another goal is to use microwave heating as a cheaper and
faster way to prepare the nanoparticles. This project also incorporates
important educational goals that are aimed at inspiring undergraduate students
to actively participate in aspects of the research. A new microwave materials
synthesis Freshman Research Initiative (FRI) stream is being introduced at the
University of Texas - Austin, which enables undergraduates to engage in
laboratory-based research, and promotes a deeper appreciation for scientific
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative project between a
materials synthesis and catalysis group (Simon Humphrey) and a theoretical
modeling group (Graeme Henkelman) at the University of Texas at Austin. The
major objectives of this research activity are to synthesize metal nanoparticles
(MNPs) with defined compositions, to test the MNPs in model catalytic reactions
relating to industrially-relevant large-scale chemical transformations, and to
use detailed and state-of-the-art theoretical approaches to gain a deep
understanding of the relationships between surface reactivity and MNP structure.
Experiment and theory are combined to elucidate general trends in reactivity as
a direct function of composition; this ultimately provides important information
that can be applied to direct the synthesis of other new MNPs with desired
reactivity. The project features the preparation of a variety of novel metal
nanoparticles (MNPs) using an innovative and technologically-relevant microwave-
assisted method. Compared to classical methods, microwave-assisted synthesis
allows for faster reaction times, easier scale-up, and can also allow access to
products that cannot otherwise be obtained. Microwave heating is becoming
popular in organic chemistry and the biosciences, but it has still yet to be
fully exploited in materials and inorganic chemistry. In this project, microwave
synthesis is exploited to gain access to MNPs with defined size and surface
structure, and with unusual hybrid core-shell and alloy compositions. The
surface chemistry of these previously unstudied MNPs are explored through model
reaction studies including vapor- and liquid-phase reactions including
hydrocarbon hydrogenation, carbonylation, and NOx reduction. Another goal of
this project is the development of new theoretical approaches that can provide a
more accurate description of surface reactivity than is presently available.
This project also incorporates important educational goals that are aimed at
inspiring undergraduate students to actively participate in aspects of the
research. A new microwave materials synthesis Freshman Research Initiative (FRI)
stream is being introduced at the University of Texas - Austin, which enables
undergraduates to engage in laboratory-based research, and promotes a deeper
appreciation for scientific research.