* 1505524
* Gravitational Wave Transient Astrophysics with LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Deirdre Shoemaker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Gravitational physics is on the edge of a discovery that will shake its
foundation: the direct detection of gravitational waves, tiny oscillations of
the curvature of space-time that were predicted 100 years ago by Einstein's
theory of General Relativity. Gravitational waves are produced by changes in the
gravitational field of accelerating masses, and their detection will reveal
information from the most cataclysmic and mysterious events in the Universe: the
death of a star, the collision of black holes, and the Big Bang. This new era of
gravitational physics is being ushered in by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) and its sister project Virgo. This year
marks the completion of hardware upgrades that form Advanced LIGO, a quantum-
noise-limited laser interferometer which will probe about 1000 times more
galaxies than initial LIGO. Source population studies suggest it will routinely
detect gravitational waves from the collision of neutron stars and black holes.
This award supports mission critical research for the detection of gravitational
waves by Advanced LIGO at the Georgia Institute of Technology, for the
detection, characterization and astrophysical interpretation of gravitational
wave transient signals in data from the first Advanced LIGO science
runs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three components: (1)
participation in the LIGO-Virgo all-sky search for generic gravitational wave
transients, sensitive to a wide range of compact object signatures, including
core-collapse supernovae, coalescence of neutron star and/or black hole binary
systems and neutron star oscillations, (2) development of innovative approaches
to blending data analysis and numerical relativity, with contribution to
targeted searches for binary black hole coalescences, and (3) characterization
of Advanced LIGO data to enable scientific discovery, to deliver the data
quality information necessary to clean the data sets and veto false positives,
and to identify data quality issues early enough that they can be mitigated in
the instruments, within the LIGO Detector Characterization team. The award will
benefit from the long term collaboration of the PI and co-PI and a synergistic
team at the GeorgiaTech Center for Relativistic Astrophysics, with experts in
computational astrophysics, cosmology, particle astrophysics, astronomy, the
college of computing and a strong outreach program in Atlanta, enhanced by the
new ties to the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, and a firm commitment to
diversity and the role of women in STEM.