* 1505184
* RAPID: Responding to Terror of a Different Kind: A National Study of the Ebola Epidemic
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Roxane Silver, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 11/30/2015
* USD 160,306.00

The diagnosis and Ebola-related death of a Liberian man on US soil in October,
and the subsequent diagnosis of an Ebola infection of two nurses who treated him
in Dallas, Texas, made Ebola the most closely followed news story in the US in
October, 2014, with much media attention focused on claims of ?Ebola hysteria.?
Because Ebola is rare, most Americans have learned about it exclusively from
traditional (e.g., TV, radio) and social (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) media
sources. Yet, media-based information varies in accuracy and tone regarding how
the disease is spread, the numbers of cases and deaths, and the gruesome way its
victims die. If media communications fail to address the informational and
emotional needs of the populace, they may fail to help -- or even make matters
worse -- by undermining the trust between citizens and authorities and
increasing public anxiety and complacency. This research examines the efficacy
of widespread Ebola-related media coverage in providing information that people
need to understand Ebola-related threats. The research team assesses how this
media coverage is linked to Ebola-related stress response, and how cognitive and
emotional factors combine to shape risk assessments, behavioral responses, and
mental health outcomes as this public health crisis unfolds. In ongoing
research, the team has surveyed a nationally representative sample of
individuals three times over the 18 months since the Boston Marathon Bombings
(BMB). The sample includes a nationally representative sample of adults and
representative subsamples of residents from metropolitan Boston and New York.
This new research involves a follow-up survey on the Ebola threat with all
available respondents immediately, including an examination of predictors of
Ebola-related risk perceptions and stress response, controlling for pre-existing
mental health status, functioning, prior trauma exposures, and media behavior.
The research has three primary aims: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Estimate Ebola-
related media exposure, Ebola risk perceptions, trust in the institutions
managing (and communicating about) Ebola, and behavioral and emotional responses
to perceived Ebola threat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Investigate how type (e.g.,
television, Twitter, online news), amount (e.g., total hours), and nature (e.g.,
types of images) of Ebola-related media coverage are associated with risk
perceptions, and behavioral and emotional responses (e.g., stress response,
somatization). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Investigate whether prior exposure to
individual (e.g., childhood exposure to violence) and collective (e.g., the BMB,
9/11) stress are associated with Ebola-related risk perceptions and behavioral
and emotional responses to the Ebola virus threat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance of the research is in the examination of questions relevant to risk
assessment and community response to a national crisis. The findings will (a)
further our understanding of the role played by Ebola-related media coverage in
risk perceptions and stress responses to the outbreak, (b) facilitate early
identification of individuals at risk for subsequent difficulties following
public health crises, (c) integrate the stress and coping literature with that
on risk analysis and perception, and (d) help policymakers, service providers,
media professionals, and educators design cost-effective, evidence-based risk
communication and interventions that are sensitive to diverse
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was submitted in response to NSF 15-006
Dear Colleague Letter on the Ebola
Virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;___________________