* 1505341
* National Energy Education Summit
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2015
* David Blockstein, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 06/30/2015
* USD 24,970.00

Principal Investigator: Blockstein Proposal No: 1505341

Nontechnical Description

The Council of Energy Research and Education Leaders (CEREL) of the National
Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE) will hold the inaugural National
Energy Education Summit on January 26, 2015 in Washington, DC. This conference
award will provide partial support for this Summit. The Summit will be an
opportunity for energy, environmental, and STEM educators in K-12, higher
education, and informal education to gather with leaders from the private
sector, government, and civil society to share best practices and develop new
partnerships in order to expand the scale, impact and effectiveness of energy
education. The Summit will engage energy educators at all levels to build,
improve and expand energy education to serve the needs of students and citizens.
The Summit will promote teaching, learning and training to help to build an
interdisciplinary field of energy education. Sessions will specifically deal
with improved teaching and learning as well as development of programs such as
majors, minors, and certificates that facilitate teaching and learning.
Furthermore, the Summit will provide financial support for presenters from
under-represented populations, and will have at least one session focused on
engagement of under-represented populations.

Technical Description

The Council of Energy Research and Education Leaders (CEREL) of the National
Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE) will hold the inaugural National
Energy Education Summit on January 26, 2015 in Washington, DC. This conference
award will provide partial support for this Summit. The Summit will be an
opportunity for energy, environmental and STEM educators in K-12, higher
education, and informal education to gather with leaders from business and
industry, government, and civil society to share best practices and develop new
partnerships in order to expand the scale, impact and effectiveness of energy
education. Education and workforce training for the energy infrastructure that
powers national and regional economies traditionally relies on science and
engineering fields. However, education on energy topics should also embrace
political economy, history, ethics, environmental, and cultural studies, as well
as science and engineering. Towards this end, the broadly-defined,
interdisciplinary field of energy studies is advancing rapidly. The National
Energy Education Summit seeks to further define the principles of energy
literacy need to operationalize the field of energy studies. In this context,
the overall goal of the Summit is to expand the scale, impact and effectiveness
of energy education through energy studies. The Summit will engage energy
educators at all levels to build, improve and expand energy education to serve
the needs of students and citizens. The agenda will include issues at both the
classroom level (content, curriculum and pedagogy) and at the programmatic level
(degree and sub-degree programs).

The Summit will promote teaching, learning and training to help to build an
interdisciplinary field of energy education. Many of the sessions will
specifically deal with improved teaching and learning. Other sessions will
explore programs such as majors, minors, and certificates that facilitate
teaching and learning. Furthermore, the Summit will provide financial support
for presenters from under-represented populations, and will have at least one
session focused on engagement of under-represented populations.