* 1505119
* Research Initiation Award: Superconvergence of Finite Element Approximations for the Second Order Elliptic Problems by L^2 Projection Methods
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Anna Harris, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 187,273.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at her home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff has potential broader impact
in a number of areas. The project will focus on constructing a mathematical
model on superconvergence of the nonconforming finite element method (NCFEM) for
second-order elliptic problems by L-squared projection methods. This project
will enhance the research experience and training of undergraduate students in
mathematics at the institution. Additionally, a course in Finite Element Methods
will be developed and offered as a topics course.

The project will use L-squared projection methods to improve the convergence
rate of an existing finite element solution so that the new approximation is
closer to the exact solution than the existing finite element solution. The
objectives are: to obtain mathematical theories for the superconvergence of
NCFEM using various element spaces for the second order elliptic problems with
the homogeneous essential Dirichlet and natural Neumann boundary conditions; to
write computer programs to perform numerical approximations to support the
theoretical results; and to investigate existing theoretical results for the
superconvergence of the conforming finite element method for second-order
elliptic problems by the L-squared projection method. Finally, mathematical
theories will be tested with real world data for the Laplace and Poisson
equations, which are used in modeling heat conduction, seepage through porous
media, irrotational flow of ideal fluids, and other applications.