* 1505080
* An Integrated STEM Approach for Studying Aerospace Engineering Design and Manufacturing
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Mohamed Hafez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2018
* USD 249,965.00

This project at the University of California-Davis will develop an aerospace
engineering course to significantly address contemporary needs within the
engineering industry. The course is designed to help undergraduate mechanical
and aerospace engineering students understand how airplanes fly by taking them
through the process of designing, modeling, manufacturing, and testing a
prototype wing. The combination of design, manufacturing, and experimental
validation will constitute an educational concept for undergraduate students in
engineering, integrating important topics such as physics of flight and
manufacturing processes, including sustainability. The contexts of flight and
sustainability allow for student engagement, while presenting substantial
opportunities for intellectual growth.

The goal of this effort is to research simple and effective methods for teaching
aerospace engineering design and manufacturing concepts and fundamentals to
college students, through the use of computer simulations, manufacturing and
laboratory experiments. The course takes an active, project-based approach that
research shows is effective in fostering the development of deep, conceptual
learning and, in turn, greater problem solving flexibility in engineering.
Course and project evaluation will include (1) assessing student learning
through classroom examinations; (2) assessing student perceptions using the
intrinsic value subscale, engineering design self-efficacy, and adaptive
expertise and (3) "scenario-based" assessment to evaluate the benefits of the
interdisciplinary nature of the instruction. The design documents, course
modules, and assessment materials will be published and made available to other
teaching institutions so this unique teaching concept can be applied and can
lead to transformative teaching of aerospace engineering design and
manufacturing. The design documents will be available to educational institutes
as well as to industry so teaching and research in these communities can benefit
from this effort.