* 1505878
* Electrophoresis of Filamentous Viruses Through Solid State Nanopores
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jay Tang, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Brown University is to study how filamentous viruses pass
through extremely tiny pores. The pores are drilled through a thin layer of
silicon nitride, which is a solid-state material and why they are referred to as
solid-state nanopores. The viruses being used for this study belong to a class
of bacterial phage and are isolated from infected E. coli. The viruses are
skinny filaments of about one micrometer in length and only a few nanometers in
diameter, and each one is identical in size because it consists of a single DNA
chain coated by about three thousand copies of a small coat protein. Because the
coat protein carries a few charges, the virus filament is charged along its
length. When a solution containing the virus fills one side of a device
containing a single nanopore, viruses can be driven through the nanopore, one by
one, by applying a voltage across the device. When a virus passes through the
nanopore, it blocks a characteristic amount of current for a brief but
measurable duration. The goal of this project is to use the nanopore as a tool
to study in microscopic detail how stiff charged molecules move through
nanopores. This study essentially consists of comprehensive sets of measurements
under carefully controlled conditions and with a number of different parameters.
How the amount of current blocked and the speed of translocation change with
parameters such as the amount of salt added to the solution, the size of the
nanopore, and the voltage applied can tell us a great deal about the physical
processes at play, all the way down to molecular scale. In spite of the
conceptual simplicity of the study, the knowledge acquired can have profound
technological implications. It may, for instance, lead to tiny devices for
efficiently detecting and sorting various virus strains. The program will also
provide multidisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students. The
PIs and the graduate students have also planned, through the Brown Science Prep
program, to deliver guest lectures, perform demonstrations, and host lab tours,
all in order to broaden the impact of laboratory research on the surrounding
area K-12 students and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: In
this project, filamentous viruses will be used to study the fundamental physics
of driven electrophoresis through nanoscale pores. The physical properties of
filamentous viruses, including their charge density, their stiffness, and their
length, are both precisely known and easily tunable. That control enables us to
systematically test theoretical models of electrophoresis inside a nanopore at
the single-molecule level. The planned study includes measurements of the
capture process, the amount of current blocked, the translocation speed, and the
spread of individual translocation times. With this study, the effects of
filament stiffness on translocation speed under a range of driving voltages will
be studied. In addition, factors that account for the dispersion in
translocation speed will also be determined. The experimental results will be
compared with theoretical calculations based on the coupled Navier-Stokes and
Poisson Boltzmann equations, and also compared with computer simulations driven
by Langevin dynamics. By addressing every facet of nanopore translocations,
including the capture process, the electrokinetic pulling force, and the viscous
drag that opposes it, the planned experiments will provide quantitative tests of
the established theoretical models. Thus, students working on the program will
acquire comprehensive training in the cutting-edge, nano-technology field. The
planned outreach efforts, coordinated by the Brown Science Prep program, focus
on connecting physics knowledge with device technology, via guest lectures, lab
tours, and demos both live and through online videos.