* 1505105
* Polypeptide Hybrid Particles and Their Constituents
* MPS,DMR
* 05/31/2014,05/31/2017
* Paul Russo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 304,177.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Some of nature's most important building blocks and functional engines are made
of proteins. Synthetic polypeptides, which can be made in large amounts by
simple methods, borrow the protein structure and retain many protein-like
features, such as the ability to rotate light and respond to thermal or chemical
changes in the environment. The problem is that, even though they are very large
molecules, polypeptides are still very small things. This makes them hard to
manipulate. This project marries the functionality of bio-inspired polypeptides
to the easy manipulation of larger particles using gravitational or magnetic
fields. This will be accomplished by placing the polypeptides onto colloidal
silica, essentially little balls of glass, resulting in core-shell particles. By
adjusting the temperature, the shape of the polypeptide shell will be altered.
This will provide information on shape transitions similar to those used e.g. by
influenza virus to penetrate the human body. Chains of particles crosslinked by
the action of light will result in nearly uniform filaments that bring polymer
science into the visible regime for easier inspection, while facilitating the
creation of even larger structures. Studies on a particularly attractive water-
soluble polypeptide will lead to improved understanding of the kinds of polymers
used to make high-strength fibers, such as those woven into bullet-proof vests.
New educational and outreach initiatives are incorporated, integrated with real-
world experience and laboratory research.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

These research activities will develop and explore submicron particles having
synthetic polypeptide shells atop silica cores, sometimes with magnetic
inclusions. The polypeptide shells render the particles responsive to
temperature and good sensors of molecular asymmetry, while the silica cores make
it possible to direct these functions to a particular location. Whole particles
and their individual polypeptide and silica components will be studied.
Specifically, the following work will be performed: 1) The effects of core
radius, shell polymer coverage, and shell polymer molecular weight on a
thermally driven coil-to-helix transition will be assessed by small-angle X-ray
and neutron scattering, static and dynamic light scattering, optical rotatory
dispersion, and NMR; 2) The particles, acting as very large monomers, will be
polymerized into nearly uniform chains by using a magnetic field to align them
perpendicular to a striped optical pattern that will initiate a photochemical
crosslinking reaction originally developed for proteins; 3) Better understanding
of silica core structure, including newly discovered variants, will be achieved
by chromatography with fractionation and scattering of X-ray or visible
radiation; 4) The stiffness of a water-soluble, uncharged polypeptide will be
determined by combined chromatographic and scattering methods; 5) A big
difference between the mobility of rigid rods and polypeptide semiflexible
filaments will be explored by an optical tracer method; 6) A long-standing
problem with the measurement of rigid rod diffusion using pulsed-gradient NMR
will be re-assessed using a very high-field-gradient facility.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Some of nature's most important building blocks and functional engines are made
of proteins. Synthetic polypeptides, which can be made in large amounts by
simple methods, borrow the protein structure and retain many protein-like
features, such as the ability to rotate light and respond to thermal or chemical
changes in the environment. The problem is that, even though they are very large
molecules, polypeptides are still very small things. This makes them hard to
manipulate. The proposed work marries the functionality of bio-inspired
polypeptides to the easy manipulation of larger particles using gravitational or
magnetic fields. This will be accomplished by placing the polypeptides onto
colloidal silica, essentially little balls of glass, resulting in core-shell
particles. By adjusting the temperature, the shape of the polypeptide shell will
be altered. This will provide information on shape transitions similar to those
used by influenza virus to penetrate the human body. Chains of particles
crosslinked by the action of light will result in nearly uniform filaments that
bring polymer science into the visible regime for easier inspection, while
facilitating the creation of even larger structures. Studies on a particularly
attractive water-soluble polypeptide will lead to improved understanding of the
kinds of polymers used to make high-strength fibers, such as those woven into
bullet-proof vests. In terms of societal impact, a middle school chemistry
competition will be further expanded in minority-serving districts, thanks to
successful attempts to woo professional educators to this cause. New outreach
initiatives with a public science & technology middle school will ensue,
integrated with real world experience and laboratory research.