* 1505118
* Stochastic and Dissipative Dynamics of Ultracold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Daniel Steck, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Quantum mechanics is an impressively successful theory that tells us how very
small (atomic and subatomic) objects behave. Despite the success so far, quantum
mechanics has important aspects that remain counterintuitive and require deeper
understanding. One such aspect of current interest involves measurements on
quantum systems. Fundamentally, when measuring some aspect of a quantum system,
the system is disturbed by the measurement, such that other aspects of the
system change in response to the measurement. The most famous example is
"Heisenberg's uncertainty principle," which, for example, states that when one
has better knowledge of the position of an atom, one must necessarily have worse
information about the atom's velocity. More generally, this disturbance effect
goes by the name of "quantum back-action." The goal of this project is use
ultracold atoms to observe and study several manifestations of quantum back-
action that have been predicted theoretically. Broadly speaking, this research
addresses the following questions: Under what conditions does back-action
significantly influence the future of the system? Can precisely engineered back-
action be useful as a tool to control the system? These questions are
nontrivial, as back-action generally refers to a random disturbance to a quantum
system. However, under carefully arranged conditions, the randomness of the
back-action can control quantum systems in well-defined ways. This research will
advance fundamental understanding of quantum mechanics, measurement, and
information, and it will provide new tools that may be useful in future
technologies such as quantum computers and precision-measurement devices for
such quantities as acceleration and magnetic field, whose performance will
ultimately be limited by quantum effects.

More specifically, the effects of quantum back-action on the dynamics of
ultracold atoms will be studied in three separate scenarios. In the first
scenario, a single trapped atom undergoes coherent transitions between two
states when driven by a laser field. Spontaneous emission not only causes the
atom to jump from the excited state to the ground state at random times, but
also provides information about the present state of the atom. By selecting only
the (random) cases where an atom does not spontaneously emit at all, the
experiment is predicted to show that spontaneous emission nevertheless has an
effect, via the relative probabilities for the atom to be in each state (i.e.,
the measurements should not be explainable by a theory that does not include
spontaneous emission). In the second scenario, atoms confined to an optical
lattice undergo spontaneous emission, which produces heating (momentum
diffusion). Although momentum diffusion should increase the rate at which the
atoms spread through the lattice, an interesting prediction is that for small
spontaneous-emission rates, the atoms' spreading should be suppressed due to the
inhibition of quantum tunneling. For larger spontaneous-emission rates, the
spreading of the atoms should then again increase as expected. In the final
scenario, a realization of the predicted "blowtorch" effect is to be realized
with atoms in an optical lattice: by making a space-dependent "temperature"
(spontaneous-emission rate) for the atoms, a pumping effect for the atoms
(realized as a steady current of atoms) should be observable, demonstrating a
fundamental effect in nonequilibrium thermodynamics.