* 1505217
* RUI:  Path Integral Approach to Ion-Impact Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Allison Harris, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 07/31/2019
* USD 124,927.00

The study of atomic collisions provides important information about one of the
fundamental forces of nature. The results of atomic collisions research are
widely used in fields such as plasma physics, astrophysics, biophysics, and many
other areas. In addition to providing a better overall understanding of heavy-
ion collisions, which is the principal focus of the effort, this work will bring
a well-known technique from other areas of physics into atomic and molecular
collisions research, and possibly lead to additional overlap and collaborations
between the atomic collisions community and other related fields. Another
important aspect of this project is the inclusion of undergraduate students in
cutting-edge research. By participating in this project, students will gain
valuable hands-on research experience through code development and data
analysis. They will also present their results at regional and national
conferences, which will hopefully give them a more global view of scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The few-body problem is one of the most
fundamental, unsolved problems in physics. When more than two particles interact
through the Coulomb force, the dynamics of the system cannot be described
exactly. As a result, theory must resort to approximations, and any
discrepancies that result between theory and experiment must be a result of the
approximations. A comparison of current theoretical models with recent
experimental results reveals some striking limitations of the current models. In
particular, the dynamics of collisions in which some of the collision fragments
are found in a full 3-dimensional geometry is not understood. The underlying
mechanism behind these 3-dimensional collisions is known to be a result of
quantum mechanical effects, but current theories cannot accurately describe the
collision dynamics. The objective of this project is to develop a novel quantum
mechanical theoretical model for the study of ion-impact atomic collisions
through the use of the path integral technique. The path integral method is a
well-known technique used in other areas of physics, but has not been applied to
the study of heavy-ion collisions. This particular technique will allow for the
inclusion of important quantum mechanical interactions, as well as provide an
intuitive understanding of particle trajectories during the collision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical details of the project include the
development of a computational model using the path integral method for
ionization and capture processes with heavy-ion projectiles. The method will
utilize an expansion of the Lagrangian around the classical path, where the
deviation from the classical path represents the quantum fluctuations of the
particle. For electron capture collisions, the role of the projectile-nuclear
interaction and target electron correlation will be studied. Electron capture
collisions with high projectile energy and large scattering angle will also be
studied with the objective of better understanding the Thomas mechanism, and
determining if possible diffraction effects exist in these collisions. For
ionization processes, collisions in which the ejected electron is found outside
of the scattering plane will be studied, with a focus on projectile-nuclear
interactions and the role of close collisions between the projectile and the
target nucleus.