* 1505657
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: experimental and computational study of structure and thermodynamics of rare earth oxides above 2000 C
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Axel van de Walle, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 285,606.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Materials which are stable to very high temperatures are
needed for applications in aerospace, energy, and other technologies. Many such
materials contain rare earth oxides, critical materials in potential short
supply. Novel experimental and computational methods are studying the structure
and stability of such rare earth oxides. The methodology includes diffraction
(determination of crystal structure) and calorimetry (measurement of heat
effects associated with melting and other reactions) on laser heated samples
levitated in a gas stream and not contaminated by contact with other materials,
as well as theoretical calculations. Such studies offer a unique opportunity to
obtain fundamental understanding of structures, phase transitions, and melting
properties and applications to technological problems. The project will also
advance general experimental and computational techniques for high temperature
research. It will offer opportunities for both undergraduates and graduate
students in materials science, chemistry, physics, and engineering to take part
in state-of-the-art research in both university and national laboratory
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Rare earth oxides are
critical materials essential to many important technologies yet their high
temperature properties, needed for such applications, are poorly known. Their
structure and thermodynamics above 2000Â°C are being studied using a combination
of novel experimental and computational methods. Aerodynamic levitation and
laser heating are being used for in situ X-ray diffraction at the Advanced
Photon Source, in situ neutron diffraction at the Spallation Neutron Source and
for drop calorimetry at the UC Davis Peter A. Rock Thermochemistry Laboratory.
Enthalpies of solid state phase transitions and fusion are being measured by
calorimetry, and volume changes on phase transitions and thermal expansion of
high temperature phases are being determined by diffraction. High temperature
thermal analysis complements drop calorimetry. Fusion enthalpies are required
for reliable calculations of eutectics of multi-component systems containing
rare earths. Ab initio computations of high temperature heat capacities, thermal
expansion, and temperatures and enthalpies of phase transitions and fusion are
being performed at Brown University using post-density functional theory (DFT)
methods, such as hybrid functionals and DFT+U, in conjunction with statistical
mechanics techniques such as cluster expansion, lattice dynamics analysis and
molecular dynamics. Computed thermal expansion and enthalpies of phase
transitions and fusion are being compared to experimental measurements and
calculations are being extended to high temperature properties of rare earth
oxides not yet accessible experimentally.