* 1505953
* Ionomer Dynamics in Confinement: Fundamental Insights from Dielectric Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* James Runt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project will create knowledge on the dynamic properties and the motions of
ions in ion-containing polymeric materials, which will facilitate understanding
and optimization of next-generation power sources and electrochemical devices.
In particular, the performance of these materials will be explored when their
dimensions are restricted to only a few nanometers. The research deals with the
way the properties of ion-containing polymers change when confined inside porous
membranes, in comparison to the bulk material. For example, there is evidence
that some polymer molecules will be absorbed onto the pore surface (strong
guest/host interaction) resulting in significant slowing of polymer motions and
reduced ion conductivity. These surface effects can be negated when the pores
are chemically treated to create weak guest/host interactions, resulting in
enhanced ion conductivity. The findings of this work can have a significant
impact on the future development of power sources and electrochemical devices,
particularly those with nanometer feature sizes. In terms of human resources,
this research project will create learning opportunities for two graduate
students. Undergraduate students will also participate meaningfully, through the
Penn State Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) Research program, senior
thesis projects, and as part of the Penn State NSF-REU program on soft
materials. Program participants will be encouraged to engage in outreach
activities, particularly those connected with the WISE Institute.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project targets an important unexplored area: the role of nanoscale
confinement on ion transport in conductive ionomers. The mobility of ionic
species in confined geometries is an important topic in polymer physics and has
future practical relevance in the design and processing of ion-containing
polymer nanostructured devices. The motivation for investigating how nanoscale
confinement influences ion transport in ionomers arises from the quest to
understand how their properties and performance change as their dimensions are
restricted to length scales of a few nanometers. To this end, a comprehensive
investigation of the molecular dynamics of two conductive ionomer systems
confined in cylindrical silica nanopores is proposed. Silica membranes are
particularly advantageous for these experiments, as pores with diameters in the
range of 4 to 10 nm can be readily achieved. Strong interfacial interactions
between the host membrane and guest ionomer will lead to slower dynamics, while
spatial restriction at the nanometer length scale can have the reverse effect of
enhancing ion transport. Dielectric spectroscopy is an ideal tool to investigate
the dynamics of polymers in nanoporous media owing to its ability to probe
molecular fluctuations over a wide frequency and temperature range. Aggregation
of ion dipoles in ionomers has important consequences for ion conduction,
particularly through its influence on polymer segmental dynamics, which in turn
is generally coupled with ion transport. The influence of confinement on ion
dipole aggregation has not been explored previously, but it is essential to do
so in this investigation to provide a complete understanding of the role of
confinement on the molecular dynamics.