* 1505303
* Research Initiation Award: Direct Numerical Simulation for Shock/Turbulence Interaction with Applications to Supersonic Cavity Flows
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Ovais Khan, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 01/31/2020
* USD 247,450.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in supersonic
cavity flow research is growing with the advancement of technology to design
long range and sustained supersonic transport and business jets. Tuskegee
University's HBCU-UP RIA will establish an advanced teaching-research
infrastructure in a much needed area of teaching and research - computational
modeling and simulation. The proposed research utilizes direct numerical
simulation based on a numerical scheme of high accuracy and efficiency to
investigate the shock/turbulent mixing layer interaction and various flow
features of a supersonic cavity and has applicability to supersonic civil
transport and military aircraft. Data obtained from the developed code will be
utilized to perform aero-acoustic analysis, thereby, predicting flow
oscillations and corresponding sound pressure levels with maximum accuracy. The
proposed numerical model has the potential to considerably reduce the high costs
associated with supersonic experimental testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research material produced will be directly integrated into new and existing
courses and classes for undergraduate students from predominately
underrepresented minority populations and for faculty development. In addition
to developing the the principal investigator's research portfolio, the project
contributes to a competitive, well-trained, diverse national workforce for high
technology industries, national labs and academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves collaborations with
researchers at the Ohio State University, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (Langley Research Center)and the Alabama Supercomputer Authority.
The development of research capabilities in the area of computational modeling
of fluid dynamics problems and high-performance computing assists Tuskegee
University faculty in conducting leading-edge research and provides the
opportunity to share these outcomes with the scientific community through
publications. The institution is both a minority-serving and an Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) institution. Thus, the
project expands the capability and capacity for research competitiveness in a
specialized engineering field in this EPSCoR-designated jurisdiction.