* 1505556
* Studying Correlated Electron Dynamics in Molecules and Materials with Isolated Attosecond Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Arvinder Sandhu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 321,801.00

Electrons play a fundamental role in most natural and laboratory phenomena.
These elementary particles are extremely light and agile--they can move inside
atoms, molecules and materials on the timescale of "attoseconds," which is a
billionth of a billionth of a second. To understand the functioning of physical,
chemical, and biological processes, it is important to be able to resolve and
control the underlying fast electronic motion. Newly devised attosecond
techniques provides exactly such an opportunity, using light pulses to strobe
the dynamics of electrons. However, most initial studies in this field have been
conducted on simple systems like atoms and small molecules. The researchers
supported by this program will develop and extend attosecond techniques to the
study of complex molecules and materials, where one or more electrons are
interacting with each other. Success along these directions will open up
opportunities for direct investigation of many biochemical and nanomaterial
processes relevant for light harvesting and energy storage. The proposed program
will therefore advance the state of science by building bridges between the
field of physics, and those of chemistry, biology, and material sciences. The
project will also train the next generation of scientists belonging to diverse
backgrounds in this emerging and interdisciplinary research
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic correlation often dominates the
excitation and relaxation dynamics of photo-excited molecules and nanomaterials,
manifesting itself in the energy and charge redistribution mechanisms in
important natural and laboratory processes, such as photosynthesis, repair and
damage or DNA, energy storage at molecule-semiconductor interfaces etc. This
research project aims at the investigation of correlation-driven physical and
chemical phenomena using various types of ultrafast spectroscopy. The high
temporal resolution required for these studies will be achieved through the
generation of isolated attosecond pulses using double optical gating or similar
schemes. The scientific objectives of this program will be to: (1) investigate
coherent charge migration dynamics in polyatomic molecules, such as those
consisting of a phenyl group, (2) study the coherence in electron wavepacket
dynamics and the origin of decoherence mechanisms, and (3) probe the generation
and dynamics of high energy excitons in carbon nanomaterials (e.g. graphene).
These objectives will be achieved while training graduate and undergraduate
students in the field of attosecond physics. Two powerful experimental
techniques will be utilized in the proposed measurements: velocity map imaging
and attosecond transient absorption. The investigations outlined in the proposal
will provide the building blocks for developing a better understanding of the
inner-workings of natural and practically relevant phenomena. Collaborations
with theorists will play crucial role in the interpretation of results obtained
in this unchartered territory, potentially leading to the development of new
theoretical models.