* 1505799
* Synergy: Collaborative: Security and Privacy-Aware Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,125,000.00

Security and privacy concerns in the increasingly interconnected world are
receiving much attention from the research community, policymakers, and general
public. However, much of the recent and on-going efforts concentrate on security
of general-purpose computation and on privacy in communication and social
interactions. The advent of cyber-physical systems (e.g., safety-critical IoT),
which aim at tight integration between distributed computational intelligence,
communication networks, physical world, and human actors, opens new horizons for
intelligent systems with advanced capabilities. These systems may reduce number
of accidents and increase throughput of transportation networks, improve patient
safety, mitigate caregiver errors, enable personalized treatments, and allow
older adults to age in their places. At the same time, cyber-physical systems
introduce new challenges and concerns about safety, security, and privacy. The
proposed project will lead to safer, more secure and privacy preserving CPS. As
our lives depend more and more on these systems, specifically in automotive,
medical, and Internet-of-Things domains, results obtained in this project will
have a direct impact on the society at large. The study of emerging legal and
ethical aspects of large-scale CPS deployments will inform future policy
decision-making. The educational and outreach aspects of this project will help
us build a workforce that is better prepared to address the security and privacy
needs of the ever-more connected and technologically oriented
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-physical systems (CPS) involve tight
integration of computational nodes, connected by one or more communication
networks, the physical environment of these nodes, and human users of the
system, who interact with both the computational part of the system and the
physical environment. Attacks on a CPS system may affect all of its components:
computational nodes and communication networks are subject to malicious
intrusions, and physical environment may be maliciously altered. CPS-specific
security challenges arise from two perspectives. On the one hand, conventional
information security approaches can be used to prevent intrusions, but attackers
can still affect the system via the physical environment. Resource constraints,
inherent in many CPS domains, may prevent heavy-duty security approaches from
being deployed. This proposal will develop a framework in which the mix of
prevention, detection and recovery, and robust techniques work together to
improve the security and privacy of CPS. Specific research products will include
techniques providing: 1) accountability-based detection and bounded-time
recovery from malicious attacks to CPS, complemented by novel preventive
techniques based on lightweight cryptography; 2) security-aware control design
based on attack resilient state estimator and sensor fusions; 3) privacy of data
collected and used by CPS based on differential privacy; and, 4) evidence-based
framework for CPS security and privacy assurance, taking into account the
operating context of the system and human factors. Case studies will be
performed in applications with autonomous features of vehicles, internal and
external vehicle networks, medical device interoperability, and smart connected
medical home.