* 1505830
* Mitigation of Pervasive Haber Process Carbon Pollution: Ammonia synthesis from air and water in suspensions of nanoscale Fe/Fe2O3
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Stuart Licht, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Stuart Licht of George Washington University to
develop the fundamental science of a process to produce ammonia, a critical
feedstock for the production of fertilizer. This process utilizes air, water and
sunlight, without creating carbon-containing byproducts. Currently, the Haber
process to produce ammonia effectively feeds the world population through
fertilizer production; however, this process is energy intensive, releasing over
200 million tons of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere each year. Introduction of
Haber synthetic ammonia has paralleled the explosive increase in world
population from 2 billion in 1930 to 7 billion today. In this research program,
an alternative chemical process is being developed for the production of ammonia
from N2, water and thermal energy. Also needed are common materials (molten
hydroxide, Ni electrodes) and an inexpensive, nanoscale Fe/Fe2O3 catalyst. The
broader impacts include the training of graduate students in the field of
renewable energy, specifically in the domain of solar
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is an effort to explore
electrolytic and solar synthetic pathways to produce critically needed ammonia
for fertilizer. The recent discovery in the Licht research group of this
alternative chemistry for the production of ammonia from atmospheric nitrogen
produces ammonia without carbon dioxide and at up to 70% coulombic efficiency by
electrolysis in molten hydroxide using suspensions of nanoscale Fe2O3. The
process requires little energy at high temperature. With STEP (Solar Thermal
Electrochemical Process), when the thermal energy is provided by sunlight,
ammonia is produced without emission of any carbon dioxide. The project seeks to
improve understanding of the fundamental basis of this new synthetic pathway to
produce ammonia by exploring the mechanism and seeking to increasing the
activity of the process and optimize the solar energy coupling. The interfacial
electrochemistry of the water plus air conversion to ammonia is being probed,
the architecture of nanoscale catalyst is being varied and a solar (STEP)
ammonia prototype is to be explored, including a new solar pressurized route, to
further increase solar energy efficiency.