* 1505007
* Collaborative Research: Liberal Studies in Engineering - Broadening the Path to the Profession: Feasibility Study
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Louis Bucciarelli, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 54,366.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project will develop a
framework for establishing an undergraduate, pre-professional, Bachelor of Arts
degree program called Liberal Studies in Engineering. This program intends to
establish an alternative pathway into engineering and attract the interest of a
different group of students than existing approaches. The program will utilize
the substantive content of the traditional undergraduate engineering program -
the engineering sciences, the laboratory activities, and design projects - and
subject this to study from the perspectives of the humanities, arts, and social
sciences as well as engineering. Traditionally engineering education emphasizes
mathematics and science prerequisite topics for beginning students and addresses
the broader social, economic, cultural and ethical aspects much later in the
curriculum and often in an indirect manner. The planned liberal studies in
engineering degree envisions reversing the process, offering students an
approach to the discipline from a humanistic, artistic, and social perspective.
It is expected that the Liberal Studies in Engineering approach will attract the
interest of a segment of undergraduates that do not find their goals and
concerns represented in the current mathematics-first prerequisite structure of
the discipline. Additionally the attention to context and emphasis on analytical
thinking, multiple framing, critical reflection and practical reasoning, key
dimensions of learning in the liberal arts, may better prepare students for the
realities of current and future engineering practice.

This project represents an initial phase in the development of a Liberal Studies
in Engineering degree. A feasibility study will be carried out to identify the
institutional policies and procedures that must be in place, the resources
needed, and prerequisites students should have for a Liberal Studies in
Engineering degree program. As part of this, efforts will be made to promote and
support the development by project participants of leaning units that illustrate
the approach of teaching exemplary engineering content from the perspective of
the humanities and social sciences. Peer review, and technical support will be
made available for module development. The study will include input from faculty
and administrators at selected institutions to obtain diverse and broad-based
perspectives. This study represents the beginning of a multi-phase process to
explore and develop a potentially transformative step in broadening
participation in engineering by offering a pathway into the discipline and a
route to a degree that is markedly different from the traditional path but still
encompasses comparable content.