* 1505536
* Terahertz Plasmonics for Linear and Nonlinear Spectroscopy and Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Daniel Mittleman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Terahertz science and technology has become one of the most exciting research
frontiers in recent years. This long-neglected portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum (with frequencies ranging from about 0.1 to 5 THz, which corresponds to
wavelengths from about 0.06 to 3 mm) has attracted a great deal of attention,
because of the many possible research and technology applications. One important
area is terahertz sensing, which exploits the unique spectroscopic signatures of
materials for detection and identification. Recent research has shown that the
terahertz range is spectroscopically rich, with many different substances
possessing strong and unique absorption fingerprints. Sensitive sensing
technologies would therefore have wide-ranging applications, in areas as diverse
as food monitoring and chemical weapons detection. However, the field has been
hampered by the relatively poor sensitivity of terahertz systems. By contrast,
state-of-the-art mid-infrared absorption spectroscopy achieves parts-per-
trillion detection levels, and surface-enhanced Raman scattering in the visible
or near- infrared can be used to detect the spectroscopic signature of a single
molecule. The aim of this research program is to demonstrate new techniques for
sensing and spectroscopy using terahertz pulses, including pulses with very high
peak electric fields. The approach is to build on recent work which explored the
giant enhancements of fields that can occur in the local environment of small
metallic structures. These ideas will be combined with newly developed
techniques for high-energy terahertz pulse generation. This combination will
enable the generation of extremely high local field strengths, opening up a new
realm for extreme light-matter interactions in the terahertz range, and pointing
the way towards vast improvements in the sensitivity of terahertz sensing
systems.

This comprehensive three-year research program has several important goals. It
will pioneer the development of sensitive new techniques for time-resolved
spectroscopic studies based on nonlinear interactions induced by strong
terahertz fields. By generating the highest terahertz fields yet reported and
studying their interaction with materials, this work will establish the
possibility of exploiting higher-order nonlinear interactions such as Raman
scattering, which have been essentially absent from the THz literature. It will
also demonstrate new techniques for sensing based on these nonlinear
interactions, which are of great technological importance. The scope of the
project is defined by two broad research thrusts. The first will investigate the
new possibilities enabled by plasmonic devices for sensing and manipulation of
terahertz waves. This will include the study of metasurfaces, including those
fabricated on active substrates which can be switched electrically. It will also
involve the use of atomic force microscopy for tip-enhanced near-field
spectroscopies including near-field emission spectroscopy. The second thrust
will explore the possibilities offered by nonlinear interactions induced by
these plasmonic local field enhancements, by integrating these plasmonic devices
together with high-intensity terahertz incident fields. Broadly speaking, this
work will change the prevailing view of terahertz science, which is generally
thought to be confined to the low- field or perturbative limit. By extending the
recent breakthrough work on terahertz high-field generation, this project will
establish a new discipline of extreme terahertz light-matter interactions.