* 1505790
* TWC SBE: TTP Option: Medium: Collaborative: EPICA: Empowering People to Overcome Information Controls and Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Michael Bailey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This project studies the security of representative personalized services, such
as search engines, news aggregators, and on-line targeted advertising, and
identifies vulnerabilities in service components that can be exploited by
pollution attacks to deliver contents intended by
attackers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also develops defense-in-depth
countermeasures against pollution attacks. These include new server-side
mechanisms to prevent the various cross-site-request-forgery schemes that allow
an attacker to insert actions. The defense mechanisms also include a distributed
data collection, measurement and analysis framework to detect anomalies in
browsing behaviors and information contents that are indicative of pollution of
user profiles or population preferences. The new information analysis techniques
use machine learning and natural language processing to identify differences
(e.g., missing information) that are significant or important to a user. The
project also develops tools to alert users and guide them to understand and
repair profiles, and studies regulatory models to incentivize the industry to
adopt a more transparent practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an
evaluation framework to facilitate the development and adoption of technologies.
The evaluation plan includes user studies involving real, diverse user groups on
the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To transition technologies to practice, this
project makes the tools freely available, and deploys data collection and
measurement systems on the Internet. This project also educates users about
pollution attacks and engages with users to improve the usability of the tools.