* 1505048
* Emergent Computation in Collective Decision Making by the Crevice-Dwelling Rock Ant Temnothorax Rugatulus
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Hyunju Kim, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2020
* USD 595,520.00

From the level of chemical reaction networks within cells to the social
structures of higher organisms, biological systems seem to take advantage of
distributed computation to perform a myriad of complex functions. However,
rigorous quantification of how life stores, processes and propagates information
at the various levels of organization observed in biological systems has
remained elusive. In this project the PIs will utilize recently developed
information-theoretic tools from complex systems research, typically applied to
artificial life systems, to assess how a real biological system manages
distributed information to perform a collective computational task. This
research will provide new applications of mathematical and computational tools
for use by scientists and will provide important insights in issues of broader
concern such as colony collapse disorder observed in honeybees. The results will
be disseminated to the general public through a variety of media as part of the
outreach efforts of the PI and Co-Is. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
PIs focus on characterizing information storage, processing, and propagation in
colonial decision making as a rigorous case-study for understanding the physics
of collective computation in living systems. The aim is to address several
outstanding questions in insect behavior, by applying a novel theoretical
framework treating collective decision making as a computation to the problem of
collective nest site choice by the ant Temnothorax rugatulus. To this end, the
investigators will implement a novel synthesis of two levels of theoretical
investigation, agent-based modeling and information-theoretic analysis of
experimental and simulated data sets, with experimental manipulation to
determine the mechanisms of information processing among individuals that lead
to global, emergent computation in Temnothorax rugatulus colonies. With this
novel framework, the PIs will address several important outstanding questions
about the physics governing collective choice, including the role of negative
feedback and under what conditions collective wins over individual rationality.
The research will provide one of the first detailed studies expanding the wealth
of knowledge on emergent computation in complex systems to the biological realm.
This study will inform our understanding of fundamental aspects of biological
computation that will provide new perspectives on the physics of living systems
by illuminating how life stores, processes, and propagates information. Due to
the ease of manipulation of individuals within eusocial-insect societies, the
PIs will be able to probe the minimal set of individual-level features necessary
for spontaneous distributed computation.