* 1505044
* Study of Electrons in Superfluid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Humphrey Maris, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 12/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;When an electron is injected into helium, it
forms a very small bubble (diameter ~38 Ã…) from which helium atoms are excluded.
This "electron bubble" forms a unique quantum system which has been extensively
studied and is fairly well understood. However, in addition to the normal
electron bubbles other negatively charged objects are produced whose origin
remains a mystery. These objects, which have been called exotic ions, have
higher mobility and appear to be smaller than the normal electron bubbles and,
despite much work, the nature of these objects remains a mystery. One possible
explanation, which remains somewhat controversial, is that these exotic ions are
bubbles in the liquid which contain only a part of the wave function of a single
electron. This project is aimed at exploring the nature and structure of these
exotic ions using ultrasonic, optical and transport measurements. If it can be
established that these are indeed bubbles with only a fraction of the electron
wave function it will result in a radical change in how physicists view quantum
theory. This research project is ideally suited for the training of
undergraduate and graduate students who will learn a broad range of practical
skills including electronics, vacuum techniques, low temperature physics, optics
and computer programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research our team investigates exotic
negatively-charged ions which have been discovered in superfluid helium at
temperatures around 1 K. The goal of the research is to discover the inner
structure of these exotic ions. In previous experiments our group has made
mobility measurements which show that there are at least 18 different ions, each
with a different characteristic size. Remarkably, there are also ions which have
a continuous size distribution. Despite much work by different research groups
the structure of these ions remains unknown. There is strong experimental
evidence that they are not impurities, and it appears impossible to relate them
to atomic or molecular helium ions previously detected in helium gas. One
remaining possibility is that the ions are electron bubbles each containing only
a fraction of the wave function of a single electron. While this is a radical
idea, it does provide a way to understand the existence of a large number of
different ions and makes it possible for there to be ions with a continuous
distribution of size. The goal of the current project is to learn more about the
properties of the ions and in this way to test the idea that bubbles containing
a fraction of the wave function can exist as stable entities. In a first project
a negative pressure is applied to the liquid and the magnitude of the pressure
required to cause a selected exotic ion to explode is measured. The magnitude of
the negative pressure is then compared with theoretical predictions. In a second
project the optical absorption by the ions is measured. This determines the
photon energies which can induce optical excitation of the ions and gives a
second test of the theory. The research project uses a wide range of techniques
including ultrasonics, optics, low temperature, and computer simulation and
provides excellent training for undergraduate and graduate students.