* 1505164
* Polyacetals: Water-Soluble, pH-Degradable Polymers with Remarkable Thermoresponsive Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jeffrey Koberstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2018
* USD 435,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The fundamental nature of polymer applications has changed markedly over the
years. While early applications called for polymers that were strong and light,
resistant to chemicals and environmentally inert, today's applications demand
smart polymers that can shrink, expand, thicken, or change effectively their
material properties in response to a host of different external stimuli.
Thermally responsive polymers exhibit a drastic and discontinuous change in some
physical property, usually solubility, with change in temperature. The proposed
research focuses on the development of an exciting new family of
thermoresponsive polyacetal polymers with remarkable properties that are well
suited to a myriad of biomedical and other applications. The new polyacetals are
the first water-soluble thermoresponsive polymers to be intrinsically
biodegradable. Their thermal transitions can be predicted from their molecular
structure and tuned to high precision anywhere within a range of about 6-80Â°C,
they are biocompatible, and they degrade under acidic conditions to form neutral
degradation products that do not cause inflammation inside the body. The new
polyacetal materials have the potential to be used in a broad range of
technologies that are important not only economically, but that affect the
quality of life, in particular those relating to medicine. An example of such an
outcome might be development of polyacetals as potential drug delivery vehicles
for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

Personnel development is an important outcome of the proposed research, and
involves training and mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher for a position in
academia, involving Master's students enrolled in an innovative new program that
provides undergraduate science majors the opportunity to obtain a Master's
degree in engineering, and developing the research skills of an undergraduate
student. The personnel involved with this research will also gain important
insight into critical biomedical problems through collaborations with practicing
medical clinicians.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The main technical research objectives are to develop the polyacetal materials
as a new family of temperature-responsive, pH degradable polymers; and to
explore the fundamental origins of their remarkable lower critical solution
temperature (LCST) behavior, scaling linearly with the number of carbon and
oxygen atoms in the polymer repeat units. LCST phase diagrams will be modeled to
extract the concentration and temperature dependence of the interaction
parameter and thereby explore the fundamental origin of the unique temperature
response. The research plan also seeks to extend the number of polyacetals
available to meet current and future needs for multi-stimuli-responsive
polymers. Extensions include exploring several new types of monomers, developing
monomers that provide main chain functionality to graft functional moieties of
interest and preparing macromonomers with terminal azide and alkyne groups that
can be coupled together by click chemistry. The macromonomers enable preparation
of dual responsive gels and block copolymers that can be used in important
applications ranging from smart drug delivery vehicles for cancer treatment that
biodegrade in acidic tumors, to polymers for controlled release of pesticides
that slowly degrade upon contact with soil. The research plan includes modeling
the remarkable LCST behavior in order to understand its linear dependence on
molecular structure, as well as correlating other important properties such as
the block copolymer critical micelle concentration and pH-dependant degradation
rates with the molecular structure. Successful modeling will provide the ability
to predict thermal response and physical behavior so that the properties of
these remarkable new polyacetal-based materials can be designed a priori to meet
the needs of specific applications.