* 1505145
* Studies of the Early-1990s Climate Shift in the Pacific and Its Linkage to the Atlantic Multi-decadal Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jin-Yi Yu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2019
* USD 849,543.00

Changes in the climate of the Pacific Ocean and overlying atmosphere have
worldwide consequences, and the causes and consequences of such changes are
important topics in climate dynamics. One such change is the Pacific climate
shift of the early 1990s, in which 1) the location of El Nino/Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) events shifted from the eastern equatorial Pacific to the
central equatorial Pacific; 2) the year-to-year variability of the Northern
Hemisphere monsoons decreased dramatically; 3) sea level in the western tropical
Pacific began rising at a faster rate; and 4) the north equatorial current and
countercurrent migrated southward. This project tests the hypothesis that the
1990s climate shift is related to an intensification of the subtropical Pacific
high, a quasi-stationary region of high sea level pressure which extends past
the dateline from the California coast and covers much of the subtropical North
Pacific. When the subtropical Pacific high intensifies the surface winds
circulating around it speed up, and the higher speed has the effect of
strengthening the coupling of the ocean and atmosphere in the region. Work under
this award examines the extent to which the intensification of ocean-atmosphere
coupling can lead to the four climate shift impacts listed above. The project
further tests the hypothesis that the intensification of the Pacific high
occurred in response to the reversal of the Atlantic Multi-decadal Oscillation
(AMO) which occurred at the same time. The AMO is a slowly varying mode of sea
surface temperature (SST) variation in which the Atlantic north of the equator
is either warmer or colder than average, with a transition from colder to warmer
SSTs around 1990. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is conducted using a suite
of simulations from a climate model configured in various ways to test the
hypotheses. In one configuration SSTs are prescribed globally, with the AMO
pattern imposed in the Atlantic so that the response of the Pacific high to the
AMO can be assessed. Other configurations use a partially or fully interactive
ocean model, allowing the changes in the Pacific high to affect SSTs and the
subsurface ocean. These configurations allow the changes in ocean-atmosphere
coupling and their hypothesized consequences to be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aside from its scientific interest, the 1990s
Pacific climate shift has societal importance due to its worldwide impacts. The
variability of monsoon systems is consequential for water resources, while the
shift from eastern to central Pacific ENSO events has implications for the
impacts of these events on the weather and climate of the US. In addition, the
project provides support and training for a postdoctoral associate and two
graduate students, thereby providing for the next generation of researchers in
this field.