* 1505195
* I-Corps:  Market Impact Identification of Dyadic Attribution Model for Disposition Assessment Using Online Games
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Shuyuan Metcalfe, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Both public and private agencies have a need to identify psychological
attributes that can lead to potentially undesired behavior or best-fit in the
organization. Communities across the US and throughout the world are looking for
new approaches to protect against&lt;br/&gt;potentially dangerous behaviors.
Cyber threats specific to our military, privacy, personal safety, financial
security, and national security are initiated by human factors. Language used
reveals the tendency of a user's behavior, which provides a window into the
potential stability, dependability, and trustworthiness of an individual. The
ability to identify potentially harmful human behavior before it is acted out
becomes increasingly viable. The need for increased intervention measures by
appropriate authorities before undesired behavior surfaces must be addressed. By
measuring trustworthiness, organizational insider threats can be mitigated. By
screening military personnel, stress-related disorders can be identified early
on. By understanding students' disposition, cyber-bullying behavior can be
recognized in order to safeguard students. By paying attention to the
disposition of law enforcement personnel, community interactions can be less
contentious and more effective. This I-Corps team has developed a methodology to
identify threatening human disposition and deceptive motivation through analysis
of online communication behavior&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology
has the ability to extract actors' language-action features based on their
online communication to establish dyadic attribution models of trustworthiness.
During interactive game playing, the technology analyzes online actors' choices
based on their online conversations, to discern their communicative intent. The
language-action features will feed a causality reasoning system
where&lt;br/&gt;the trustworthiness of the social actor is analyzed and updated
in a recursive Bayesian inference framework. The analysis from this dyadic
attribution model has the potential for assessing threatening human disposition
and intent (e.g., disgruntled) based on information behavior. The further
utilization of this model is to apply in similar instances such as identifying
actors with tendencies for suicide, murder,rage, and violence based on their
online behavior. With this product, the authorities can analyze psychological
stability and respond when necessary to provide counseling so that tragic
consequences can