* 1505373
* RUI: Parameter Estimation, Data Analysis, and Detector Characterization for LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Nelson Christensen, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 01/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

The observation of gravitational waves by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) will be a tremendous scientific
accomplishment, but the resources provided through this grant will create many
other positive opportunities. Carleton College is a leader in producing future
scientists. This project will provide research opportunities to students with
interests in physics and statistics, and help train them to become the next
generation of scientists. Carleton students are eager to participate in exciting
research, and their interest in gravitational wave astronomy, and science in
general, is large. The computational statistical methods developed as a
consequence of this project have, and will continue to have significant
influence in other scientific fields: astrophysics, chaos studies, and
gravitational wave detectors in space. The project will also continue to provide
material that will improve teaching at the college level; subjects that will
benefit from the science covered in this project include optics, general
relativity, and statistics. This project also creates opportunities for
scientific outreach; high school students and high school teachers will continue
to be exposed to the wonder and significance of LIGO's research, and this
outreach creates much excitement for science and physics. Finally, the research
work of this project promotes international scientific collaboration. Albert
Einstein predicted the existence of gravitational waves in 1916; a century later
we should actually observe gravitational waves, and consequently the scientific
and educational benefit will be tremendous.

Events seen by LIGO will produce a wealth of astrophysical information, the
extraction of which will require advanced techniques in data analysis, parameter
estimation, and statistics. Detector characterization work will provide
scientists with confidence in the quality of the data, and the performance of
the detectors. Carleton College will continue with its significant efforts in
identifying and characterizing noise in LIGO data; this information will be fed
back to the interferometer operators in order to improve the detector
performance. Carleton and colleagues are researching how to eliminate magnetic
field noise from the Schumann resonances that is coherent in the LIGO-Virgo
detector network. Carleton will use LIGO data to observe a cosmologically
produced stochastic gravitational wave background. Carleton will contribute to
the effort to detect long duration gravitational waves by correlating data from
two detectors, and using pattern recognition techniques to look for signals. The
Carleton team will develop Bayesian parameter estimation methods to extract
physical parameters associated with core collapse supernova produced
gravitational wave signals.