* 1505811
* Particle Astrophysics at TeV Energies with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Reshmi Mukherjee, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 745,448.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is a ground-based
observatory designed to study high energy gamma-rays. VERITAS has unique
capabilities, providing high sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic
and extragalactic sources. This award supports scientists at Barnard College to
carry out research with VERITAS. The group will participate in both technical
operations in support of the observatory and scientific investigations with a
focus on studying emission from active galaxies, pulsar wind nebula, and gamma-
ray bursts. The Barnard College group is heavily engaged in education and
outreach efforts. They involve undergraduate students in astrophysics research
with an emphasis on broadening the participation of women. They are also
involved in outreach efforts to high-school students in the New York City area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS has embarked upon a broad program of Galactic and
extragalactic source observations, as well as studies of signatures for new
physics such as dark matter. With this award the Barnard College group will
participate in VERITAS observing and calibration campaigns and work on code
development for improvements to VERITAS analysis techniques. Their scientific
program includes searching for high energy emission and variability in blazars,
using pulsar wind nebula and multi-messenger approaches to investigate the
origin of cosmic rays, and studying gamma-ray bursts.