* 1505311
* Research Initiation Award: High-resolution electronic spectroscopy of inter/intra-molecular interactions on biologically relevant molecules
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* John Yi, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 237,525.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Winston-Salem State University
(WSSU) will conduct research on the structures of biomolecules which are key to
understanding processes in biological systems. The research is a collaborative
project with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). This
project will enhance WSSU's research capabilities and the educational
experiences of undergraduates. Students will receive mentoring, training and
research experiences at WSSU and NIST. The research and educational efforts are
expected to expand the participation of groups underrepresented in STEM and
support WSSU's vision and mission of strengthening and broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goals of
the research are to: 1) Explore the direct connection between geometry and
chemical reaction dynamics by studying the conformational preferences for photon
induced intramolecular formation in Tryptophan methyl ester; 2) Measure the
atomic displacements and changes in electronic distributions that occur in a
peptide bond when it is linked by hydrogen bonds to a molecule, specifically the
model system of 3-indole propionic acid-H2O; 3) Examine the influence of
hydrogen bond formation with water in the reversible tautomerization reaction
involving oxindole-H2O in the presence of light; 4) Probe the influence of
hydrogen bond formation with water on the inter-molecular dynamics of
m-methoxyphenol; and 5) Determine the intramolecular potential energy surface
that governs the motion of an alkyl functional group such as -CH3 moiety
attached to the N site in N-methylcarbazole and discern how this motion is
affected when the assembly is radiated with light. The project will strengthen
WSSU's undergraduate students' preparation in advanced spectroscopy technology,
and thus, will have a significant impact on WSSU and its commitment to producing
more graduates with competencies and degrees in STEM fields. Research will be
conducted at WSSU and NIST.