* 1505849
* Solution-Processed Monodisperse Nanoelectronic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Mark Hersam, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 435,852.00

Nontechnical Description: With the increasing importance of portable and
wearable electronic technologies, new materials are needed that combine
superlative electronic properties with other requirements such as mechanical
flexibility, low power consumption, and scalable manufacturing. Emerging two-
dimensional nanoelectronic materials that are atomically thin meet many of these
requirements, but no single material can achieve all of them concurrently.
Consequently, this project develops heterostructures that synergistically
integrate the desirable properties of multiple two-dimensional nanoelectronic
materials, thus overcoming the design tradeoffs imposed by single materials
utilized in isolation. Solution-processing methods are further employed to
achieve highly homogenous nanoelectronic heterostructures in a manner that is
compatible with large-scale, low-cost additive manufacturing. The results of
this project are disseminated through a comprehensive set of education and
outreach activities that include graduate curriculum development, undergraduate
laboratories, and a materials science exhibit at the Chicago Museum of Science
and Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: To realize
reproducibly high performance in electronic and optoelectronic devices,
nanoelectronic materials must be produced via scalable methods that possess high
structural monodispersity. Furthermore, the resulting nanoelectronic material
components need to be assembled into morphologies that preserve their superior
properties and are amenable to subsequent fabrication methods. Towards these
goals, dispersion chemistries, solvents, and density gradient media are
identified that enable density gradient ultracentrifugation sorting of
transition metal dichalcogenides, boron nitride, and black phosphorus with
exceptional structural and electronic purities. These high purity samples
facilitate fundamental studies of two-dimensional nanoelectronic materials as a
function of structural parameters such as thickness and lateral size. In
addition, homogeneous two-dimensional nanomaterial dispersions are assembled via
vacuum filtration and layer-by-layer assembly to form multi-component bulk
heterojunction nanocomposite films and thin-film heterostructures that are
suitable for the fabrication and testing of large-area nanoelectronic devices
and circuits. In this manner, the role of surface and interfacial chemistry on
electronic properties are elucidated at the two-dimensional limit.