* 1505361
* I-Corps L:  Real-Time Graphical Presentation for Visually Impaired STEM Students
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jenna Gorlewicz, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Visually impaired (VI) students are challenged with learning highly visual
content in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) courses using
nonvisual technologies that portray only limited details and cannot be presented
in real-time. Though there is a rising number of VI individuals seeking higher
educational experiences, just under a third have attained a high school diploma.
This situation is exaggerated in STEM fields, where much of the content relies
heavily on graphical information presented visually. These unfortunate events
are not due to VI individuals being incapable of high academic achievement, but
rather, due to inadequate technologies and resources provided to them.
Subsequently, there exists a dire need for a portable, refreshable real-time
display of graphical information via nonvisual feedback that can be easily
integrated within a classroom setting. This Innovation Corps for Learning Team
project aims to assess the commercial viability, market potential, and
technological impact of touchscreen-based educational curriculum that will
enable real-time graphical information presentation through visual, auditory,
and vibratory feedback. The proposed innovation leverages commercially available
touchscreens and custom software created in the form of Android applications to
translate visual content displayed on-screen into content that can be felt
(through vibrations) and heard (through sound). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed innovation has the potential to bridge this technological gap and open
up these new learning opportunities for VI students. &lt;br/&gt;The
infrastructure and software in this work will promote a transformed classroom in
which students with VI are independently interacting with their sighted peers
and primary classroom teacher, in real-time via touchscreens. Each student would
have a touchscreen that is wirelessly networked to their peers' and teacher's
touchscreens (or smart board or laptop). As the teacher draws a graph or figure
on his or her input device, this same image will immediately "appear," in a
multimodal sense, on all of the students' touchscreens. While sighted students
may primarily use the visual display of the information, students with VI can
leverage vibratory and/or auditory feedback (using headphones) to explore the
graphical content. This work lays the foundation for the creation of
touchscreen-based educational curriculum in the form of Android applications
that will (1) meet the customer need of a portable, multimodal, real-time
platform for graphical information presentation, (2) enable classroom
integration through the use of existing hardware, and (3) encourage widespread
adoption through distribution in online application markets. The impacts of this
work will not only address several barriers of graphical information transfer
for VI students (a significantly underrepresented population in STEM), but will
also lay the foundation for the creation of a universally-designed, learner-
centered framework for touchscreens that may benefit all people, enhancing the
fidelity and creating new dimensions of learning right at our fingertips.