* 1505228
* A Survey of Pulsars in Very-High-Energy Gamma Rays with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Nepomuk Otte, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 438,000.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is a ground-based
observatory designed to study high energy gamma-rays. VERITAS has unique
capabilities, providing high sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic
and extragalactic sources. This award supports scientists at Georgia Institute
of Technology to carry out research with VERITAS. The group will study pulsars
that emit very high energy gamma-rays to test models of particle acceleration
and to look for evidence of the quantum-mechanical structure of spacetime. The
group will work with undergraduates in research projects. They will also
participate in the GIFT program, integrating a teacher in the group's research
activities and developing classroom activities.

This award with support the Georgia Institute of Technology group as they begin
the first comprehensive survey of pulsars in very high energy gamma-rays with a
goal of finding more pulsars like the Crab that emit pulsed gamma-rays at
energies above 100 GeV. They will perform a deep exposure of the Crab pulsar
with VERITAS. This will extend spectral measurements into the TeV range in order
to discriminate between model predictions of particle acceleration and to test
Lorentz invariance. Photon detectors for future gamma-ray observatories will be
characterized and simulation software will be developed.