* 1505150
* Multiple Consciousnesses: Investigating The Identities (Academic, Gender, Race and Disability) Of Black Women Undergraduate Students In STEM And Their Impact On Persistence
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Lorraine Fleming, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,339,223.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
supports research projects that seek to study the underlying issues affecting
the differential participation and graduation rates in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate education of African American
students. This award to Howard University is co-funded by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, specifically the ECR Research in Disabilities Education area of
special interest. ECR emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Howard University has teamed with
three other Historically Black Universities - Morgan State University, Hampton
University, and Prairie View A &amp; M University - to conduct a large empirical
study of Black women undergraduate students in STEM. The overall goal of the
project is to investigate the intersectionality of their existing identities
(gender, race and disability) and the identity that they acquire as STEM
students on their way to earning a degree and the impact of the
intersectionality on their participation, retention and success. The project is
guided by an evaluator, as well as an external advisory committee.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For decades, researchers have examined the issues related
to broadening the participation, retention, and success of individuals
underrepresented in STEM. However, there is limited data on Black women, who
over time have become an increasingly larger portion of the available talent
pool. Past research on women and Blacks in STEM has not focused on the
identities of race, gender and disability. The identity of being Black and
female uniquely influences the pathways that students take to reach degree goals
and be successful in STEM careers. The study will investigate the impacts of the
intersectionality of existing identities (gender, race and disability) and the
academic identity that they acquire as STEM students. The researchers will use a
triangulation mixed methods approach to longitudinally collect qualitative and
quantitative data to learn participants' perspectives and experiences from
freshman to senior year. Additionally, those participants who self-identify as a
person with disabilities will be invited to participate in a semi-structured
interview. Purposive sampling will be employed to ensure an adequate number of
students with disabilities participate in the project's qualitative data
collection. Once data are collected and disaggregated, the variance in the
educational experiences of students along the variables of ethnicity, racial
identity, gender identity, disability, and academic major will be examined. It
is anticipated that a better understanding of the complexity of the identities
of these women will inform inclusion practices, particularly at the collegiate
level, and perhaps serve as a predictive element in success.