* 1505308
* Searches for Gravitational Wave Transients:  Data Analysis and Detector Characterization for Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Guenakh Mitselmakher, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 600,010.00

Gravitational waves are ripples in the curvature of space-time created by moving
masses, which travel through the universe at the speed of light. Predicted by
Einstein's Theory of General Relativity (GR) - the most commonly accepted model
of gravity - gravitational waves have not been detected yet. The direct
observations of gravitational waves would be one of the most fundamental results
in the modern science and the ultimate test of GR. Also gravitational waves will
be a radically new tool for exploring fundamental physics and astronomy. They
will probe the physics driving the most violent astrophysical events in the
universe in ways inaccessible to electromagnetic astronomy. The construction of
the U.S. Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (aLIGO) is
almost complete. The aLIGO detectors will conduct the first observations in the
fall 2015. Within the next few years, aLIGO and its international partner
detectors Virgo and Kagra expect to make the first detections of gravitational
waves from merging compact binary objects, such as neutron stars and black
holes. Gravitational waves produced by the collision of black holes, asymmetric
core collapse supernovae, rapidly spinning neutron stars, and even by the Big
Bang itself are targets for detection in the years to come.

This award supports high priority searches for gravitational-wave transients
from a broad class of astrophysical sources. These searches are capable of
detecting gravitational transients in a wide range of source parameters,
including yet unknown sources. They target the most extreme astrophysical
events, such as supernovae, gamma-ray-bursts, mergers of neutron stars and black
holes, and hold a promise for discoveries of entirely new astrophysical
phenomena. Also, they will extend the most promising advanced LIGO searches for
compact binary sources into the binary parameter space not covered by the
existing template algorithms. These searches have a potential to establish the
existence of intermediate mass binary black holes, look inside the galactic
nuclei by detecting binaries with the eccentric orbits, and test the theory of
general relativity at high field regime with the intermediate mass ratio binary
sources. Rapid source reconstruction and sky localization will enable joint
observations, with the electromagnetic telescopes advancing the field of the
multi-messenger astronomy. Sophisticated signal processing algorithms and source
reconstruction methods will be implemented and applied to find the source
polarization and waveforms. A novel wavelet regression method will be used for
the analysis and characterization of aLIGO data, targeting identification,
monitoring and cancellation of environmental noise coupled into the detector
output. Studies of noise sources will be performed and novel noise cancellation
techniques will be tested to enable the first confident detection of
gravitational-wave transients.