* 1505891
* Understanding Adsorption, Uptake and Reactive Processes at Aqueous Surfaces of Atmospheric Aerosol Importance
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2019
* USD 667,139.00

This project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division supports the efforts of Professor Geraldine Richmond and her
students at the University of Oregon to perform experimental measurements and
theoretical calculations of the adsorption and reactivity of atmospherically
important organic species at the surface of aqueous solutions that mimic aqueous
aerosols in the atmosphere. Much of the chemistry in the earth's atmosphere
occurs on tiny specks of solid particles and liquid droplets known as aerosols.
Although it is known that atmospheric aerosols have major impacts on our climate
and our health, little is known about adsorption and reactive processes that
occur on these aerosol particles and the role they play in influencing these
impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies take a stepwise approach towards
understanding surface aerosol processes of increasing salt and organic surface
composition and morphology. The results may fill the current demand for a
molecular-level description of environmental interfaces and the need for
surface-sensitive and real-time measurements made under environmentally relevant
conditions. State-of-the-art laser spectroscopic and surface tensiometry
measurements are used to measure the detailed molecular characteristics of the
adsorbed surface species. The computational studies that involve a combination
of molecular dynamics calculations and density functional theory provide a
complement to these experimental studies. In addition to these studies
accelerating the understanding of aerosol surface chemistry that contributes to
air quality, Professor Richmond uses this research in outreach activities to
scientists in developing countries in Asia and Africa where air and water
quality are both a local and global concern.