* 1505460
* Development of Research-Based Tools for Teaching Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Chandralekha Singh, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2018
* USD 465,000.00

This award supports the continued development, assessment, and dissemination of
Quantum Interactive Learning Tutorials (QuILT) and peer-instruction tools for
undergraduate courses to prepare future scientists and engineers for the demands
of the high-tech workplace. A solid grasp of the fundamental principles of
quantum physics is essential for most scientists and engineers, considering that
the global economy has become increasingly dependent on science and technology
based upon quantum phenomena. Single electron transistors, SQUIDs, quantum-well
lasers, and other innovative quantum devices are made possible by an
understanding of the underlying quantum processes. However, quantum physics is a
technically difficult and abstract subject. The subject matter makes instruction
quite challenging; able students constantly struggle to master basic concepts.
To sustain U.S. leadership in science and technology, it is critical to ensure
that advanced undergraduate students (and graduate students) preparing for
careers in science and engineering develop a solid grasp of the fundamental
concepts of quantum physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QuILTs and peer-instruction
tools are based upon a cognitive-apprenticeship model of learning and emphasize
modeling, coaching and weaning. To aid instructors, the concept-based and
problem-based QuILTs and peer-instruction tools will be keyed with most of the
common textbooks. However, every effort will be made to ensure that the
different modules fit together as a coherent whole and help students organize
their knowledge in a hierarchical fashion. Some tools expose students to
contemporary and exciting topics such as quantum cryptography that can be taught
using simple two-level systems.