* 1505901
* New Photophysical Processes in Impurity Doped Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 457,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Doped semiconductor nanostructures are ubiquitous in
energy conversion, energy storage, photocatalysis, information processing, and
information storage technologies, and they are central to numerous futuristic
device technologies including spin-based electronics. With support from the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, this project is generating new forms of matter on nanometer length
scales made from semiconductors doped with impurities. This project is also
applying sophisticated physical measurement techniques to elucidate the
technologically relevant physical properties of these doped nanocrystals. The
knowledge gained from this project has broad implications for each of these
technologies. In addition to yielding new fundamental scientific knowledge and
new forms of matter, this project is also providing advanced technical training
for participating undergraduate and graduate students to prepare them for future
careers in science, engineering, and education. Special emphasis is being placed
on integrating research and education at the undergraduate level through
aggressive involvement of undergraduates in this research, incorporation of
experiments and concepts from this research into the University of Washington
undergraduate curriculum, hosting faculty and students from undergraduate
institutions as visiting scientists at University of Washington, and mature
outreach activities at Seattle-area community colleges and high schools.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This research is developing new colloidal luminescent
nanomaterials based on lanthanide- and transition-metal doped semiconductor
quantum dots that show unprecedented photophysical and magneto-optical
properties relevant to advanced information-processing, imaging, spectral
conversion, and energy conversion technologies. A balanced research effort
integrating synthetic, spectroscopic, photophysical, and magneto-optical
methodologies is being applied to develop a fundamental understanding of the
structure/function relationships that govern the physical properties of these
materials. This project targets a thorough understanding of delayed luminescence
and excitonic magnetic polaron phenomena in doped quantum dots, development of
new methodologies for exploiting delayed luminescence to probe quantum dot
surface electron traps, elucidation of the magneto-optical properties of
lanthanide-doped quantum dots, and translation of research discoveries into
patentable technologies and educational tools. This research will yield new
fundamental scientific insights that will define the ways such materials are
made and understood, and will accelerate the emergence of applied technologies
based on such materials, including in information processing, spectral
conversion, imaging, and energy conversion technologies.