* 1505198
* The Precipitation Response to El Ni√±o/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) over Tropical South America: Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity and the Role of the Land Surface
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Leila Carvalho, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2019
* USD 459,601.00

El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events are known to have significant impacts
on weather and climate worldwide, including reductions in rainfall over much of
tropical South America with associated disruptions to water resources,
agriculture, and other human and natural systems. The rainfall anomalies are
ultimately due to changes in the large-scale atmospheric circulation induced by
ENSO conditions in the neighboring equatorial Pacific, but they may also be
modulated by land-atmosphere coupling occurring over South America. Here land-
atmosphere coupling refers to several mechanisms through which the condition of
the land surface influences precipitation, one of which is that soil moisture
serves as a source of water vapor through evaporation and transpiration, thereby
promoting precipitation. This sort of "precipitation recycling" can prolong and
enhance dry spells, as lack of rain dries the soil and reduces
evapotranspiration, leading to further reductions in rainfall. On the other
hand, a drier land surface can mean greater heating of the land surface during
the day as there is less evaporative cooling, and a hotter land surface can lead
to instability in the atmospheric boundary layer, which increases the chances of
convective precipitation. Land-atmosphere coupling can be quite variable
depending on land cover and other factors, and can thus cause the rainfall
response to ENSO events to be more spatially variable that would be expected
from the large-scale atmospheric circulation anomalies. It can also cause
changes in the frequency, intensity, and duration of daily and sub-daily
rainfall episodes within the period of a season or more during which an ENSO
event takes place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine
the extent to which land-atmosphere coupling accounts for the spatial
heterogeneity in the rainfall response to ENSO events over tropical South
America. The research consists in large part of statistical analysis of
precipitation and atmospheric and land surface data for tropical South America,
taken from satellite and surface observations and reanalysis products. Parallel
analysis is applied to model simulations from the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project version 5 (CMIP5), including simulations from the subset of models which
contributed to the CMIP5 Global Land-Atmosphere Coupling Experiment (GLACE-
CMIP5), in which models were integrated using climatological soil moisture so
that land-atmosphere coupling could be assessed by comparison between
simulations with interactive and fixed soil moisture. The statistical assessment
is accompanied by model experiments using the quasi-equilibrium tropical
circulation model version 2 (QTCM2), a simplified model which can simulate key
aspects of the precipitation response over tropical South America, and in which
key factors such as soil moisture, surface sensible heat flux, and the exchange
of heat and water vapor between the boundary layer and the overlying free
troposphere can be controlled and examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this
project has important broader impacts in addition to its scientific merit, given
the substantial consequences of ENSO-related precipitation disruptions in the
region. The results of this study are also expected to shed light on the role of
land-atmosphere coupling in other regions of the tropics where similar surface
conditions prevail. The work also promotes international collaboration, as it
involves unfunded collaborators in two Columbian universities. Aside from the
broader impacts of the research, the project also supports undergraduate
research assistants through the Research in Science and Engineering (RiSE)
program, a 10-week summer program which focuses on students from traditionally
underrepresented populations. In addition, the project provides support and
training to a graduate student, thereby providing for the next generation of the
scientific workforce in this research area.