* 1505403
* I-Corps L:  Social Entrepreneurship to Integrate Education, Research and Training - A University of Houston Model
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Rupa Iyer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Our undergraduate students are at a distinct disadvantage as they lack the
interdisciplinary skills required to face the rapidly changing practices present
in life sciences research. Therefore, there exists a critical need to advance
life sciences education to reflect the discipline it serves. Both the
disciplines of life sciences and of science education underwent tremendous
changes in the latter half of the 20th century; however, biology education has
not kept pace with the rapid changes in the field. The goal of this project is
the expansion and implementation of an interdisciplinary research-based
curriculum to broadly disseminate and implement innovative S.T.E.M learning
practices. In addressing the NSF?s Vision and Change, a call to teach biology as
it should be done in the 21st century; this project further delineates the
skills and knowledge base for students in this growing interdisciplinary field.
Additionally, the project recognizes the opportunity to expand the scope of this
curriculum to support and benefit the wider education and research community and
help guide the transformative effort to prepare our students for the 21st
century biology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This curriculum uses a pesticide
degrading bacterium, Brevundimonas diminuta, as an anchor organism to
demonstrate the lifecycle of a typical biotechnology product. Three sets of
activity modules use a guided inquiry-based method to teach appropriate
techniques and skills and help students build a bridge between materials
presented in courses and real-life applications. Module I is an environmental
sampling research module (ESRM) which demonstrates the discovery process and
consists of the collection of environmental soil samples to isolate pesticide-
degrading microbes. Module II contains techniques for isolation, cloning, and
transgenic expression of the pesticide-degrading gene. Module III consists of
activities that emulate production of a biotech product, in our case activities
that are related to growing transformed cells in a bioreactor for optimum
production which is then followed by purification of the recombinant protein
using traditional downstream processes. The environmental sampling research
module (ESRM) designed, developed, and successfully implemented at the
University of Houston during the past six years will be integrated into a
variety of courses across diverse institutions to provide undergraduate research
experiences. Students will locate sites positive for pesticide degrading
activity, and identify novel strains of bacteria. The wide expansion of the ESRM
database through this activity will be used to enhance a variety of skills,
including writing, critical thinking, and quantitative learning. This curriculum
will impact the following areas in life sciences education; undergraduate
research, retention in STEM, and workforce readiness.