* 1505353
* RAPID: Evaluating Ebola Message Effects over Time: Risk Perceptions, Trust in and Attributions of Responsibility to Institutions, Personal Behavior and Policy Support
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2014,10/31/2015
* Branden Johnson, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2015
* USD 134,760.00

While Ebola threatens a major catastrophe in West Africa, its public health
impacts in the U.S. are likely to be minor, shaped more by fear than
transmission of the virus. The effect, however, on Americans' trust in public
health authorities, and thus the impacts on future epidemics, among other
impacts, may be much larger. Research to track changes in public views on Ebola
risk and management performance, especially their impacts on trust and
attribution of responsibility to varied institutions (e.g., Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Department of Health and Human Services, Obama
administration, Congress, hospitals), and individual medical professionals and
travelers from West Africa, is vital to help foretell public responses to future
epidemic threats. Given the diverse and conflicting messages about Ebola risks
and institutional performance now present, we also must understand how such
messages affect public interpretations of Ebola risk and institutional
performance. Results can help improve public health management and
communication, plus help integrate theory on risk perception, trust in
institutions, attribution of responsibility to institutions, and risk
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study involves five surveys over 6
months with the same randomly sampled set of people from a diverse national
online panel, exploiting the strength of a longitudinal survey experiment to
assess causes of change over time. The experimental part of the study tests
effects of alternative messages over this extended period, tracking their
interactions with interpretive screens provided by trust and attributions of
responsibility. Two messages concern the 21-day quarantine based on WHO
recommendations: one message that repeats the authorities' reassurance that this
quarantine is long enough that the affected person will not become symptomatic
after release, and one that warns (based on expert analyses) of small but non-
zero risks that symptoms will appear beyond this period. Besides testing the
effect of the latter message on judged risk, trust, and support for the 21-day
quarantine limit, the study also tests the inoculation strategy of stimulating
counter-arguments to reduce panic effects of later counter-attacks on the
quarantine period. A third message, also an inoculation message, stressrd
capabilities of the public health system despite inevitable mistakes, to see how
this affects trust and responsibility-attribution ratings. In pre-event
conditions this kind of inoculation seems to reduce public over-reaction to
scary [terrorism] events, but in the midst of ongoing management of Ebola may be
counter-productive. The final message will review arguments on specific policies
(e.g., how to keep people from Ebola-afflicted West African nations out of the
U.S., or from spreading disease while here). Varied belief, attitude and
behavioral intention measures tracks effects of these manipulations, and tests
potential moderators (e.g., worldview, affect, political ideology and
partisanship). Finally, the research includes the first probe of how perceived
relations among institutions affect trust and attributions (e.g., belief that
CDC was free to act against Ebola without constraints from other institutions
may increase its judged responsibility for subsequent failures of performance).