* 1505149
* Search for Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay with the NEMO-3 and SuperNEMO Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Karol Lang, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Neutrinos are some of the most intriguing elementary particles that make up the
Standard Model of particle physics. They were long thought to have no mass,
don?t interact with much of anything, and may hold the key to why there is more
matter than antimatter in the Universe. Neutrinos are commonly observed in beta
decay, a radioactive process that involves the emission of an electron (or its
antiparticle the positron) from the nucleus, and which is always accompanied by
the emission of a neutrino (or its antiparticle the antineutrino) as well. This
research focuses on the search for what is called neutrino-less double beta
decay, where an initial nucleus with atomic weight and number (A,Z) is
transformed into a nucleus of (A, Z + 2) with the emission of only two electrons
and nothing else. According to the Standard Model of particle physics, this can
only happen if neutrinos and antineutrinos are exactly the same, that is, the
neutrino is its own antiparticle. It is believed that this overlap between
matter and antimatter could prove essential in answering one of the most
fundamental questions in science: why is our Universe made exclusively of
matter?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research uses the NEMO-3 and SuperNEMO
experiments. The NEMO-3 experiment employed thin foils of particular nuclear
isotopes surrounded by detectors that could provide 3D particle tracking of the
decay electrons. This unique technique provides several observables for each
registered event, offering a powerful means to identify double beta decays and
to reject background processes. SuperNEMO will further exploit the NEMO-3
technique. The research group supported by this award will continue its
participation in the NEMO-3 data analysis and in the construction of the first
SuperNEMO module ("Demonstrator"). Through their activities, the group will
educate and train young researchers in building state-of-the-art research
instruments and science projects. They will work towards building on the
University of Texas at Austin campus an exhibit gallery illustrating the
discovery, the underlying physics, and applications of natural radioactivity,
cosmic rays, and related subatomic phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NEMO-3
analysis has already yielded high precision measurements of double beta half-
lives for seven isotopes and set some of the most stringent constraints on the
neutrino-less transitions, yielding an upper limit for the effective neutrino
mass of (0.3-0.9)eV, where the span reflects uncertainties in the nuclear matrix
element. The SuperNEMO aspects include designing and fabrication of the central
source foil frame, the light injection and calorimeter monitoring system, and
the Bi-207 calibration deployment. For the next three years, a critical period
for completing and commissioning the Demonstrator, the group will complete
hardware commitments and will participate in analysis of data from the new
experiment.