* 1505767
* Scavenging Thermal-noise Energy and Quantum Fluctuations for Self-powered Time-stamping and Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2015
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 08/31/2015
* USD 344,387.00

This research project is investigating self-powered sensing devices, circuits
and algorithms for event time stamping and event reconstruction. As a proof-of-
concept we are applying these techniques for designing passive, battery-less
structural health monitoring (SHM) sensors that can continuously sense and time-
stamp important and rare events that could have occurred during the operating
life span of the structure. For instance in orthopedic implants like knee or hip
implants, the use of these techniques would be able convey temporal information
about any mechanical misalignment or any abnormal usage of the implant. This
information could be useful to surgeons in diagnosing and planning of any
revision surgery. For civil and aerospace structures, these techniques could be
used to determine when the structure was subjected to large mechanical
deformations or strains; or when a rare, unwanted mechanical impact with the
structure could have occurred. In combination with computer models, the time-
stamped event information could be used in prognosticating impending failures
and can be used in determining condition-based maintenance schedules. Thus, the
proposed self-powered sensing technology could be a key facilitator in achieving
the grand vision for the internet-of-things, where millions of passive,
inexpensive sensors could become an integral part of "smart" structures (civil,
aerospace, mechanical and biomechanical) that can self-diagnose its own
catastrophic failure. As a part of the outreach activities, the project is
developing a cross-disciplinary forum between the electrical, structural and
biomedical engineers; and includes design of educational modules and
organization of tutorial and special sessions in the area of self-powered
sensors. Also, in addition to the mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students, the project is also fostering student entrepreneurship activities in
the area of sensors and structural health monitoring.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in the investigation of
thermodynamically and quantum-mechanically driven electron transport phenomena
that can be used to implement perpetual timers and clocks. Different device and
layout topologies are being investigated that will lead to timers with different
dynamical responses and to timers that can continuously operate over the entire
monitoring period. The physics of the timer is being combined with the physics
of the piezoelectricity driven impact-ionized hot-electron injection process to
achieve self-powered monitoring of mechanical strain when the sensor is embedded
or implanted inside a mechanically active structure. Using an array of these
timer-modulated hot-electron injectors, the project is investigating sparse
reconstruction algorithms that will be able to time stamp salient strain-related
events. As a proof-of-concept, the circuits implementing the self-powered timers
and the self-powered strain sensors are being prototyped in a standard CMOS
process are also being integrated with previously developed radio-frequency
identification (RFID) and wireless sensing system-on-chip architectures. This
hybrid energy scavenging configuration will not only enable continuous, self-
powered monitoring of salient and rare events but will also enable wireless
retrieval of the sensor data along with remote initialization and configuration
of the sensor under user command and control.