* 1505795
* UNS: Employing hydrodynamic lift and particle trajectory ratcheting to achieve sieve-free separations based on size and shape in cross-flow filtration
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,035.00

1505795(Koch)

The focus of the proposed research is to study particle transport phenomena that
occur during cross-flow filtration of suspensions. In addition to development of
fundamental understanding of these phenomena, the objective is to aid the
development of a so-called sieve-free filtration system. While the proposed work
is highly fundamental, engineering applications are its motivation.

This is a proposal to conduct a combined theoretical/numerical/experimental
study of particle separation in crossflow. The motivation for this study is to
improve practices in cross-flow filtration - a high throughput method of
separating particles (including cells or macromolecules) from a fluid and from
smaller sized particles. In conventional operation, the separation is
accomplished by sieving through a membrane with a small pore size. The PI
argues, and the panel agreed that this is worth exploring, that an operation in
which the separation is accomplished using particulate hydrodynamic transport
processes rather than membrane exclusion would have the advantages of decreasing
membrane fouling and improving the selectivity of the separation. Because of the
high shear rates accessible in cross-flow filtration, inertial lift can keep the
particles away from the coarse non-sieving membrane. In addition, a new sieve-
free separation mechanism based on the ratcheting of particle trajectories at
the rough surface of the membrane due to excluded volume interactions of the
particle with the membrane will be investigated. The goal is to develop a
predictive model for lift-based cross-flow, allowing separation based on shape
as well as size and identifying the maximum filtration flux and particle
concentration at which particles can be retained. This mechanism can lead to
sieve-free separations of nanoparticles or proteins which are too small to
separate based on hydrodynamic lift. The models developed will be tested and the
reliability of sieve-free filtration demonstrated by experimental measurements
of separation of micro- and nano-particles of well controlled size and shape in
a Couette cell filter. In addition to graduate education, plans to reach out to
K-12 students and by an experimental demonstration to be used in activities at
the local children's museum and the Ithaca Science Center are laid out.