* 1505902
* Understanding the Impacts of Impurities on Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Guozhong Cao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 348,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Impurities exist in almost all raw materials and
precursors and the removal of such impurities can be time-consuming, energy
intensive and very costly. In contrast, this project is to investigate the
positive impacts impurities can have to promote the development of high energy
crystal facets, and surface and bulk defects in a model system, vanadium
pentoxide, with much desired chemical, electrochemical, and catalytic properties
for energy conversion and storage. These impurities can modify the bulk and
surface chemistry, morphology, crystallinity, and the physical properties of the
resulting crystallites, and thereby significantly impact their performance and
applications. Although the doping in semiconductors (at the electronic grade or
ppm level) and the doping in oxides for ionic conductors (at metallurgical grade
or a few percent) have been well studied and understood, there is limited
information on the impacts of impurities on the processing, morphology, and
properties of the resulting crystallites that are widely used in energy
conversion and storage as well as many other applications including environment
monitoring and remediation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
project is to investigate the influences and impacts of impurities on the
processing, morphology and properties of inorganic materials with vanadium
pentoxide as a model system, focusing on submicrometer or nanometer sizes, and
their applications in energy conversion and storage. Impurities, often
accompanied with other defects such as oxygen vacancies may also be incorporated
into the crystal lattice or reside on the surface. Such impurities can modify
the bulk and surface chemistry, crystallinity, morphology, and the physical
properties of the resulting crystallites away from thermodynamic equilibrium
and, thus, significantly impact on their performance and applications with much
reduced processing cost. The results generated by this project will enrich the
fundamental understanding of the impurities on the processing, morphologies and
properties of materials. Broader impacts are envisioned through the recruitment
of diverse students; fostering a positive culture that accepts, respects, and
tolerates differences of others; training of both undergraduate and graduate
students; incorporating recent research results into courses; and working
cooperatively with Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL).