* 1505147
* RUI: Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Matter in Intense Laser Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Rainer Grobe, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,995.00

During the last years numerous laboratories worldwide have begun to develop
high-powered laser systems to create electromagnetic radiation pulses that are
so energetic that new avenues to probe and control the states of matter can be
tested soon. The research team at Illinois State University plans to accompany
these developments with ab initio computer simulations that can provide
microscopic insight into the relativistic interaction of electrons and positrons
with photons with full temporal as well as spatial resolution. A better
understanding of these fundamental processes might open new ways to control
atomic, chemical and even biological processes on very short time scales. An
important mission for the grant is also to give undergraduate students the
opportunity to gain research experience. This educational experience provides
them with important skills including working as a team, gaining the endurance,
intellectual flexibility and experience to tackle serious research problems, and
communicating results in conferences and publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
computer simulations are obtained by solving the coupled set of Dirac-Maxwell
equations of relativistic quantum electrodynamics on a numerical space-time
grid. These non-perturbative large-scale calculations are very CPU time
consuming but have become possible due to recent progress in the development of
specialized numerical algorithms for massively parallel computers. The
calculations are performed in Illinois and also at the XSEDE supercomputer
cluster in Texas. A specific goal of the current grant is to simulate for the
first time the laser-field induced electron-positron pair-creation process for a
general situation for which the attractive Coulomb force between the two created
particles is taken into account. Preliminary simulations for simplified model
systems suggest that our present theoretical understanding of this process might
need to be revised as this (so far neglected) inter-particle force might play a
major role for the dynamics.