* 1505499
* I-Corps L:  Tinkering Labs - Invent it Here
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Brianno Coller, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Crisis often creates opportunity. The ongoing US educational crisis has spawned
a rapidly growing industry for out-of-school student "enrichment" programs.
Parents across all economic strata want to invest in their children. While
traditional tutoring programs are highly valued by parents, they are rarely
considered fun and engaging by the students. This I-Corps team proposes to
evaluate the feasibility of launching a national chain of retail 'Tinkering Lab"
locations where girls and boys are challenged to invent exciting science and
?Maker? projects (e.g. planes, robots, catapults, automatic pet feeders, musical
synthesizers, etc.) while learning to use 21st century fabrication tools such as
3D printers, and laser cutters, and incorporating electronics and servo
actuators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Tinkering Labs, young people will learn by
doing, inventing, and being challenged. They will learn STEM concepts compelled
by curiosity while having fun. It reinforces a new paradigm of STEM learning by
fostering 21st century skills such as design thinking, authentic problem
solving, creativity, collaboration, and communication. The Tinkering experience,
guided by skilled mentors, fosters STEM learning, and generates interest in
pursuing STEM careers. The project will test the commercial potential of the
Tinkering Labs concept, as an after-school and weekend destination for children
and teens, ages 8 to 18. Tinkering Labs has the potential to increase the number
of students enthusiastic about STEM careers, improve their understanding of STEM
concepts and contribute to the transformation of the traditional STEM education
process. Over the next decade Tinkering Labs has the potential to reach hundreds
of thousands of children and to provide a much more engaging way for them to
explore STEM while they develop critical thinking skills.