* 1505718
* EAGER:  Development of a Mechanistic Framework Correlating Quantum Dot Surface Chemistry and Subsurface Environmental Fate and Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Allison Dennis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2017
* USD 99,999.00

1505718&lt;br/&gt;Goldfarb, Jillian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interfacial
interactions between quantum dots (QD) surface coatings and ecological surfaces
are critical determinants of the environmental fate and transport of these
materials. However, currently there is no foundational understanding of the
mechanisms by which such interactions occur. Therefore it is necessary to
examine and test every nanomaterial using a battery of tests to predict
resulting subsurface behavior. This proposal will lay a foundation for a
mechanistic understanding of the interplay between QD surface coatings and their
subsurface reactions. Multivariate statistical analysis tools will be used to
analyze data in a framework that reduces the experimental burden by correlating
the composition of QD coatings with the environmental factors that influence
nanoparticle behavior. By laying a mechanistic foundation for understanding of
how QDs with varying structures respond to different environmental stimuli, the
project may transform our approach to evaluating the environmental impacts of
emerging nanomaterials from the test-and-observe approach to one of predict-and-
verify. The long-term goal is to enable assessment of environmental impacts of
manufactured nanomaterials in a combined computational and experimental
framework. This is a radically different approach from the existing strategy of
thoroughly test every new nanomaterial and involves an innovative methodology
for developing a novel predictive tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core/shell
semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are heterogeneous nanomaterials with seemingly
infinite applications and unknown potential effects on human health and the
environment. As QDs transition from specialized research laboratories to
components in consumer and biological devices, there is a need to develop an
understanding of how they will interact, persist, and degrade in the
environment. The objective of this proposal is to develop an experimental
framework to enable a mechanistic understanding of the relationships between QD
surface characteristics and the physico-chemical properties of the subsurface
environment on the agglomeration, adsorption, and partitioning of core/shell
QDs. This objective will be met by synthesizing QDs with four organic coating
combinations (hydrophobic interactions or dative bonding, paired with
electrostatic repulsions or steric hindrance). The nanoparticles will be fully
characterized to assess their size, morphology, monodispersity, concentration,
quantum yield and photoluminescence, crystalline structure, ratio of core and
shell atoms, and ratio of coating to particle. To develop this mechanistic
understanding, the agglomeration kinetics of QDs with common soil colloids,
their partitioning behavior between octanol and water, and their adsorption to
saturated porous media, all as a function of ionic strength and pH, will be
measured. An initial framework using multivariate statistical analysis will
enable the modeling and quantification of relationships between pH and ionic
strength and the partitioning, agglomeration, and adsorption for each of the
four coating possibilities.