* 1505221
* Theoretical Advanced Study Institute will be in Boulder CO, annually June 2015-2017
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Thomas DeGrand, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 140,000.00

This grant provides partial funding for the Theoretical Advanced Study Institute
(TASI) at the University of Colorado, Boulder CO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TASI is
a one-month long Summer Institute for advanced graduate students working in the
field of theoretical high-energy physics, held every June. The aim of TASI is to
expose advanced graduate students to a much broader range of ideas and topics
than they normally experience in their home institutions while working on their
dissertation topics. TASI has been held every summer since 1984, and has been
held on the Boulder campus since 1989. A nationally-distributed Scientific
Advisory Board selects a topic and recruits scientific organizers, who arrange
the program for that year. In a typical year about sixty junior participants
hear approximatly sixty presentations from approximately twenty cutting-edge
established researchers. TASI is the most successful program of its kind in the
world, and past students of TASI are found at major research institutions (both
in and outside high-energy physics). As such, it advances the national interest
by promoting the progress of science and the training of junior scientists.
Further broader impacts associated with TASI are that the videos, lecture notes
and written proceedings of TASI provide the same benefits more broadly to other
members the the high-energy physics community and beyond. A Public Lecture is
also part of TASI's annual program, and attracts a large audience from the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Thomas DeGrand of the University of
Colorado at Boulder is responsible for TASI's infrastructure: he oversees annual
TASI operations, maintains the web site, makes and distributes the poster,
collects applications, assists in the admission process, organizes housing for
junior and senior participants, takes care of the lecture venue, records the
presentations, and allocates participant support costs.