* 1505717
* RUI: Probing Molecular Recognition Profiles via Quasiracemic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Kraig Wheeler, Eastern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this project
explores how molecular shape impacts the internal organization of crystalline
solids. Because material properties intimately relate to the composition of the
building-blocks and their alignment, a greater understanding of the factors that
influence component interactions holds much importance to the development of
advanced materials that exhibit a wide-variety of functional properties. The
project is anchored by a research team at Eastern Illinois University and will
prove useful for probing the structural boundaries of the recognition process by
investigating the complementary shapes of molecular neighbors. The educational
and service component of the activity focuses on training students
(undergraduate and Master's level) as scientists for careers in STEM fields,
developing teaching modules for the introductory organic laboratory, and
providing X-ray instrument services to the greater academic community of small
colleges and universities that support rigorous undergraduate research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Many
functions of solid materials require exquisite control over the molecular
architectures of their building blocks. The construction of structurally
controlled supramolecular assemblies (e.g., bulk solids) is still at a primitive
level despite great progress in the chemical synthesis of discrete molecules
over the past few decades. This project explores the structural boundaries of
molecular shape to the molecular recognition process by using the quasiracemate
approach for constructing bimolecular compounds. Chiral building blocks
formulated from known organic precursors will be synthesized via diarylamide and
Pemoline templates. Since it is well known that a high propensity exists for
organic molecules to arrange in centrosymmetric relationships, this activity
explores the supramolecular behavior of these molecules to form
quasicentrosymmetrically related aggregates. Video-supported thermomicroscopy
and calorimetric techniques will be used to investigate the ability of pairs of
materials to assemble. X-ray diffraction techniques will help determine the
detailed structures of the materials obtained and assist with determining the
topological contributions to these molecular assemblies.