* 1505679
* Strong Field Molecular Ionization With Shaped Ultrafast Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Thomas Weinacht, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 02/29/2020
* USD 499,875.00

This work will advance our understanding of how electrons move in molecules. The
motion of electrons in atoms, molecules and solids takes place on attosecond (a
billionth of a billionth of a second) timescales, and requires very short laser
pulses to resolve. The investigators in this project will use intense ultrashort
laser pulses in order to ionize molecules, removing one of the many electrons
bound to the molecule. They will take pictures of the electrons as they come off
the molecules, making use of a technique called velocity map imaging. These
pictures can be used to understand electron dynamics during ionization, which is
important for molecular imaging, chemical dynamics and the development of new
high speed electronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make use of
shaped few cycle laser pulses to study strong field ionization of small
molecules. The investigators will make use of ultrafast optical pulse shaping of
filament based sub 10 fs (3-4 optical cycles) laser pulses, as well as velocity
map imaging in order to study the angle and momentum resolved photoelectron
spectrum as a function of laser pulse shape. This will help develop our
understanding of how electrons are removed from multiple orbitals, and the
extent to which electron correlation and non-Born Oppenheimer dynamics play a
role in the ionization dynamics. The investigators will also make use of strong
field ionization as a probe of excited state dynamics, studying dissociation and
internal conversion in families of similar molecules.