* 1505345
* Study of Anomalous Magnetism and Superconductivity in Selected Lanthanides, Alkalis and Noble Metals Under Extreme Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* James Schilling, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract Whereas simple materials are easier to understand,
complex materials are more interesting and more likely to lead to innovative
applications. In this single investigator award extremely high pressures, as
high as 2-3 million atmospheres, are applied to very simple and soft materials,
like the alkali metals. Such extreme pressures are able to continuously
transform these metals into surprisingly complex materials that may become
superconducting, ferromagnetic or even insulating. The fact that a single sample
can be brought through extreme compression to exhibit such anomalous behavior
allows one to gain a deeper understanding of what makes them tick. This enhanced
understanding, on the other hand, facilitates the design of materials with
useful properties at ambient pressure. In elements called "rare-earths", high
pressures have been found to induce magnetic ordering at very high temperatures.
With some luck this work could lead to the development of superior permanent
magnets, a ubiquitous material in everyday life. The proposed experiments give
undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity to learn and develop a
multitude of essential experimental techniques; these students also benefit from
scientific collaborations with groups both in the US and abroad.

Technical Abstract The research in this single investigator award has two
primary thrust directions. The first is the transformation under extreme
compression of canonical simple free-electron metals, such as the alkali metals,
into materials with highly anomalous electronic properties. These properties
include superconductivity at relatively high temperatures, metal-semiconductor
or metal-insulator transitions or even Pauli paramagnetic to itinerant
ferromagnetic transitions. This project will study in depth to ultrahigh
pressures the superconducting phase diagram and critical magnetic field behavior
of selected alkali metals as well as their alloys and compounds. The second
thrust direction has evolved out of the discovery by the PI's group of magnetic
order at temperatures well above ambient in selected lanthanides under extreme
pressures. This raises the possibility of a permanent magnet material superior
to the current record holder Nd-Fe-B. Further materials of interest are the
hydrides, particularly following the very recent discovery of superconductivity
in sulfur dihydride near 190 K. The proposed experiments give undergraduate and
graduate students an excellent opportunity to learn and develop important
laboratory techniques and collaborate with groups both in the US and abroad.