* 1505887
* RUI: Fundamental Symmetry Experiments with Muons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Frederick Gray, Regis University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2018
* USD 135,000.00

The study of fundamental symmetries in the field of nuclear physics explores the
nature of the matter, energy, and forces that define the universe and that have
allowed stars, planets, and life to emerge and flourish. This award will support
the PI and undergraduate students to work on two experiments that will further
our understanding of that universe. The first experiment, called MuSun,
addresses one of the most important limitations of calculations related to the
proton-proton fusion process that releases most of the energy in stars like the
Sun. It will provide data that will calibrate the least precise parts of these
calculations and can also be applied to other important nuclear reactions. The
second, known as the Muon g-2 experiment, tests our Standard Model of particles
and their interactions. While this model has been remarkably successful, it is
not complete. The previous generation of this experiment uncovered a strong hint
of a discrepancy between its measurement and the Standard Model's prediction;
the new experiment will probe it with enough precision to potentially claim a
discovery.

Students will have opportunities to carry out guided research related to the
larger physics goals, to work at major research facilities, and to attend
conferences and collaboration meetings. This grant will provide opportunities to
involve and support a talented and diverse group of science students that
includes women, members of underrepresented ethnic groups, and first-generation
college students.

MuSun measures the rate of muon capture in deuterium, a fundamental two-nucleon
process that provides a calibration of effective field theories of weak
interactions in light nuclei. The muon capture process studied by the MuSun
experiment is analogous to reactions that include proton-proton fusion and the
deuteron breakup reactions that were used to detect neutrinos at the Sudbury
Neutrino Observatory. The MuSun result will dramatically improve the precision
of the low-energy constants describing two-nucleon terms in chiral effective
field theories that describe these reactions. The Muon g-2 experiment at
Fermilab will be the group's primary focus for this grant period. This
experiment measures the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon by observing the
rate of spin precession of a muon beam as it circulates in a precisely shimmed
storage ring magnet. The spin polarization precesses because of coupling to
virtual particles, including all of the particles described by the Standard
Model and potentially any new, as-yet-undiscovered particles and interactions
that are beyond it. The Regis group will be responsible for the implementation,
installation, commissioning, and analysis for the fiber harp beam monitors and
entrance counters for this experiment. The measurement clearly has the potential
to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model. When the existing precision
of 0.5 parts per million from the Brookhaven National Laboratory experiment is
compared with modern Standard Model calculations, there is a discrepancy of more
than three standard deviations; the probability of a fluctuation at this level
by chance is less than one in a thousand. As the precision of the experiment
reaches its 0.14 part-per-million goal, the discrepancy could exceed the
discovery threshold of five standard deviations. Such a finding could represent
the discovery of supersymmetry, new gauge bosons such as dark photons, or other
new particles or interactions.