* 1505472
* Experimental Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Heidi Schellman, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. A primary area to search for answers to these and
other open questions about the universe, how it came to be and why it is the way
it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to use what we
know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science beyond the Standard
Model. Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact with practically
nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and were once thought
to be massless. Like other elementary particles, they were believed to have an
antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the Standard Model predicted
that there were actually three different kinds of neutrinos that were
distinguishable through the different interactions that they did undergo
whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements have totally changed
our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a mass and because
they do, they can actually change from one type to another, i.e. oscillate.
Detailed measurements of these changes, along with other current neutrino
experiments, form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics Beyond
the Standard Model (BSM). This particular project will focus on the study of the
oscillations of the neutrinos between different types. The award will support
the work of one post-doctoral researcher as well as graduate and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports work, using the neutrino
beam at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), on the neutrino
experiments: MINERvA and MicroBooNE, both measuring neutrino oscillations: muon
neutrino to electron neutrino transitions. These oscillations are of great
interest to the scientific community since they could show indications of BSM
physics. To correctly measure these transitions, precise knowledge of neutrino
interactions with nuclei is required. This award will be used to measure these
interactions across a wide energy range available at FNAL, which will be
beneficial for both neutrino and nuclear physics. This will improve our
knowledge of the neutrino flux, useful for future Short Baseline (detector near
the source at FNAL) and Long Baseline (detector hundreds of kilometers away).