* 1505389
* Surfaces, Chirality, and Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Charles Rosenblatt, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 470,404.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT Surfaces play an important role in aligning the liquid
crystals (LC) that are the core of LC displays. Currently, only simple forms of
alignment have been used and these have been adequate for today's displays.
However, future devices with even greater capabilities will depend on developing
more complex surface alignments. One possibility is to use surfaces patterned at
the microscopic level to introduce chirality, or handedness, into the ordering
of the liquid crystals. Chirality - the fact that your right hand is not a
mirror image of the left - plays an important role in many areas such as biology
and chemistry. In fact, many pharmaceuticals must be prepared with a specific
chirality (either right or left handed) to be effective. In this project the
principal investigator and his team will explore ways of introducing chirality
into liquid crystals by patterning the surface they are in contact with. They
will then study these systems to determine what new patterns develop, what are
the forces introduced by these new patterns and how they can be used to more
effectively separate molecules with different chirality, such as
pharmaceuticals. The students involved in these studies, from high school to
graduate school, will be trained in state-of-the-art techniques and will work
with collaborators from around the world.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT Surfaces play a defining role in myriad systems; this is
especially true of liquid crystals. By mechanically tailoring the surface
structure on nanoscopic length scales, the PI manipulates the behavior and
symmetry of the adjacent liquid crystal, facilitating new phenomena,
applications, and a more profound understanding of fundamental physical and
chemical properties. This project focuses on imposed chirality at the surface,
induced chirality in the achiral liquid crystal, and forces associated with
chirality. In recent years the PI has developed powerful techniques both to
establish controlled chirality at surfaces using inherently achiral materials
and to image liquid crystal orientation on nanoscopic length scales. He is
ratcheting up these techniques and addressing the most seminal issues in which
chirality originates at an interface. The work has several objectives,
including: optimization of mechanically-generated chiral surfaces; understanding
the influence of surface chirality on liquid crystal symmetry and anchoring;
spatially-controlling enantiomeric segregation at scales as small as 2-3
micrometers; examining forces associated with chiral "dipoles"; creating chiral
topological defects, including chiral defects, at the 2-3 micrometer scale and
using them as traps for chiral nanoparticles; and the Holy Grail: understanding
chiral induction, both the strength and penetration depth. The PI?s team
exploits a battery of experimental tools, including - but not limited to -
optical microscopy and optical nanotomography (the PI's modification of near
field scanning optical microscopy), atomic force microscopy, AFM and electron
beam nanolithography, and ellipsometry. By exploiting the PI's ability to create
exquisitely tailored chiral substrates from achiral materials and to image
liquid crystal orientation down to x,y,z dimensions of 60 x 60 x 1 nm, this work
is transforming our conceptions about - and methodology toward - surface
chirality and its effects on anisotropic fluids. In particular, it is leading to
vastly improved methods to create spatially-controlled chirality at surfaces,
the quantification and understanding of surface-induced chirality in otherwise
achiral molecules, and its manifestation in other physical phenomena. These
issues cut across multiple disciplines, as consequences of chirality appear
throughout biology, chemistry, physics, medicine, and pharmacology. The research
is giving rise to a host of novel phenomena, and establishing new scientific
paradigms for surface chirality and liquid crystals.