* 1505081
* Tipping the Scale: Engaging Community College Science Faculty and Students in Course-Based Research Experiences (CBRE)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Paul Ruscher, Lane Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2018
* USD 249,866.00

The value of engaging students in course-based research experiences has become
increasingly appreciated as more is learned about effective approaches to
retaining students in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
studies and preparing them well for future positions in the various fields
affected. The significance and importance of this project is that it is designed
to introduce this experience into a community college on a large scale by
helping a broad range of faculty, including adjunct faculty, explore, develop
and assess sustainable strategies for integrating course based research
experiences into lower-division transfer courses in biology and environmental
science. Adjuncts are an important resource on many community college campuses
but they are often overlooked when campuses engage in broad change efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals and scope of the project are to prepare
community college students (both STEM majors and those majoring in other fields)
for opportunities available as they transfer to four year schools and to
generally help these students realize their capacity for and interest in
participating in scientific research efforts as well as help them realize how
science is done and how it may affect them. The project capitalizes on the
unique variety of courses at Lane and their: integrated lecture/laboratory class
formats; small class sizes; exceptional research sites; the longitudinal
datasets being gathered on campus to advance knowledge in ecology and
environmental science projects; the number of committed faculty; and the
college's laboratory support capabilities. Faculty change models (AAAS, 2009)
along with evidence-based undergraduate research models from other colleges
(CUR, 2007) will be explored for their relevance and applicability by engaging
adjunct faculty and full-time faculty in Faculty Learning Communities for
professional development. These faculty will discuss with and learn from each
other how to transform their courses by integrating campus based research into
the lecture and laboratory components of their courses. An estimated 2000
students a year will be engaged in doing science together with their professors.
Based on prior pilot studies at the college, the students will achieve
measurable gains in scientific literacy and gain needed skills in science
research as well as gain a sense of self efficacy as scientists leading to
increased persistence in science majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.