* 1505719
* Experimental Flavor Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Michael Sokoloff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 04/30/2019
* USD 612,600.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory near Geneva, Switzerland.
However, the Standard Model as it currently exists, leaves open many questions
about the universe. These include why matter dominates over anti-matter in the
Universe (CP violation), the values of the masses of the fundamental
constituents of matter, the quarks and the leptons, the size of the mixings
among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the properties of dark
matter. Most explanations require the presence of new forces and the development
of concepts that now constitute what we call physics Beyond the Standard Model
(BSM). This award supports research that addresses those questions that dominate
BSM physics. The research will be carried out at the LHC, which is the premier
High Energy Physics particle accelerator in the world and one of the foremost
facilities for answering these BSM questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LHCb is the
first experiment designed specifically to study the decays of hadrons containing
b or c quarks at a hadron collider. The goal of LHCb is to identify new physics
in nature by examining the properties of hadrons containing these quarks. New
physics, or new forces, are manifest by particles, as yet to be discovered,
which would modify decay rates and CP violating asymmetries, and thus allow new
phenomena to be observed indirectly. In direct searches for new particles, the
accelerator's energy must be high enough to allow the particle to be produced.
In indirect searches effects of new particles can be seen even if they have a
much higher mass than can be seen directly, because the effects are quantum in
nature, and appear in Feynman diagrams where the particles are" virtual", so
they are emitted and absorbed over short times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LHCb has
operated very successfully starting in late 2010. This award will allow the
study of rare decays of heavy quark systems. These decays provide a unique
window into physics at an energy scale well beyond that accessible by explicit
production of new particles at colliders. This is increasingly important as the
limits for new physics by CMS and ATLAS increase, the only window may turn out
to be in the studies of rare decays. This work will concentrate mostly on charm
quark physics, the expertise of the group. These charm channels can show BSM
physics in CP violation and other parity violating asymmetries. Any discovery of
BSM physics would be a huge step forward in our understanding of the fundamental
physics of the universe. In addition, this award will facilitate a small part of
the ongoing LHCb detector upgrade that will improve the overall ability of the
detector to fully exploit the LHC data.