* 1505172
* Vibrational and Electronic Properties of Complex Metal Oxides by Spectroscopic Ellipsometry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Stefan Zollner, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
and Ceramic (CER) Programs in the Division of Materials Research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project trains students,
including underrepresented minorities and women, in optical and X-ray thickness
measurements of thin films (such as those used for advanced manufacturing in Rio
Rancho, NM) and connects students with research at National Laboratories,
especially the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies at Sandia National
Laboratories. The project determines the refractive index and absorption
coefficient of novel crystalline oxides and studies the interaction of localized
d- and f-electrons with atomic vibrations and itinerant s- and p-electrons in
complex metal oxides. This research aims to develop new types of lasers and
light detectors based on metal oxide hetero¬structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project measures the optical
constants of a broad range of complex metal oxides from the mid-infrared to the
ultraviolet spectral region. The data is analyzed to draw conclusions on the
vibrational, electronic, and transport properties of such oxides. Quantum
confinement and stress effects in oxide heterostructures and intersubband
transitions in oxide superlattices are also studied. Temperature is used a
parameter to tune the oxide properties. Results are compared with theory to
achieve a comprehensive understanding of correlated oxides. Experimental results
provide adjustable parameters (such as the Hubbard U value) needed for band
structure calculations. Undergraduate students engaged in this project visit
local and regional high schools and perform materials physics classroom
demonstrations. They also organize a week-long physics summer day camp in the
New Mexico State University Physics Department.