* 1505943
* EAGER: Investigation of Lithium-Air Battery Cathode Reaction Mechanisms through SERS-Active Electrode
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Yu Zhu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2016
* USD 105,587.00

Zhu - 1505943&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at developing lithium-
air batteries for use in electrically powered vehicles as alternatives to
vehicles that run on fossil fuels. To compete with commercial internal
combustion engines, electricity storage systems have to be significantly
improved in energy density, power density and reversibility. Lithium-air
batteries have the potential to significantly enhance the energy density but
they are still immature and suffer from many issues, including the fact that
they have sluggish and irreversible cathode reactions. Because the cathode
reaction mechanism of the lithium-air battery is unclear, it is very difficult
to design electrodes and electrolytes that cycle better. The primary objective
in this research is to synthesize a bicontinuous, SERS (surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy)-active electrode for lithium-air batteries and study the mechanism
of charging/discharging processes by Raman spectroscopy. This is an EAGER grant
to demonstrate the feasibility of the fabrication
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to fabricate the SERS-active electrodes to study the products
formed on the cathode. The rationale for fabricating well organized bi-
continuous 3D porous electrodes is to provide, simultaneously, a large effective
surface area and an improvement in the electrolyte and oxygen diffusion.
Lithium-air battery cathode reactions are complicated and sensitive to the local
electrochemical environment. It is important to study the mechanisms of the
battery electrode reactions to gain chemical information about the electrode
throughout the charging/discharging process. In this work, the PI plans to use
polymer templates to fabricate well-organized bicontinuous electrodes made of
pristine chemical vapor deposited graphene. The bi-continuous electrodes can
enhance the lithium-air battery kinetic performance and reduce the clog induced
degradationTo enhance the Raman signals, the bi-continuous electrodes will be
modified by the adsorption of uniform and regularly assembled gold
nanoparticles. The modified electrodes may allow the detection, by surface-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy, of trace intermediate compounds deposited on the
electrodes. The PI proposes to use the modified electrode with stable solvents
(Dimethoxyethane, Dimethyl sulfoxide and Tetra(ethylene) glycol dimethyl ether
etc.) to fabricate lithium-air battery. A suite of characterization tools
(including Raman, FTIR, TEM, XPS, and XRD) should enable the investigation of
the materials on the air-cathode. Of particular interest are intermediate
compounds deposited on the cathode during the charging and discharging processes
that will be elucidated by SERS Raman spectroscopy to address fundamental
material challenges associated with electrolyte/electrode stability. This
research will provide the bases to design in-situ SERS Raman characterization
techniques in the future, which may elucidate the cathode reaction mechanisms
through the continuous investigation of the chemical information on the
electrodes. Ultimately this may point to new engineering solutions for high
performance, reversible lithium-air batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Understanding the electrode reaction mechanism is needed to improve
capacity and cyclability of electrochemical energy storage system. This is also
pivotal for material and process design. Due to the high theoretical capacitance
of lithium-air battery and the possible high demand for these batteries in
consumer and industrial applications, the potential impact from even a modest
advance in cyclability or efficiency is quite large. There are both economic and
environmental benefits to consider because increased battery capacity will
decrease the replacement rate and may allow for the substitution of new
technology for old. This could include the replacement of the internal
combustion engine with electrical motors for uses in transportation systems.
Dissemination of concepts associated with this research will be to a broader,
public audience through various outreach programs. Local outreach efforts will
include Science Olympiad weekend for students in grades 4-6, the UA-Harker
program for high-school students working with professors in the institute of
polymer science and polymer engineering. Additionally, the PI's group is active
in ACS SEED program to promote the research activities of economically
disadvantaged local high school students. The goal of these outreach activities
are to (1) illustrate hands-on nanotechnology, (2) excite students about science
and technology so that they may be encouraged to consider careers in STEM
fields, and (3) teach about challenges and opportunities associated with the
engineering of chemical processes.