* 1505565
* Studies of Singularities, Black Holes and Gravitational Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* David Garfinkle, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 140,297.00

This project will study two aspects of gravity: (1) gravitational collapse and
(2) gravitational radiation. (1) When an object's gravity becomes strong enough
to trap light, the object becomes a black hole. Inside the black hole the object
continues to become smaller and smaller under the influence of its own gravity
until it becomes a point with infinite density and infinite gravitational field
called a singularity. I will work out the properties of the singularities formed
in gravitational collapse, and in particular the forces felt by any observer who
approaches the singularity. (2) Just as the electric currents in a radio
transmitter make radio waves, so moving masses make gravity waves. And just as
radio receivers react to the presence of radio waves, so there is an ongoing
effort to detect gravitational waves. One interesting aspect of gravitational
radiation is something called gravitational wave memory: even after the wave has
passed, there is a permanent change in the gravitational wave detector. I will
study the causes and properties of this gravitational wave memory.

It is conjectured that the singularity inside a black hole consists of two
parts: a spacelike singularity at the center of the black hole and a null
singularity that takes the place of the black hole's inner horizon. I will study
both types of singularities using two different numerical methods. Previously, I
have performed simulations of spacelike singularities; however these simulations
revealed the presence of structure with a very small spatial scale (called
"spikes") that was not resolved by the simulations. I will revisit these
simulations using the technique of adaptive mesh refinement, which should serve
to resolve the spikes. I will compare the results of these simulations to those
of an analytic approximation to spike behavior using what are expected to be the
leading terms of the field equations near the singularity. I will study null
singularities using a "double null" formulation of the Einstein field equations.
Here instead of the usual foliation of spacetime by spacelike surfaces of
constant time t, one has a foliation by pairs of null surfaces of constant null
coordinates u and v. The Einstein field equations and Bianchi identities then
become equations for the expansion and shear of the null surfaces and the Weyl
tensor. I will perform numerical simulations of these equations to see whether
the Weyl tensor blows up on (what used to be) the inner horizon of the black
hole. I will study gravitational wave memory from a variety of sources using a
variety of methods. Memory from neutrinos will be treated using the full
nonlinear Einstein-Vlasov equations. Memory in an expanding universe will be
treated using cosmological perturbation theory. Memory for the vacuum case will
be treated in second order perturbation theory. I will also study critical
gravitational collapse using a new vacuum axixymmetric code. In addition, I will
continue, using numerical methods, my studies of Einstein-Aether theory,
gravitational collapse in anti de-Sitter spacetime, and charged black holes.