* 1505241
* Collaborative Research: Initial development of the US Hub of the Future Earth Secretariat
* GEO,ICER
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Diana Wall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 12/31/2015
* USD 43,867.00

This award supoorts the initial development of the US hub of Future Earth
Secretariat. Future Earth seeks to harness the insights and capacity of the
global scientific community, development professions, and stakeholders to
address these global problems. The Future Earth effort is based on the
recognition that modern environmental problems can not be solved by physical
science alone and rather requires the coordinated efforts of environmental
scientists, social scientists, and stakeholders to meet the societal challenges
of global environmental change and a world transition to global sustainability.
Future Earth seeks to advance a new way of doing science by directly emphasizing
the co-design and co-production of knowledge with those who most need scientific
information to make effective decisions to help manage a changing environment.
The Future Earth programme is organized around three major themes:
Dynamicplanet; Global Development; and Transformations toward Sustainability.
Under the auspices of these three themes, the Secretariat will support workshops
and other efforts to foster the co-design of research to enhance
transdisciplinary efforts to inform solutions and decision making. The
secretariat will also develop programmes and initiatives to educate the next
generation of inter-disciplinary professionals on how to integrate global
sustainability with human prosperity and will actively engage the public through
an extensive communication and outreach effort.