* 1505037
* Aligning Instructional Objectives with Features of a Self-Contained Simulated Teamwork Activity for Teamwork Skill Development
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kevin Hadley, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 184,275.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project will develop a new
approach to improving the teamwork skills among engineering students.
Engineering graduates need strong teamwork skills to be productive members of
the nation's technological workforce. However, developing teamwork skills is
both difficult and time-consuming. This project will further develop a novel
self-contained activity capable of improving teamwork skills among first-year
engineering students. The activity is inexpensive, requires only a maximum of
three hours class time, and can be prepared and graded quickly by instructors.
Initial pilot testing shows that the activity is effective and increases
intrinsic motivation of students. Effective teamwork skills such as task
coordination and intra-team communication are improved. The array of activities
pursued WILL result in students who, on average, have personally incorporated
teamwork skills. Development of teamwork skills thorough efficient activities
WILL result in habits of effective teamwork behavior. The methods are preferable
to simply telling students how to work in teams which rarely results in lasting
effects. This personalized experience WILL result in a longer-term retention of
important teamwork skills. This project will clarify the effectiveness of this
teamwork development activity and refine the program to ensure easy and
effective implementation by other educators.

Typically, students do not retain strong misconceptions regarding what is
defined as good teamwork, but rather are ill informed or lack experience on how
to best approach a teamwork situation. A team at the South Dakota School of
Mines has developed an interactive simulated teamwork exercise capable of
improving teamwork skills from a constructivist point of view. As a simulated
exercise, the fear of failure is lowered and the stress and impact of team
discourse is eliminated. By engaging in the activity as intended, the students
build upon their own knowledge base to reinforce and establish good teamwork
practices. Important components to ensure the success of the constructivist
approach are alignment, reflection, and feedback. If the activity does not align
with the learning goals, either learning will not happen, or wrong concepts will
be learned. Reflection reinforces what is learned for longer-term retention,
while feedback on reflections reassures ideas generated by a constructivist
approach are validated by an expert and are worth retaining. By triangulating
reflections with quantitative assessments, the project team aims to show the
effectiveness of this activity in a number of universities across the country
and to show the adaptability and adoptability of this activity by other
educators aiming to improve the teamwork skills of their students.