* 1505667
* Nanoscale Templated Growth for Integration of Electronic and Photonic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Paul Dapkus, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 315,732.00

Nontechnical Description: Complex electronic circuits and systems that impact
our life range from tablet computers and cell phones to electronic games and
autonomous vehicles. These systems are a consequence of the relentless
miniaturization of transistors that now allows over a billion of them to be
integrated on the same silicon chip. This scaling, that has followed 'Moore's
Law', has now saturated and the exclusive use of conventional Si-based materials
is no longer adequate. Thus, other crystalline materials than Si must be
integrated onto the chip to provide higher performance and to enable optical
devices to be integrated. Direct localized crystalline deposition is the
approach most likely to result in the economical and practical integration of
these dissimilar materials. This project explores novel, yet practical,
approaches to guide the nanometer scale crystal formation that results in high
quality devices and circuits integrating many different materials. It utilizes
the talents of a diverse team and provides education and training in nanoscale
materials processing and characterizations. The efforts in disseminating the
science behind today's electronic systems include K-12 outreach and a summer
teacher training module that involves all team members. The new research results
are communicated through publications and a semiconductor technology course
taught by the PI that is offered over the University of Southern California
distance network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project
explores a technology in which a Si integrated circuit wafer acts as an
atomically ordered breadboard on which crystalline materials of many different
kinds are integrated into a mosaic of nanoscale "epitaxial" elements that
perform different functions within an integrated system. The research builds on
the idea that hetero-epitaxial growth can be initiated by a region of ordered
material formed on a substrate--a template. Defects in the epitaxial material
are minimized, even in highly mismatched materials, by initiating the growth on
a template with a small enough footprint that misfit dislocations are terminated
at the sides of the growth area. Large area growths are formed by the
coalescence of the nano-scale islands into a coherent larger structure through
lateral growth. The research is enabled by scaling of devices and nanoscale
patterning within the Si technology, by the increasing viability of nanoscale
active elements in compound semiconductors and the use of 'templates' to arrange
the materials being deposited. The long range (many micrometer to mm) perfection
and ordering that once was considered essential to successful device performance
is less relevant. Instead, the keys to this technology are the other fundamental
materials issues such as the structural quality of the crystalline material
region, the accurate positioning of the crystalline islands with respect to
substrate markers, uniform and controllable properties from island to island,
and the general alignment of the crystalline planes among islands. The project
exploits the current state of the art in thin film epitaxy and emerging ideas
related to local area epitaxy to produce device quality III-V materials on Si.
The research will focus on the formation of defect-free high-gain regions for
lasers that can be integrated with Si photonic waveguides and channel regions
for high mobility transistors based on III-V compound semiconductors on Si
substrates.