* 1505636
* GOALI: A comprehensive study of nonlinear phenomena in multimode optical fibers for enhancing the performance of optical communication systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Rene Essiambre, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2019
* USD 384,618.00

Title: &lt;br/&gt;GOALI: A comprehensive study of nonlinear phenomena in
multimode optical fibers for enhancing the performance of optical communication
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The use of optical fibers for
transmitting information over long distances has made the spread of the Internet
possible. The advent of a technique, known as wavelength-division multiplexing,
helped in increasing the capacity of fiber-based communication systems during
the decades of the 1990s and 2000s. However, current systems will not be able to
meet the continuing increase in the data rates fueled by such activities as on-
line learning and video streaming. A new technique, called space-division
multiplexing (SDM), is being studied in the laboratories worldwide to meet this
demand. It makes use of optical fibers that are designed to support multiple
spatial modes either by using a single large-size core or several narrower
cores, each supporting a single mode. However, before the SDM technique can be
implemented in real systems, it is necessary to understand the impact of various
nonlinear effects occurring inside a multimode fiber, or a multicore fiber whose
cores are coupled in view of their close proximity. This is what the proposed
research project will accomplish.&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposed
research is to develop and implement new theoretical and numerical tools for
modeling the simultaneous propagation of multiple data streams through SDM
inside a multicore or a multimode fiber. These tools will be used to develop a
fundamental understanding of how each SDM channel is affected by other co-
propagating channels in the presence of various nonlinear effects such as self-
phase modulation, cross-phase modulation, stimulated Raman scattering, and four-
wave mixing. Even though the modes of an ideal fiber should not be coupled to
each other, modes of any realistic multimode fiber will experience some random
coupling. A major objective of this GOALI project is to understand the origin of
this coupling and study how it impacts various nonlinear effects and the
performance of SDM systems. In this effort, our industrial partner would be of
immense help because of the recent experiments performed at Bell Labs that have
quantified the extent of random mode coupling in six-mode fibers. The project
has both the fundamental and applied aspects. An improved understanding of the
nonlinear phenomena in multimode fibers is of fundamental importance and should
help the next generation of graduate students and scientists in coming up with
new device ideas. The study of nonlinear effects should also help in designing
the future SDM systems. Two graduate students will work with the P.I. on this
GOALI project as a part of their Ph.D. thesis. Both of them will spend time each
year at the industrial site so that they can acquire valuable industrial
experience. This kind of training of the graduate students is ideal for
developing the work force for the U.S. telecommunication industry.