* 1505965
* Gravitational Radiation from Black Holes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Winicour, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 119,668.00

Waves, such as water, sound and electromagnetic waves, are a prominent feature
of physical systems. A revolutionary prediction of Einstein's general theory of
relativity is that accelerated bodies produce gravitational waves, analogous to
the way electric charges produce electromagnetic waves. At present,
gravitational waves have only been detected indirectly by the way they deplete
energy from co-orbiting pulsars. A Laser Interferometric Gravity Wave
Observatory (LIGO) has been constructed that is expected to open up a new form
of astronomy by direct detection of these waves. The most powerful source of
gravitational waves is the inspiral and merger of two co-orbiting black holes.
Computer simulations provide the theoretical details necessary for LIGO to tune
in the gravitational signal and monitor the dynamics of the merger. Einstein's
equations describe the production of gravitational waves but their complexity
makes a purely analytic approach inadequate. This has necessitated the
introduction of computational methods into general relativity. The project's
goal is to develop advanced methods to simulate the production of gravitational
waves from black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach uses techniques for
solving Einstein's equations which have been developed in collaboration with
computational mathematicians, thoroughly calibrated on test problems and
implemented as a community resource in the Einstein toolkit. The techniques will
be further developed to measure the loss of energy and angular momentum carried
off by gravitational waves, and other physical properties of binary black hole
inspirals, such as the electromagnetic radiation counterpart. The approach
utilizes characteristic evolution based upon the light cones on which the
radiation propagates. Most computational work is based upon time evolution using
the Cauchy initial value problem. The reformulation of the initial value problem
for general relativity in terms of light cones by Bondi and by Penrose resulted
in the first clear understanding of gravitational radiation. The global strategy
proposed here combines Cauchy evolution in the interior region containing the
black holes with characteristic evolution in the exterior region extending along
the light cones to infinity. Characteristic evolution led to the first
3-dimensional code which could successfully locate, track, evolve and compute
the waveform for a single distorted, spinning and moving black hole. However, in
a binary problem, the focusing of the light cones leads to interior caustics
which prevent a purely characteristic approach. On the other hand, present
Cauchy codes require a finite artificial outer boundary which introduces
inefficiency and errors in extracting the waveform. The proposed work integrates
the complementary strengths of Cauchy and characteristic evolution to provide an
accurate global treatment.