* 1505740
* Detector Characterization to Enable Discovery of Gravitational Waves with Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Peter Saulson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The General Theory of Relativity discovered by Einstein tells us that the
familiar, everyday force of gravity is a manifestation of something much
stranger: the bending of the geometry of space-time by matter. Among the key
predictions of the theory, which includes the expanding Universe and the
existence of black holes, is the existence of gravitational waves (GW): ripples
moving at the speed of light in the geometry of space-time caused by the fast
motion of large masses. Although well tested in terms of their indirect effects
on binary systems of compact stars, the direct detection of gravitational waves
incident on Earth poses an outstanding challenge. The scientific rewards from
achieving this ability would be enormous - ranging from probing the extreme
dynamics of exploding stars to gleaning information about the state of the
Universe almost at the moment of the Big Bang itself. The effort to enable this
new window on the universe has occupied several decades of experimental and
technological developments that have pushed the boundaries across diverse fields
in the physical sciences. The year 2015 will mark a highly-anticipated watershed
moment for gravitational-wave physics: The two advanced Laser Interferomenter
Gravitational Wave Observatory (aLIGO) detectors will start their initial data
taking runs, followed by the commissioning of the advanced Virgo gravitational
wave observatory in Europe. The sensitivity of the aLIGO detector will be ramped
up to become about ten times better than that of the first-generation detectors,
opening up a spatial volume for observing GW sources that will be 1000 times
larger than before. The Syracuse group will support the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration's search for gravitational wave signals from binary star systems
consisting of neutron stars and/or black holes (called compact binary
coalescences, or "CBC's"). Its special focus will be to study the ways in which
instrumental artifacts (called "glitches") can mimic genuine signals, and to
develop new tools to distinguish glitches from genuine signals. Because the
gravitational waveforms from binaries can be very well predicted, some special
techniques have already been developed that help make the distinction. However,
these methods do not suffice for the full range of binaries expected to be seen
with Advanced LIGO. The Syracuse group will develop new tools that will work on
these more vulnerable kinds of signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Syracuse
group will support the search with Advanced LIGO ("aLIGO") for CBC signals in
its first observing run (called "O1") with three basic approaches. Firstly, they
will tune, run, and apply the special diagnostic tool called "Daily CBC", which
gives rapid feedback to commissioners on any departures of aLIGO data from
Gaussianity. Secondly, they will develop a new specially-focused version of
LIGO's standard tool for investigating the statistical correlation between
glitches and candidate signals, hveto; because of the long duration of CBC
signals, it is necessary to implement a tuned time-shift method before asking if
a glitch is coincident in time with a CBC signal. Finally, they will use related
technology to implement a new statistical test that measures whether the data
yielding a candidate signal looks more like a true signal or like a glitch.
These techniques will enable searches for CBC signals in O1 (and beyond) to live
up to their potential, making it substantially more likely that aLIGO will be
succeed in detecting signals from these fascinating objects.