* 1505468
* Disordered Quantum Matter in Strongly Correlated Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brian DeMarco, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The purpose of this project is to enhance knowledge of how disorder affects the
electronic solids, such as metals, insulators, and superconductors, that form
the basis of modern technology. The ability to control how electrons carry heat,
energy, and information in solids enables applications such as computers and
efficient energy generation and transmission. The disorder and imperfections
inherent in solids are often deleterious and can, for example, increase the
resistance of metals to electrical current flow. On the other hand, disorder may
enhance superconductivity, which is transmitting electrical current without
resistance, and thermoelectricity, which is transforming heat into electrical
energy. In general, how disorder affects many exotic solids, such as high-
temperature superconductors, that may lead to new applications and higher
efficiencies is not understood. In part, this lack of understanding arises
because the simplest models of how electrons behave in these materials cannot be
solved using even the most powerful supercomputers that will be created over the
next century. This project will use atoms trapped in a crystal of light and
cooled to just a billionth of a degree above absolute zero temperature to
simulate these models in an experiment. The ability of disorder to transform
solids between metallic, insulating, and superconducting states will be
investigated by measuring how the atoms respond to changes in the light and
magnetic fields. The possibility to use disorder as a new tool to suppress
processes that disrupt applications such as information storage will be
explored. These measurements will be employed to test theories that may be used
to design novel materials. The influence of disorder on the behavior of strongly
correlated electronic solids, such as high-temperature superconductors, is
poorly understood, despite the prevalence of imperfections in these materials.
Numerical simulations provide limited insight, and theory has been challenged to
develop controlled approaches to understanding the interplay of strong
interactions and disorder. Furthermore, using measurements on materials to test
theory and simulations is complicated by the inability to separately control
material parameters, imprecise knowledge of disorder, and complications such as
phonon-electron scattering. Ultracold K-40 and Rb-87 atoms trapped in optical
lattices will be used to explore the impact of disorder on superfluids in
Hubbard models, which are minimal models of strongly correlated electronic
solids. In these experiments, controllable and precisely characterized disorder
will be introduced using optical speckle. The interactions will be manipulated
independently by tuning the optical lattice potential depth and via a Feshbach
resonance. The disordered attractive Fermi-Hubbard model will be realized for
the first time using atoms by tuning to the attractive side of a Feshbach
resonance. Combinations of transport and pair fraction measurements will be
employed to answer the long-standing question of how fermionic superfluids
localize in strongly correlated systems, i.e., whether pairs or single particles
constitute the disorder-induced insulating state. Rethermalization and
relaxation in localized superfluids (i.e., Bose-glasses) will be probed by
measurements of quasimomentum and density profiles. The atomic momentum
distribution will be disturbed from equilibrium using quasi-momentum-selective
stimulated Raman transitions, and the density profile will be manipulated using
a local, repulsive optical potential created by a focused blue-detuned laser
beam. Measurements will be compared with state-of-the-art theory and numerical
simulations.