* 1505406
* DMRG Studies of Frustrated and Doped Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Steven White, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2019
* USD 483,225.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education aimed at understanding condensed matter
and chemical systems involving many strongly interacting electrons which can be
described by quantum mechanics. Understanding these systems is key to developing
novel materials and molecules that can lead to the prediction of new states of
matter, and to designing new materials with useful properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important techniques for making
theoretical progress is the development of novel computer algorithms and
software for solving the equations of quantum mechanics that describe systems of
many interacting particles. The PI has invented an important algorithm, the
density matrix renormalization group (DMRG), and is the developer of a software
library for carrying out the calculations, ITensor. Building on this work, an
international group of scientists has extended DMRG to a new field of physics,
Tensor Networks, with applications ranging from chemistry to black holes and
quantum gravity. This award supports research focused on novel states of matter,
quantum spin liquids and high temperature superconductivity. Quantum spin
liquids result when quantum mechanical fluctuations due to Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle melt away any trace of magnetism in a material down to the
absolute zero of temperature, leaving a liquid with unusual properties that
could provide the foundation for building a quantum computer. A quantum computer
is predicted to be able to solve certain problems exponentially faster than any
currently existing computer. High temperature superconductors can transport
electric current without loss at higher temperatures than other known
superconductors, but still almost at temperatures where nitrogen is a liquid.
Current applications include wireless communications and power transmission.
Understanding how electrons self-organize into the high temperature
superconducting state is an important problem that may lead to superconductors
at room temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides opportunities
for training the next generation of theoretical and computational scientists.
The ITensor software library provides a scientists from different research areas
access to DMRG techniques and tensor networks and forms part of the
cyberinfrastructure of the materials research and chemistry
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research, and education aimed at
understanding strongly interacting quantum condensed matter, cold atom, and
chemical systems. The research involves simulating model systems and developing
new algorithms for these simulations, and is focused primarily on frustrated
spin systems and doped fermion systems like high temperature superconductors. To
avoid the sign problem of quantum Monte Carlo methods, the PI plans to utilize
density matrix renormalization group methods. Of particular interest are spin
liquid systems, a novel state of matter that can occur in spin systems that
exhibit frustration. Spin liquids have topological order, and their unusual
properties could be used for eliminating the barrier of decoherence in building
a quantum computer. This project also involves studying the high temperature
superconductors, with a focus on the competition among inhomogeneous phases
including stripes with superconductivity, and on the nature of the pseudogap
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI invented the density matrix renormalization
group (DMRG), a leading algorithm for simulating 1D systems. Within the last
decade, DMRG has become part of a larger field, tensor networks, and has become
closely associated with quantum information. The PI's work in algorithms now
incorporates many of the ideas of tensor networks. Most of the application work
uses DMRG rather than some of the newer tensor network methods, as DMRG
continues to be very effective. The PI is the developer of a leading software
library for carrying out DMRG and tensor network calculations,
ITensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides opportunities for training
the next generation of theoretical and computational scientists. The ITensor
software library provides a scientists from different research areas access to
DMRG techniques and tensor networks and forms part of the cyberinfrastructure of
the materials research and chemistry communities.