* 1505201
* Proposal for DPF2015: Meeting of the American Physical Society Division of Particle and Fields at the University of Michigan; August 4-8, 2015.
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Monica Tecchio, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2016
* USD 4,500.00

This award provides support to the University of Michigan for the biannual
Meeting of the American Physical Society (APS) Division of Particles and Fields
(DPF). The objective of the Division of Particles and Fields (DPF) of the
American Physical Society (APS) is the "study of fundamental particles and
fields, their structure, their interactions and interrelationships, the design
and development of high energy accelerators, and the design and development of
instrumentation techniques for high energy physics" (from
http://www.aps.org/units/dpf/. The DPF Meeting is a biannual event which brings
together physicists working in all of those areas to present results and
exchange ideas. NSF support will be used to facilitate the attendance of
students and members of under-represented groups at the
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific program will include a combination
of plenary and parallel sessions in physics sub-disciplines such as Particle
Accelerators, Beyond the Standard Model (BSM), Computing in High Energy Physics,
Charge Parity (CP) Violation, Detector Research and Development, Electroweak
Physics, Higgs Sector, Field and String Theory, Neutrino Physics, Particle
Astrophysics and Cosmology, Low Energy Searches for (BSM) Physics, Physics at
Lepton Colliders, Heavy Flavor Physics, Top Quark Physics, Hadron Spectroscopy,
Perturbative and non-Perturbative Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), Outreach,
Careers, and Women and Minorities in Physics.