* 1505617
* RUI: Spatially resolved microwave nonlinearity of superconductors investigated by undergraduates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Stephen Remillard, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 181,274.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Prior NSF support resulted in a technique to
measure, and even to image, distortion of microwave frequency electrical signals
in superconducting devices. This project refines the technique, uses it to
understand the origin of electrical distortion, and explores opportunities to
apply controlled distortion to future technologies. Electrical distortion also
provides insight into the underlying physics of superconductors, and the Hope
College undergraduate microwave research laboratory has discovered some key
distinctions in the physics of the two broad categories of distortion: even and
odd distortion. In-depth experiments with this NSF supported discovery are a key
component of this project. Domestic and international collaborations, involving
experts in distortion as well as materials fabrication and modification, ensure
that this research fits into the larger framework of superconductivity, while
also exposing undergraduates to the international and collaborative nature of
science. Finally, conclusions about superconductivity can only be drawn if the
materials are thoroughly characterized. Therefore, undergraduates are also
gaining experience in highly marketable electron and ion beam analysis
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
objectives of this project include the spatially resolved raster imaging of
microwave nonlinearity in superconducting structures, and the role of magnetic
flux vortices in the generation of the even and odd orders of this nonlinearity.
Superconducting thin film nonlinearity is being studied with a new technique to
locally measure intermodulation distortion, which also permits synchronous
determination of each order's current. When combined with laser scanning
microscopy, the resistive and inductive components of the nonlinearity are also
distinguished. With these methods developed with prior support, the physical
mechanisms behind these even and odd order spurious signals, which appear to
depend differently on induced vortex matter, are being investigated. This
research depends on the availability of a large number of industrially
manufactured microstrip devices, of which the PI possesses hundreds.
Undergraduates are gaining work experience in transferable skills such as
microwave test and measurement, electronic design and analysis, high frequency
signal analysis, device fabrication, vacuum and cryogenics, electron microscopy,
and ion beam analysis. The program at Hope College, which is also open to
students from a nearby regional state university, is one of only a handful of US
undergraduate superconductivity research programs with demonstrated longevity.