* 1505189
* Few Level Models in Atomic Radiation Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Joseph Eberly, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 07/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

This research program deals with the basic interactions of light and matter,
studying entanglement and how entangled states evolve in time. Entanglement
refers to the situation in which widely separated particles cannot be described
independently of each other (or, mathematically, when the whole is not equal to
the sum of its parts). An important direction for the research is to use
mathematical models to explore these entangled states. This may have important
applications, for example in managing the security of communication channels and
in quantum information science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is
to develop a complete catalog of correlation relations among a large number N of
fundamental physical systems (spins, atoms, photons). This will be done by the
technical process of bi-separation of quantum states. We have used both analytic
and computer-based mathematical procedures to carry out, but have not yet
published, a preliminary exploration of pure state bi-separations. These lead to
constraints on occupation of what can be called entanglement-shared quantum
state space. These constraints have a geometrical interpretation via simplexes
and polytopes in N dimensions. The consequent description of N-party additivity
leads to entanglement sharing relations and they substantially extend in a new
direction the concurrence-based results called quantum monogamy. In the
important but still simple case of 3 entangled parties, there are three bi-
separations: a|bc, b|ac, and c|ab, and the consequent polytope in this case is a
pair of base-to-base tetrahedrons inside a unit cube. Cross sections of the
polytope transverse to the body diagonal of the cube are triangles, and we have
found that their areas serve to quantify the amount of entanglement sharing that
is possible among the three parties a,b,c. Exchanges with the fields of quantum
information and quantum optics appear desirable and feasible, for example in
developing protocols for multi-mode entanglement swapping at the macroscopic
level.