* 1505056
* Collaborative Research:   Isothermal Phase Transition in Lipid Vesicles and Swell-Burst Cycles
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Atul Parikh, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2020
* USD 210,000.00

In this project the PI, using a combination of theory, simulations and
experiments, will investigate the complexities of lipid membranes. The project
combines concepts from the fields of polymer physics, membrane mechanics and
bioengineering, surface and interface science, and soft condensed matter to
study the organization of biological membranes. The modeling efforts will
develop new and novel mathematics and new numerical schemes to solve the
resulting differential equations. The current understanding of how multi-
component giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) respond to osmotic pressure
differentials is incomplete, and experimental observations indicate that a non-
linear model coupling membrane dynamics with 3D fluid flow is needed to fully
explain the non-linearities of the system. Developing this theoretical framework
and providing insight into the underlying physics is crucial for the
understanding of how membranes undergo morphological transitions. These models
will explain existing experiments and also predict membrane response to
different osmotic loads and membrane compositions. Understanding this process is
important for better experimental design of in vitro reconstituted systems such
as vesicles and also cellular systems. The work is inherently interdisciplinary,
using mathematics and physics in biological systems. Both fields will benefit
from this approach to studying biological phenomena; the theory will be grounded
in experiments and also make predictions to design future experiments. This
research will be integrated into the teaching efforts of the PIs in developing
new courses at the interface of engineering and biology. The PIs will continue
their efforts in enhancing diversity in the UC system while pursuing the
research program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological membranes are inherently
heterogeneous mixtures of lipids and proteins. A key characteristic of this
heterogeneity is the coexistence of liquid-ordered and liquid-disordered phases.
This coexistence is thought to be the key organizing principle for the formation
of lipid rafts. Studying the formation and organization of the different phases
in cellular system is experimentally challenging, given the complex nature of
the cells. Giant unilamellar vesicles with controlled compositions, allow us to
study lipid behavior in bilayer membranes and gain insight into phase behavior
which is important for understanding cellular membranes. Although GUVs are used
widely experimentally, our theoretical understanding of lipid phase separation
remains rudimentary, since existing models focus on the line tension between
preexisting domains and not on domain growth and swell-burst cycles, which are
the features observed experimentally. The objectives of this project are to
formulate quantitative models of isothermal phase separation and swell-burst
cycle in multi-component GUVs and test model predictions experimentally. STUDY
1-DYNAMICS OF SOLUTE EFFLUX. We will use theory, simulations, and experiments to
understand the factors that control pore radius, vesicle radius, and the
lifetime of the pore. STUDY 2-PHASE SEPARATION IN OSMOTICALLY STRESSED VESICLES.
Using a viscoelastic model of multi-component lipid membranes, we will
investigate the role of governing energetics in domain growth versus true phase
transitions. We will experimentally test the model predictions by tuning the
osmotic pressure difference, lipid composition, and sample temperature. STUDY
3-COUPLING BETWEEN DOMAIN FORMATION AND SWELL-BURST CYCLES. In this study, we
will develop the mathematical framework to model the complete dynamics of the
oscillatory phase separation coupled with the swell-burst cycle observed in the
preliminary experiments. This model will combine the dynamics of pore formation
outlined in Study 1, with the domain growth model including membrane viscosity
in Study 2. The significance of the proposed activities lies in its promise to
not only elucidate the fundamental properties of mixtures of lipids reduced
dimensional, bilayer configuration but also furnish design principles for
designing synthetic protocellular compartments for applications spanning in
vitro production of proteins, chemistry in confinement, and delivery of
biomedically relevant cargo (e.g., enzymes, drugs, and imaging agents). Using a
combination of theory, simulations and experiments, this work will be able to
provide insight into the complexities of lipid membranes. The long-term impact
of the proposed activities stems from the fact that the project combines
concepts from the fields of polymer physics, membrane mechanics and
bioengineering, surface and interface science, and soft condensed matter. The
modeling efforts outlined here will result in new and novel mathematics and new
numerical schemes to solve the resulting differential equations.