* 1505990
* Cosmic-ray Physics with IceCube
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Thomas Gaisser, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,241,999.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
science of IceCube is broad and interdisciplinary. As a consequence, there are
several opportunities for collaboration with other experiments. Of special
interest at Delaware is the connection with solar and heliospheric physics. The
counting rates in IceTop are highly sensitive to changes in solar activity as it
affects the flux of cosmic rays arriving at Earth. The relevant data from IceTop
sensors are posted online in near real time in the context of other,
complementary measures of solar activity. Delaware participates in the IceCube
Master Class program for high school students, and hosts local students for
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this award is to
study the high-energy cosmic-ray events detected by IceCube including IceTop.
IceTop is the surface component of IceCube, with a pair of ice-filled tanks near
the top of each down-hole cable. Each tank is instrumented with two digital
optical modules (DOMs) integrated into the overall IceCube data acquisition
system. This award also contributes to the main mission of IceCube, which is to
study high-energy neutrinos of astrophysical origin. A key aspect for
astrophysical neutrinos is to understand the background due to neutrinos
produced at Earth by interactions of cosmic rays in the atmosphere. The
astrophysical neutrinos are produced by interactions of cosmic rays in distant,
energetic astrophysical sources. Both in neutrino astronomy and in cosmic-ray
physics, the goal is to understand the origin and acceleration mechanisms of
high-energy particles in Nature.