* 1505116
* Collaborative Research: High-Throughput Quantification of Solid State Electrochemistry for Next Generation Energy Technologies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Ichiro Takeuchi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 455,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research to advance the
fundamental understanding of the behavior of oxide electrodes used in fuel
cells, electrolysis cells, batteries, and other energy technologies. The
approach combines high-throughput synthesis of libraries of material structures,
with advanced high-throughput characterization and high-throughput data
analysis. By making use of structures with well-defined geometric features, it
is possible to directly interpret the electrochemical data. The insight afforded
in turn enables deliberate engineering of structures to achieve exceptional
performance. It also provides chemical guidance on how to create next generation
materials. The performance enhancements can ultimately advance goals in
sustainable energy. A broad cross-section of students at all levels are
incorporated into the research and training goals of this effort via internships
for high school and undergraduate students, as well as doctoral research
opportunities for graduate students. Outreach efforts include engaging local
K-12 students in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to dramatically advance the understanding
of electrochemical reaction pathways by making use of geometrically well-defined
systems. Typical electrochemical structures incorporate random, high-surface
area features to maximize overall performance and are not well-suited to
extraction of fundamental behavior. In contrast, geometrically well-defined
systems enable determination of properties such as length-specific triple-phase
boundary activity, bulk chemical diffusion coefficient, area-specific surface
activity, and much more. These are essential parameters for the deliberate
engineering of high-performance structures. The painstaking nature of acquiring
such data using individually prepared samples has, however, limited the study of
geometrically well-defined electrochemical systems to a few important examples,
despite growing recognition of its value. In this project, advanced fabrication
tools are utilized to create libraries of electrode structures on electrolyte
substrates and rapidly measure the entire contents of each library using an in-
house constructed, unique scanning electrochemical probe system. Computational
tools are developed to handle the massive quantities of data generated,
including data mining and machine learning capabilities to create efficiencies
in data acquisition and analysis. Libraries of geometrically graded microdot
electrodes are complemented with selected compositionally-graded libraries, with
the compositional space identified to further elucidate rate-limiting steps.
Electrochemical studies are complemented with a broad suite of physical and
chemical characterization methods to provide a comprehensive picture of material
behavior as relevant to electrocatalysis. Generation of new insights into
electrochemical reaction pathways is an essential step in the creation of next-
generation electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices and as such has
an important role in a sustainable energy future.