* 1505855
* The EPP-Supported Neutrino Program at MIT
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Janet Conrad, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 886,429.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be, and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM). Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact
with practically nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and
were once thought to be massless. Like other elementary particles, they were
believed to have an antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the
Standard Model predicted that there were actually three different kinds of
neutrinos that were distinguishable through the different interactions that they
did undergo whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements have
totally changed our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a
mass and because they do, they can actually change from one type to another.
Detailed measurements of these changes, along with other current neutrino
experiments, form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond
the Standard Model. This project will focus on the development of a detector
based on liquid argon to search for the so-called sterile neutrino, whose
existence is suggested by BSM theories.

There is currently a large interest in experimental particle physics in Liquid
Argon Time Projection Chambers (LArTPC) spurred in part by the proposed Long
Baseline Neutrino Experiment (LBNE) project at Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory (FNAL) and in neutrino physics in general. This award supports work
which refines LArTPC technology, using the Liquid Argon Near Detector (Lar1ND)
and the MicroBooNE experiment at FNAL. Both of these experiments will further
the study of potential signals of sterile neutrinos. Sterile neutrinos are
proposed BSM particles that could explain aspects of cosmology and astrophysics
such as Dark Matter. MicroBooNE will make a variety of interesting physics
measurements, as well as serving as a proving ground for new hardware techniques
relevant for future experiments. Among MicroBooNE's primary physics goals is to
provide a cross-check of the "low-energy excess" of electron neutrino events
previously identified by the MiniBooNE experiment. There have been recent
"hints" that there may be a new type of neutrino, the so-called sterile
neutrino. The MicroBoone experiment, with the superior LArTPC, should clarify
the situation: either rule out or confirm the sterile neutrino evidence. The
PI's Group has broader impacts programs that address development of a globally
competitive STEM workforce; increased participation of women and minorities;
improved teacher development; improved undergraduate education;and increased
public scientific literacy.