* 1505662
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Studies of the Biomechanics of Fibrin Polymer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* John Weisel, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical: These Collaborative awards by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to University of Pennsylvania and University of
Massachusetts at Lowell are to investigate the mechanical behavior of the
structural component of blood clots, the fibrin gel. Long-term goal project is
to modify fibrin to create distinctive new biomaterials for cell and drug
delivery, patterning, and tissue engineering. With this award, the researchers
will study the mechanical properties of fibrin clots at the macroscopic,
microscopic and submolecular levels to understand the basis of their functional
behavior. A key novelty of this work is combined state-of-the-art experimental
and theoretical exploration to understand the mechanical behavior of fibrin
networks at these different spatial scales. This research will provide
opportunities for training of post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
students in the highly interdisciplinary areas of nanotechnology and biophysics,
with attention to broadening the participation of underrepresented groups. The
scientific community will be reached by organizing symposia in international
conferences, and by presenting research findings regularly, as well as the NSF-
funded Nano/Bio Interface Center for NanoDay and other activities targeted at
minority students and teachers in nearby high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The research objective of this proposal is to
understand the mechanical behavior of fibrin gels with the long-term goal of
modifying fibrin to create distinctive new biomaterials for cell and drug
delivery, patterning, and tissue engineering. Earlier studies by the researchers
have demonstrated that the remarkable extensibility of fibrin clots has its
origins in the unfolding of particular domains of the fibrin molecule, with the
stress-strain response of an individual fiber connected to the force-stretch
dependence at the nanoscale. Researchers plan to define the molecular structural
and thermodynamic basis of fibrin deformability and viscoelasticity. A key
novelty of this work is combined experimental and theoretical exploration to
understand the tensile behavior of fibrin networks at different spatial scales,
from submolecular (atomic) to macroscopic levels. This goal will be achieved by
combining state-of-the-art experimental methodology with novel Molecular
Dynamics simulations and a comprehensive continuum mechanics model. This
research will provide opportunities for training of post-doctoral, graduate, and
undergraduate students in the highly interdisciplinary areas of nanotechnology
and biophysics, with attention to broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups. The scientific findings will be disseminated by
organizing symposia in both national and international levels. The research
findings will be presented to the community by attending other scientific
meetings, as well as the NSF-funded Nano/Bio Interface Center for NanoDay and
other activities targeting minority students and teachers in high schools.