* 1505441
* Atomic Layer-by-Layer Deposition of Pt on Pd Nanocrystals with Well-Controlled Facets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Younan Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

In this research project, Dr. Xia of the Georgia Institute of Technology and Dr.
Mavrikakis of the University of Wisconsin-Madison are supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to develop
platinum-based catalysts with significantly enhanced mass activity toward the
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) critical to the operation of a polymer
electrolyte fuel cell. As a clean-energy technology, polymer electrolyte fuel
cells are attractive for applications that include on-site power generation and
use as a portable power source for transportation vehicles and electronic
devices. However, it has been challenging to market this technology on a large
scale due to the high cost associated with the platinum catalysts deposited on
the cathodes for mitigating the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen reduction
reaction (ORR). A reduction of roughly four-fold in platinum loading is needed
in order to meet the cost requirement for the large-scale commercialization of
this technology. Drs. Xia and Mavrikakis are investigating a new strategy that
integrates chemical synthesis and computational modeling for maximizing the mass
specific activity of a platinum-based catalyst toward ORR. They are particularly
interested in depositing platinum as ultrathin skins of only a few atomic layers
thick on palladium nanocrystals. They develop ORR catalysts with enhanced
activity by controlling the type of facet (and thus, the arrangement of atoms on
the surface) on the palladium (Pd) templates, optimizing the thickness of the
platinum (Pt) skin, and maximizing the electronic coupling between the palladium
atoms in the core and the platinum atoms in the shell. In addition to the
scientific and technological merits, this work helps forge links between
different disciplines that include materials chemistry, catalysis, surface
science, computational chemistry, colloidal science, and energy technology. It
also impacts on our society because it develops novel materials for both fuel
cells and catalysis that play a role in energy conversion and environmental
protection. The researchers promote diversity in higher education by engaging
women, minorities, and other underrepresented groups into this project. By
substantially reducing Pt and Pd loadings in catalytic devices, this work helps
society achieve a sustainable use for platinum, one of the rarest precious
metals that exists in the Earth's crust.

In the new catalysts for polymer electrolyte fuel cells, platinum atoms are
deposited as conformal shells on the surfaces of palladium nanocrystals pre-
synthesized with a uniform size and well-controlled facets. The shell thickness
is precisely tuned from one to five atomic layers. Four types of palladium
nanocrystals are investigated, including cubes, octahedra, rhombic dodecahedra,
and concave cubes, with each one of their surfaces covered by a single type of
facet: {100}, {111}, {110}, and high-index ones, respectively. This research
involves a unique combination of three approaches: modification of the
electronic structure of the platinum surface (and thus, the binding energies of
oxygen-containing species) by coupling with the palladium core; development of
the most active surface structure by controlling the facet on the palladium
core; and replacement of the platinum atoms in the bulk with palladium, a much
less expensive metal relative to platinum, to save the materials cost. The
outcomes of this research may include enhancement of both graduate and
undergraduate education through multidisciplinary and collaborative research; a
deep understanding of the heterogeneous nucleation and growth mechanisms
involved in the formation of metal nanocrystals; and the development of a novel
class of ORR catalysts with an improved performance (activity and durability) to
cost ratio when benchmarked against the current commercial catalyst.