* 1505005
* Learning by practice: Introducing a new building energy efficiency elective course and laboratory into the Mechanical Engineering undergraduate curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Paul Biney, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 01/31/2019
* USD 243,897.00

Considering the high level of building energy consumption and the importance of
building energy efficiency expertise to enhance environmental and economic
sustainability, this project at Prairie View A&M University (PVAMU) is focused
on developing and implementing a new software-assisted, project-based elective
course in the area of building energy efficiency and green building design. A
building energy efficiency lab, which will be developed in this project, will
complement the course. The successful implementation of this project will have
broader impacts on students, the PVAMU Mechanical Engineering (ME) program, the
university, the local community, and other universities. These impacts include
research capacity enhancement of the ME program by using the developed building
energy efficiency lab in undergraduate and graduate research projects and as a
supplementary lab for Thermal Science Lab and Fluid Mechanics, the inclusion of
this course as part of the energy engineering minor curriculum in the PVAMU
Center for Energy and Environmental Sustainability, sharing the gained
experience and findings from this NSF project and students' projects with the
community of educators, researchers, and the public.

The goal of this project is to enhance engineering learning and the work-related
skills of undergraduate students at PVAMU Mechanical Engineering program by
engaging them in a practice-oriented energy-related course. This project with
the proposed combination of energy-efficiency contents and instructional
approaches can be a good instructional example for other HBCUs and can be
adopted by other universities as well. Project evaluation will be used to assess
implementation activities, guide project processes, and assess impact. To this
end, formative evaluation will address the extent to which the project is
implemented as planned and strategies and activities developed and implemented
as intended (implementation evaluation). Formative evaluation will also provide
data concerning the extent to which the project is progressing as planned, what
is working well, and what needs improvement (progress evaluation). Summative
evaluation will assess the extent to which the goals and objectives were met and
whether some unintended outcomes occurred. Evaluation activities will be
conducted both internally and externally, using a mixed methods approach for
gathering data. A matched comparison design will be utilized to determine impact
of the project on students registered vs. unregistered in the proposed course.