* 1505296
* Atmospheric Neutrino Oscillations with IceCube DeepCore
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Douglas Cowen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2018
* USD 810,000.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will provide opportunities for young physicists at all levels to become
involved in particle astrophysics, with a particular emphasis on encouraging
participation among women and underrepresented groups. The PI founded and serves
as the faculty mentor to the Physics and Astronomy Women (PAW). PAW provides a
forum for open discussion of the challenges facing women as well as their
solutions, runs a mentoring program for starting undergraduate and graduate
women in physics, increases the local visibility of women in science through
outreach activities, and provides networking and professional development
opportunities in a friendly environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DeepCore
extension, a sub-array comprising the seven innermost IceCube strings, augmented
by eight additional strings containing sensors deployed below 2100 m in the
clearest ice, has enabled the observation of atmospheric neutrinos at energies
as low as 10 billion electron-volts. This award will support this group to
continue to exploit the DeepCore data to answer fundamental questions of
neutrino physics, including a high statistics inclusive measurement of tau
neutrino appearance and, with further refinements in reconstruction and analysis
techniques, measurements of the neutrino oscillation parameters. They will use
neutrinos from IceCube and DeepCore to facilitate real-time searches for multi-
messenger astrophysical sources via the Astrophysical Multi-messenger
Observatory Network.