* 1505644
* 2014 AES Electrophoresis Society Annual Meeting
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2015
* Cullen Buie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2015
* USD 7,500.00

1505644 MIT Buie

Travel funds are requested to partially support approximately 13 graduate
students and young faculty to participate in the 2014 AES Electrophoresis
Society Annual Meeting will be held November 16-21, 2014 in Atlanta, GA.

The AES Electrophoresis Society Annual Meeting is an international meeting will
involve participants from various sectors of the research community including
academia, industry, and federal research laboratories. The 2014 AES Meetings
offers a rich atmosphere for the presentation and exchange of ideas centered on
the advancement of electrokinetic phenomena for applications in biotechnology,
materials science, and separations science. The award will be used to facilitate
increased student participation in the meeting. These students will receive
additional training and take an active leadership role in the administration of
the conference by helping to convene a subset of the technical sessions.

This meeting is expected to result in bolstered scientific interactions amongst
AES members and the broader AIChE community. Students funded through this effort
will co-author a journal article summarizing the meeting and serve as co-chairs
for one of the technical sessions. This invaluable experience will bolster their
academic networks and provide them with future career opportunities. Past AES
Electrophoresis Society Meetings have led to postdoctoral job opportunities,
collaborations, and faculty positions for the attendees. It is anticipated that
this year's meeting will achieve similar results but with a stronger emphasis on
student engagement.