* 1505348
* Research Initiation Award: RNA-Seq Based Analysis of the Streptococcus parauberis transcriptome
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Ashley Haines, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 06/30/2020
* USD 236,337.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Norfolk State University (NSU)
will conduct research aimed at understanding how bacterial pathogens adapt to
divergent hosts in a variety of environments. The project will help NSU build
its research capacity and enhance the educational and research experiences of
their undergraduate students. The project has the potential to be a model for
increasing the number of minority students pursuing degree programs and careers
in bioinformatics and computational biology. The research and educational
efforts will contribute to the University's goal to establish itself as a
regional and national leader in STEM research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
proposes to use S. parauberis as a model for studying "environmental generalist"
bacteria, as it can survive in soil, water and in warm-blooded (homeothermic)
and cold-blooded (poikilothermic) hosts. The goal of this project is to define
how host environment impacts global gene expression in a model species of
Streptococcus: S. parauberis. This will be accomplished by: 1) establishing the
set of genes that are differentially expressed during growth of S. parauberis at
temperatures mimicking a mammalian (bovine) host and in a fish host; and 2)
establishing the set of genes that are differentially expressed during growth of
S. parauberis in serum from a mammalian (bovine) host and from a fish host. This
project could help determine the mechanisms by which Streptococcal bacteria
adapt to their host environment and will contribute to our knowledge base
regarding the basic cellular processes that support microbial survival. This
work will be applicable in controlling microbial growth as well as understanding
the emergence of Streptococcal pathogens in new hosts.