* 1505175
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Guardian Angel---Enabling Mobile Safety Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2018
* Jie Yang, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 120,927.00

To date, safety services are typically constructed as dedicated stovepipe
systems focusing on high reliability and a specific area of risk (e.g.,
automotive safety systems). Usage of&amp;#8232; such services remains limited
since they require a dedicated investment for each system. This project trades
off the ultra-high reliability of dedicated systems for the much more
&amp;#8232;rapid adoption of safety services that comes with integrating them
directly into mobiles and wearables. By demonstrating the feasibility of this
approach, this project can contribute to saving lives, such as some of the more
than 30,000 traffic fatalities in the United States each year. It can also
inform regulatory policy for safety services &amp;#8232;at the CPSC, NHTSA, or
FCC. Moreover, the PIs will not only train graduate students to conduct the
research but also actively include undergraduates and high school students
through research internship programs. Results will be disseminated through
scholarly publications, active outreach to the wireless and mobile industry
through WINLAB's industry events and connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to demonstrate that the mobile devices we carry and wear can
provide effective safety services. This is particularly relevant where our
devices contribute to dangers by causing distractions for drivers and
pedestrians. This project therefore pursues the vision of a system that offsets
such unsafe use by continually sensing our activities and surroundings,
identifying potentially dangerous situations, and mitigating them through
appropriate interventions. At a technical level, the primary challenge lies not
only in designing precise sensing techniques but in understanding and managing
the level of confidence provided by these techniques. A key observation is that
there are usually multiple possible interventions of varying levels of
intrusiveness and tolerance to false positives. It is therefore important to
match interventions to the confidence level provided by the sensors. To address
this challenge, the project develops system support and a toolkit to help
developers track and manage mobile&amp;#8232; sensing uncertainty. It explores
crowdsourcing failure and relevance data&amp;#8232; from a large user population
and automatically estimating the confidence provided&amp;#8232; by internal
sensing and activity recognition components. The toolkit can further use the
obtained metrics to help adapt sensing or application behavior. The system might
conserve energy by switching one context sensor to a fallback mode from a
diversity mode; or, the system could&amp;#8232; switch to a different
intervention if the level of confidence has changed. System validation includes
prototyping two application use cases, which sense and mitigate mobile device
distractions for drivers and pedestrians. Together, these techniques form the
system, which supports development of many other effective safety services on
mobile devices.