* 1505185
* GOALI: Atomistic Understanding of Non-Newtonian Flow and Related Phenomena in Chalcogenide Glass-Forming Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Sabyasachi Sen, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 686,971.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Chalcogenide glasses are an important class of
materials that have found wide-ranging applications in the areas of photonics,
telecommunication, optical memory storage, photovoltaics and environmental
remote sensing. However, surprisingly, little is known regarding the flow
response of the parent melts or liquids from which these glasses are derived,
especially when these melts are subjected to large deformation rates during
various industrial forming processes, including but not limited to molding,
extrusion, embossing and fiber drawing. This project aims to investigate the
mechanistic relationships between deformation rate and the flow behavior at the
atomic scale in a variety of chalcogenide glasses and liquids for the first
time, using a variety of cutting-edge characterization techniques. This
fundamental understanding may enable the identification of chalcogenide glasses
suitable for low-temperature polymer-forming processes, thereby permitting their
widespread application in transformative technologies with strong societal
impact. Scientifically, this work impacts materials science, physical chemistry
and solid state physics. The interdisciplinary nature of this work transfers
knowledge between fields and provides the students with unique opportunities for
intellectual growth. The impact of this research in education and outreach is in
three major areas: (1) participation by students, (2) active collaboration with
industry, and (3) dissemination of knowledge, especially of glass science and
technology, to the broader scientific community. The research activities provide
the core of special topics courses that are offered to students in materials
science, chemistry and other related fields; contribute to campus programs for
women and minority students; and to recruiting promising students from
underrepresented and economically disadvantaged
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The non-Newtonian flow response
of a supercooled glass-forming liquid, when it is driven out of equilibrium via
mechanical deformation, is intimately linked to its viability for various
processing techniques and is of key significance in industry in controlling and
optimizing the corresponding processing parameters. This GOALI project brings
together investigators with complementary expertise and common interests from
the University of California at Davis (Sen) and from Corning, Incorporated
(Aitken) to address the connections between the atomistic and the macroscopic
aspects of the non-Newtonian flow and related phenomena in chalcogenide glass-
forming liquids in the systems Ge-As-Se and Ge-P-Se using a powerful combination
of state-of-the-art rheometric measurements and structural and dynamical
characterization with high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and Raman
spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry and small-angle X-ray
scattering. Predictive atomistic models of structure-deformation-viscous flow
relationships, built on the basis of the results obtained in this project, may
ultimately enable the use of chalcogenide glasses in a wide range of low-
temperature continuous forming processes, thereby making these materials viable
for widespread applications in modern technologies ranging from photonics and
telecommunication to remote sensing. The focus of this project, namely how and
why, the dynamic and thermodynamic aspects of strain-induced rearrangements of
the atomic structure control the shear thinning behavior and related phenomena
in chalcogenide glass-forming liquids is in itself crosscutting materials
research. The breadth, flexibility and interdisciplinary nature of this project
prepares students with powerful experimental skills and research experience in
both academic and industrial settings that may open up many opportunities for
their future careers. This project also enriches the graduate education and
training experience through numerous scientific dialogues and interactions
between the collaborating scientists and participating students.