* 1505947
* Solid-State Dewetting of Metallic Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Carl Thompson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2019
* USD 457,389.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Metallic thin films are used in a wide range
of devices and systems that have an impact on our everyday lives. They play
critical roles in the integrated circuits used for computation and
communication, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) used for sensing and
biomedical analyses, micromagnetic devices used for information storage, and
microphotonic devices and systems used for information processing,
communications and sensing. As these technologies advance, smaller and smaller
metallic components are required. However, it has been found that when materials
are made very small, their shape tends to evolve over time as they try to adopt
spherical shapes, like droplets. This is limiting the development of new
technologies, especially those involving metallic components. In this project,
precisely controlled very small metallic structures are being made to study
their evolution over time. These experimental studies are coupled with
development of the theoretical models that are needed to explain this evolution.
The goals of this project are to develop new techniques for making stable nano-
scale metallic structures and for controlling shape evolution to make structures
with complex shapes for new functions. This project involves students from two
research groups, one focused on experiments and one focused on modeling. These
students participate in meetings of both groups and will also extensively
interact with senior and junior members of collaborating groups in the Technical
University of Dresden, the University of Milano, and the University of New South
Wales. Results from this project are included in courses at MIT and short
courses for industry, as well as in massively open online courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Experimental and theoretical
studies of solid state dewetting are being carried out to understand the effects
of crystalline anisotropy on capillary-driven morphological evolution. Single
crystal films have been lithographically patterned before heating to cause
morphological evolution. It is found that this evolution is strongly affected by
the crystallographic orientation of patterned features such as film edges. Edges
were found to retract at orientation-dependent rates and either undergo pinch-
off to leave behind sets of ligaments aligned in parallel with the retracting
edge, or develop a fingering instability that leads to parallel ligaments
aligned along the retraction direction. Ligaments are subject to a Rayleigh-like
instability that leads to break-up into particles. This behavior is very
reproducible, and leads to different intermediate structures that depend on the
shape and orientation of the pre-patterned structures. In all cases, crystalline
anisotropy strongly affects the observed phenomenology. In this project,
systematic studies are underway in which films of different materials,
thickness, and crystallographic texture are patterned with edges and other
features within a range of in-plane crystallographic orientations. Kinetic
studies of retraction of straight edges, rim pinch-off and fingering are
underway. Different annealing ambients are being used to understand the role of
surface structure and surface energy anisotropy on dewetting anisotropy.
Morphological evolution in the systems under study occurs by capillarity-driven
surface diffusion. 2D models for evolution in the case of isotropic surface
energies are well developed, and 3D models based on phase filled approaches are
emerging. However, the strongly anisotropic behavior that is observed in
dewetting studies shows the need for 3D models that account for surface energy
and diffusion anisotropy. As part of this project, the investigators are
developing anisotropic 3D phase field models that will be tested by comparison
with a wide range of experiments. It is anticipated that these basic studies
will lead to an improved understanding of capillary-driven evolution of thin
films and micro-/nano-structures. This will allow design of materials and
systems with improved stability and enable the use of templated solid-state
dewetting as a tool for generating complex structures with sub-lithographic
feature sizes.