* 1505858
* The PA-Supported Neutrino Program at MIT
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Janet Conrad, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,043,000.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena.

This award enables the group to address the development of a globally
competitive STEM workforce; increased participation of women and minorities;
improved teacher development; improved undergraduate education; increased public
scientific literacy; and public well-being. The work has valuable spin-offs from
the research, including reactor flux studies relevant to reactor monitoring and
the cyclotron development relevant to medical isotope production.

The group is motivated by searches for new physics manifested in the neutrino
sector. "New physics" means a step beyond the discoveries of neutrino mass and
three-active-flavor mixing, which are well established. Introducing sterile
neutrinos extends the number of mass states and expands the mixing matrix. This
can lead to oscillations with squared mass splittings that are anomalously
large. The group will pursue this question in two projects, the ongoing IceCube
experiment and the future IsoDAR experiment.