* 1505496
* Spin - Orbital Angular Momentum Coupled Ultra-cold Atomic Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Chuanwei Zhang, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 07/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

The advances of modern electrical devices are often driven by the discovery of
new quantum materials. In many materials, the coupling between electron spins
and their motional degrees of freedom (linear momentum and orbital angular
momentum), i.e., spin-orbit coupling, plays a crucial role in the underlying
material properties. Understanding the effects of spin-orbit coupling in a
controllable platform could provide important guidelines for future design and
discovery of new quantum materials with desirable properties and
functionalities. In this context, ultra-cold atomic gases offer such a
controllable platform for material design and discovery with unprecedented level
of control and precision in experiments. Previous research has realized one type
of spin-orbit coupling (the coupling between spin and linear momentum) for
ultra-cold atoms, which now becomes one major research frontier in physics.
However, another important and fundamental type of spin-orbit coupling, the
coupling between spin and orbital angular momentum (SOAM coupling), has not been
explored for ultra-cold atomic gases. In this project, the generation of SOAM
coupling for ultra-cold atoms and their applications in engineering new quantum
states will be studied. The study of such highly controllable SOAM coupled cold
atomic platform will in turn influence the future electronic material design and
discovery. This work will not only pave the way for coherent control of cold
atomic systems for many important applications (e.g., material design, quantum
computation, precision measurement, etc.), but will also influence fundamental
research in cold atomic and condensed matter physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major objective of this project is to investigate the generation and
applications of SOAM coupling in ultra-cold atomic gases using higher order
Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) laser modes. Another goal is to study the cold atomic
physics with spatially varying spin-linear-momentum (SLM) coupling using higher
order Hermit-Gaussian (HG)) laser modes. Specific tasks include: 1) Study the
generation of SOAM coupling or spatially varying SLM coupling using LG or HG
Raman laser modes; 2) Investigate ground states and collective dynamics of cold
atoms in the presence of SOAM coupling and HG-SLM coupling; c) Explore novel
quantum phases induced by SOAM or HG-SLM couplings for both bosons and fermions.
Various numerical and analytical methods (e.g., mean field approximation, time-
evolving-block-decimation algorithm, perturbation theory, etc.) will be applied.
The work will provide a diverse platform for both graduate and undergraduate
students to explore theoretical cold atomic and condensed matter physics. In
addition, this effort will include outreach activities for K-12 students and
involvement of students from under-represented groups, such as women and
minority students.