* 1505903
* Spectroscopy of Dense Positronium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 572,568.00

A Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) is a cold gas of many identical atoms that have
collected into the lowest energy state of a container. A BEC can exhibit
frictionless flow and unique interference properties that make it an atomic
analog of a laser. The coherence of light in lasers has found extraordinary
applications in optical communication, medical imaging, and various industrial
applications. The coherence of atoms may open new paths to atom-based quantum
computation, simulation of new states of matter, and advances in high precision
metrology. It has been proposed that a BEC formed from positronium (Ps) atoms
(bound states of electrons and their positron antiparticles) would be of unique
interest because it could exhibit double coherence, simultaneously condensing
like a BEC and, at sufficiently high densities, exhibiting laser-like effects
due to stimulated annihilation. Because positronium is thousands of times
lighter than ordinary atoms, a positronium BEC does not need to be held at
ultra-low temperatures and could even exist at room temperature, making it
convenient for eventually making a practical gamma ray laser. An application of
the positronium BEC would be the ability to induce coherent Ps atom emission to
produce extremely monoenergetic atoms for ultrahigh precision optical
spectroscopy measurements. The positronium BEC is predicted to form at 100 times
higher density of positronium atoms than has ever been produced in a laboratory
before. Two scientists from the University of California, Riverside (UCR)
propose to study positronium at 100 times higher density and to observe the
first positronium BEC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an ongoing project at the
University of California Riverside (UCR) with the goal of studying the physics
of a cold, dense gas of positronium (Ps), an ultra-light hydrogenic bound state
of an electron and its positron antiparticle. Although the triplet ground state
of Ps has a mean lifetime of only 142 ns, it is possible to make precision
measurements of the energy levels of Ps and to observe Ps interactions with
atoms, molecules and condensed mater. Scientists at UCR have thus far been able
to create Ps densities sufficient to produce the dipositronium molecule (Ps2)
for the first time. In this new phase of the project they will create a much
denser Ps gas and study the effect that Bose-Einstein statistics is expected to
have on atoms that are unit spin Bose particles. The specific objectives are:
(1) Produce Ps pulses in a target with surface densities more than one hundred
times greater than before; (2) Measure cooling rates of Ps atoms in cavities at
cryogenic temperatures; (3) Observe an excess of low momentum cold Ps atoms in
2D cavities due to the effect of Bose statistics; and (4) Search for a Ps Bose-
Einstein condensate (BEC) in 3D cavities at low temperature. Ps momentum
distributions and temperatures for identifying a BEC will be measured directly
in real time with a newly NSF-funded instrument specifically designed for this
purpose.