* 1505547
* Student Travel - 12th International Workshop on Nanomechanical Sensing (NMC2015); Auckland, New Zealand.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Beth Pruitt, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 10/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) Nontechnical &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 12th
International Workshop on Nano mechanical Sensing (NMC2015) will be held in July
2015&lt;br/&gt;in Auckland, New Zealand: http://nmc2015.org. We anticipate
150-200 academic and industrial&lt;br/&gt;research scientists from around the
world will attend. NMC has been held in Asia, Europe,&lt;br/&gt;and the U. S.
annually since 2004. The organization promotes cross- pollination of ideas
from&lt;br/&gt;all corners of the globe. The conference consists of oral
presentations (invited and juried),&lt;br/&gt;poster sessions, and time for
informal networking and discussion. All materials presented&lt;br/&gt;at the
meeting are invited to submit a more comprehensive version of their work in a
special&lt;br/&gt;edition of the IET journal Micro Nano
Letters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NMC workshop is focused on interdisciplinary
research on and with nanoscale sensors. NMC&lt;br/&gt;started as a "Nano
mechanical cantilever" meeting but has grown along with innovations
in&lt;br/&gt;Nano mechanics and probing at the nanoscale. NMC Workshops are non-
profit academic meetings&lt;br/&gt;which are self-supporting; the meetings rely
on contributions and attendee tuition to offset&lt;br/&gt;all expenses. NSF
support is requested to assist in keeping the tuition rate as low as
possible&lt;br/&gt;to enable a larger number of students and postdoctoral
trainees to attend. NMC2015 provides&lt;br/&gt;a single session technical
program with the latest research on Nano sensing including
renowned&lt;br/&gt;invited speakers, contributed oral and poster presentations
and excellent networking opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;NMC aims to promote
interaction among researchers in the micro and Nano sensing and
device&lt;br/&gt;community interested in addressing high-impact issues in
chemical, biological and physical&lt;br/&gt;detection e.g. applications from
homeland security and health, to materials research for computing&lt;br/&gt;and
energy. An important component of the meeting is discussion and exploration on
bringing&lt;br/&gt;this research to the real world. Conference participants hail
from major universities and &lt;br/&gt;research facilities in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be
participating in this conference. Attending sessions, and discussing with the
researchers in the fields. They will be able to present their technical papers
and discuss the latest technology on nanosensors.