* 1505144
* In-Situ Transmission Electron Microscopy of the Electrochemical Deposition of Functionalized Poly(thiophenes)
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* David Martin, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2018
* USD 419,998.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will directly
monitor the formation of solid electrically conducted polymers (also known as
"synthetic metals") from liquid solutions using a special high-resolution
electron microscope which allows direct observation of the cyrstallization
process as it takes place. These organic materials are used in many advanced
applications including flexible batteries, solar cells, and biomedical devices.
However, the way their complicated structures actually form at the molecular
level is not well understood scientifically. The project will examine the
formation and growth of these complex materials during an electrochemical
reaction. The experiments will use a special sample stage that will make it
possible to watch and monitor within the electron microscope what happens as the
materials change from liquid to solid. The research project will teach students
in materials science and engineering how to establish a detailed understanding
about the relationship between microstructure and properties of electrically
active polymers, as well as contribute to their broader interdisciplinary
education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate the
electrochemical deposition of functionalized poly(thiophenes) using in-situ
transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Conjugated poly(thiophenes), including
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene)
(PProDOT), are of considerable scientific and commercial interest, but the
detailed mechanisms of electrochemical deposition are not yet known. An in-situ
sample holder will be used to examine the deposition from liquid monomer
solution to solid polymer directly in a TEM. These experiments will make it
possible to monitor the oxidative polymerization of thiophene monomers in the
region of the electrode-electrolyte interface, providing detailed information
about the structural evolution of the resulting polymer films as a function of
total charge delivered to the electrode. The results will be correlated with
measurements of charge transport properties using impedance spectroscopy and
cyclic voltammetry. Correlations will also be made with images obtained by
complementary imaging techniques including optical and scanning electron
microscopy.