* 1505313
* Construction of the TPC Readout Electronics for the LAr1-ND Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Michael Shaevitz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2021
* USD 629,937.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model has
succeeded in classifying all of the elementary particles known into a hierarchy
of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this model to date
has been recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions, for example why there is a preponderance of matter
over antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers
to such open questions about the universe is to focus on a study of the
properties of neutrinos and to use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as
probes of science beyond the Standard Model. Neutrinos are elementary particles
that barely interact with anything else in the universe. They have no electric
charge and were once thought to be massless. Moreover, the Standard Model
predicted that there were actually three different kinds of neutrinos that were
distinguishable through the different interactions that they would undergo
whenever they would interact with matter. But recent measurements have totally
changed our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a mass and
because they do, they can actually change from one type to another. Detailed
measurements of these changes, along with other current neutrino measurements,
form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the Standard
Model. There have also been possible hints in various experiments of new types
of neutrinos (called sterile neutrinos), and building the critical instruments
to clarify such "hints" is one of the main thrusts of the work in this project.

The work proposed here is to develop the front-end electronics for a Liquid
Argon Time Projection Chamber (LAr TPC) for the Liquid Argon, Near Detector
(LAr1-ND) Experiment. This detector technique is powerful in that it allows the
experimenter to distinguish between electrons and photons, important for the
understanding of the character of neutrino interactions and neutrino
oscillations. At Fermilab, the LAr1-ND experiment, along with a companion
experiment called MicroBooNE, should significantly increase the physics reach
toward answering the important question of whether hypothesized "sterile"
neutrinos exist and resolving the anomalies in recent neutrino experiments. The
electronics developed through this award will also advance an important new
technology for the field, the Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber, which is the
likely technology in the future large-scale Long Baseline Neutrino Facility
(LBNF) being constructed at FNAL.