* 1505603
* Collaborative Research: Smart prismatic-louver technology for enhanced daylighting and management of thermal loads in green buildings
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Nicholas Madamopoulos, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 09/30/2021
* USD 183,675.00

The project will develop nanofluid-filled louvers that can be used as light
blocking devices, as well as visible light redirectors and solar infrared energy
absorbers and manipulators. The louvers through their optical transparency to
visible light and optical properties redirect the incoming collimated sunlight
so that natural lighting improvement and management for deeper daylight
penetration are achieved, reducing lighting electrical power cost. In addition,
reduced glare and offsetting of artificial lighting needs can be accomplished,
increasing occupants' comfort. The faculty and students involved in the project
will organize lectures and workshops to share their results to the local
community to inform of the possible benefits of the research. The integrated
education and research program will enhance recruitment and outreach to various
underrepresented communities at the two public universities that serve a large
population of underrepresented students in STEM. Daylight is an important aspect
of everyday life inside buildings, as it enhances individual productivity,
increases student performance and well-being. The project has the potential to
have an impact in the perception of and adaptation of older buildings to
contemporary uses by virtue of sustainable energy technology. The project
results offer a better working environment, reducing the energy requirements and
the carbon footprint of buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
objective of this project is to study the fundamental optics and thermal-fluid
mechanisms for enhanced daylighting, enhanced solar infrared (IR) energy
harvesting, and enhanced energy transport, via use of proposed nanofluid-filled
prismatic louvers. In particular, the project will study the effects of the
prismatic louver geometry, orientation and control in glazings, and the
photothermal physics of nanofluids for achieving: (a) Visible light redirection
and diffusion and smart control for better natural light penetration in the
indoors, and (b) Selective radiation absorption through IR absorption-enhanced
nanofluid for heat gain manipulation of the incoming solar radiation. The
specific aims of the project include: (i) Optical analysis and experimental
verification of enhanced daylighting; (ii) Spectral analysis of selected
nanofluids for enhanced solar IR radiation harvesting; (iii) Thermal analysis
and measurements for enhanced heat transfer and energy storage; and (iv)
Daylighting and thermal management control for realizing a smart louver system.
The project will develop prismatic louver geometries and orientations for
optimum daylighting condition for a variety of climatic zones. At the same time,
nanofluids (e.g., low-volume TiO2 nanoparticles in water) tailored for
selectively increasing solar IR absorption/harvesting but not affecting visible
light penetration will be developed and studied. An important objective of this
project is to study the interplay between increased daylight penetration and the
effects on reducing heating/cooling needs. This is required to effectively
manage both the incoming light and solar radiation, by proper control of light
redirection and heat transfer to either the surrounding environment, or to
secondary heat exchanging and/or thermal storage tank, or to thermoelectricity
generators. Theoretical and experimental work in both optics and heat transfer
issues are addressed. For the first time to the project team's knowledge, the
project addresses solar IR energy harvesting, regulation and management in a way
that makes optimal use of their impact through an integrated and adaptable
design that can address different climatic, and seasonal needs. The project
through its hybrid methods and results, e.g., lighting and sun-shading, energy
savings, thermal load reduction and nanofluid-based heat storage/transfer allows
for the conversion of natural resources, achieving green energy and
sustainability.