* 1505733
* Development of THz Laser Frequency Combs
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Qing Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 04/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Title: Terahertz (THz) Laser Frequency Combs&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical: Frequency combs, which can be viewed as rulers in frequency domain,
have revolutionized high-precision metrology and spectroscopy, and for which
half of the 2005 physics Nobel prize was awarded. At terahertz (or trillion
hertz, in a nontechnical unit), many species exhibit strong and distinctive
spectral fingerprints, that is, they absorb or emit strongly at several specific
frequencies at THz. THz frequency combs will be the idea tool to study those
species. Prior to our breakthrough development in 2014, THz frequency combs have
been generated using bulky pump lasers with nonlinear generation. As such, they
are very inefficient and can produce only low levels of power (~microwatts). In
our recent breakthrough, we developed laser frequency combs at THz which
generated much higher power levels (~5 mW). The principal investigator's work
has been reported in media aimed at broad communities such as Technology Review,
Laser Focus, NPR Market Place, Discovery, Popular Science, and Boston Museum of
Science. Through collaborations, the THz lasers developed in the PI's group have
helped to enhance infrastructures at other institutions in THz-related
activities by adding a crucial enabling component. The principal investigator
has incorporated elements in the research project into a graduate course in
solid-state physics and a undergraduate foundational course Signals and Systems.
Furthermore, effort has been made to involve members of underrepresented
minorities, women, and undergraduate students in the research activities. In
2010, based on the technologies developed in the PI's group, a former student
co-founded a start-up company LongWave Photonics. Since then, the company has
sold many turn-key systems of THz lasers (Easy QCL) to customers worldwide. We
fully expect that the proposed work will enable the development of new
commercial products which will be of interest to many customers in biochemical
communities. Such a development will secure the American leadership in this
technical area, and create well-paid jobs in the U. S. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Following the breakthrough, the proposed research seeks to
develop high-performance THz frequency combs based on quantum cascade lasers,
and to demonstrate their applications in THz optical coherent tomography (OCT)
and dual-comb spectroscopy. Recently, by clever dispersion engineering we have
successfully developed THz frequency combs spanning over a ~500 GHz bandwidth.
As fundamental oscillators, these laser combs generate almost four orders of
magnitude greater power than other THz frequency combs based on nonlinear
frequency conversion. We plan to develop THz laser frequency combs uniformly
spanning over an octave bandwidth (&gt;2 THz) with &gt;10 mW output power, and
demonstrate them in real applications. Towards this objective, we will pursue
four interrelated tasks: developing heterogeneous THz quantum cascade gain media
with flat gain curves spanning over an octave bandwidth (&gt;2 THz), developing
broadband dispersion compensators with high index contrast to compensate the
dispersion over such a broad bandwidth, achieving more robust comb operations by
utilizing the internally generated beatnote to actively enforce comb formation
and performing f-2f frequency stabilization, and demonstrating comb applications
in THz optical coherent tomography and high-resolution dual-comb spectroscopy.
This development will have a significant impact on the science and technologies
in THz frequencies, which have great potentials in biochemical sensing and
spectroscopy, imaging for medical and security applications, astrophysics,
remote atmospheric sensing and monitoring, and high-bandwidth free-space
communications.