* 1505276
* GOALI: Liquid Charging in Electrostatic Atomizers for Coating and Painting Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Farzad Mashayek, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 349,750.00

The focus of this proposal is to investigate the process of the generation of
electrical charges at the nozzles of sprays. This work will be done in
collaboration with an industrial partner, Spraying Systems Company (SSCo), a
large international manufacturer of spray products with a well-equipped research
lab near the University of Illinois at Chicago. The co-PIs already have an on-
going collaboration with SSCo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for the
proposed research is to facilitate the commercialization of the electrostatic
atomizers for coating and painting applications. Both of these applications
would benefit significantly from the ability to control drop trajectories to
avoid waste, provide precision deposition, and reduce the spread of hazardous
materials. The proposed work aims at providing the understanding needed to
achieve these performance characteristics. In addition, a low-cost computational
model as a predictive tool for the design of these atomizers will be developed.
The proposal includes concurrent studies based on theory, computation and
experiments. This is a multiscale problem that will be tackled by theory to
separate the analysis of the extremely thin near-electrode polarized layer,
where an imbalance of charges exists, from the analysis of the electroneutral
bulk flow with much larger dimensions. As a result of this separation, one would
only need to solve for a Laplace equation (for the electric potential) along
with the Navier-Stokes equations in the incompressible bulk flow. The solution
of the Laplace and Navier-Stokes equations, which are coupled through the
boundary conditions at the electrode, will be obtained numerically. Experiments
are also proposed to (i) determine an empirical coefficient for the rate of
reaction at the electrode surface, and (ii) provide data for validation of the
computational model. The validated model will be implemented to conduct a
detailed study on the effect of various parameters, such as the shape of the
electrode. Collaboration with SSCo will provide experimental data for model
validation and will facilitate the scale-up of the process. Broader impacts
include industrial outreach and involvement of undergraduates and graduate
students; creation of animations demonstrating the charging process. A
successful electrostatic atomizer for non-conducting liquids will provide great
advantages in sprays and coatings, which are materials that surround us and we
use in everyday life.