* 1505122
* Physics, Materials, and Electronic Properties of Dilute-As GaNAs Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Nelson Tansu, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 395,000.00

Non-technical Description: The project focuses on exploring the fundamental
materials properties of a new class of semiconductors for solid state lighting.
One of the key barriers in current light-emitting diodes (LEDs) is a significant
reduction in device efficiency when operating under high current density. The
new materials based on dilute-As GaNAs offer a potential solution toward low-
cost solid state lighting and high-efficiency solar cells. The project offers
graduate and undergraduate students multidisciplinary research training, ranging
from computational materials science, materials synthesis, to materials
characterization for III-Nitride semiconductors. The outreach activities include
pairing undergraduates and high-school students with Ph.D. students to perform
material- and nanotechnology-based research work in the Principle Investigator's
laboratory. The 'hands-on' experiences in the fields of optoelectronics and
nanotechnology attract students at early stage to pursue careers in sciences and
engineering.

Technical Description: The project focuses on a new III-Nitride technology based
on mixed As-N alloys, specifically, GaNAs. The key barrier in the conventional
III-nitride system, namely InGaN, is the lack of fundamental materials
understanding of the non-radiative process--referred to as the Auger process.
The dilute-As GaNAs is expected to show significant reduction in the Auger
process and thus could lead to high efficiency LEDs as well as other
optoelectronic devices. The research tasks include thin-film epitaxy, materials
characterization, computational materials science and nanostructures, and
physical property characterization. The understanding of the synthesis, material
physics, and electronic properties of this new material system is expected to
shed light on the efficiency-droop issue in LEDs, which opens up a pathway for
low-cost and high efficiency solid state lighting technology. In addition, the
dilute-As GaNAs could find applications in solar cells and solar-hydrogen
conversion devices because of its capability in bandgap tuning across a large
spectrum range.