* 1505234
* Responsive Branched Miktoarm and Ionic-Liquid Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2020
* USD 552,000.00

NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Novel adaptive and responsive polymeric materials represent an intriguing class
of soft nanomaterials with interesting properties. The PI will investigate a
class of these nanomaterials whose molecules also include molecular branches
that contain electrical charges. These provide a unique ability to alter their
physical properties under weak external stimuli such as changing chemical
environment, temperature, or others. The PI will be focusing on the
understanding of the molecular behavior of these soft nanomaterials using
advanced characterization techniques. The morphing and self-assembly of these
materials so as to adopt local macromolecular shapes and nanoscale properties
makes them strong candidates for prospective applications in environmentally-
friendly processing, energy harvesting, controlled drug release, adaptive
surfaces, and ion-exchange selective membranes. Another major component of this
project is the involvement of the graduate students in cross-disciplinary
fundamental research, as well as collaborations with national labs in the US and
abroad. The research and educational aspects of this project promote the
national interest.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The project focuses on the assembly of multi-responsive miktoarm block
copolymers with dual-type responsive arms as well as novel classes of branched
oligomeric and polymeric ionic liquids with peculiar ionic transport properties.
The PI adopts a comprehensive strategic approach to the understanding of global
materials properties by ascertaining the behavior of individual macromolecules
and their assemblies in the condensed confined state. Special attention will be
paid to molecular reorganization during phase transformations and coil-globule
collapse of individual arms. The effect of polymer arm composition and length,
arm number and macromolecular topology on their global and local conformation,
intramolecular state, and responsive behavior in dilute solutions and within
interfacial surface layers will be investigated. Conformation, microstructure,
and morphology of these materials will be considered in conjunction with their
mechanical properties and permeability with emphasis on tailored ionic and
macromolecular transport. A broader impact of this project is anticipated
through the enhanced training of graduate and undergraduate students with an
emphasis on their early involvement in an interdisciplinary, fundamental
research with active recruitment of underrepresented groups and intense
collaboration with polymer chemistry and materials labs in the USA and Europe.