* 1505287
* Workshop: The Physics of Protein Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Patrick Charbonneau, Yeshiva University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 09/30/2016
* USD 30,500.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research is
in support of a workshop titled "The Physics of Protein Self-Assembly" to be
held in June, 2015 at the Centre Europeen de Calcul Atomique et Moleculaire
(CECAM) in Lausanne, Switzerland. This award is cofunded by the Condensed Matter
Physics program in the Division of Materials Research; the Biomedical
Engineering program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems (ENG); and the Global Venture Fund program in the Section
of International Science and Engineering (OD/IIA). This workshop would provide
opportunity to bring together scientists working in theory, computation, and
experiments from both colloidal and protein communities, and share their recent
ideas and approaches for gaining insights into the protein self-assembly.
Knowledge gained from this workshop would be important in developing an
understanding of many biophysical phenomena, and would have impact on many
industrial processes that rely on bottom-up protein assembly. The participants
of the workshop include junior faculty, postdoctoral fellows and graduate
students in addition to well established investigators. The workshop includes
oral presentations, discussion groups, and poster sessions. In addition, the
size, structure and format of the workshop would facilitate networking and
developing future collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The self-assembly of
proteins into membranes, fibrils, crystals, clusters and gels is of keen
biological and material interest. This workshop will explore the following
themes: 1) Experimental systems of protein self-assembly in globular proteins,
viruses and amyloids, and the role of anisotropy in these experimental systems,
and to identify protein assembly experiments to improve microscopic
understanding and schematic models; 2) Coarse-grained and atomistic simulations
of protein self-assembly, how well these simulations work for proteins in their
current form, how can they be refined and adapted to achieve better
predictability, and how atomistic simulation complement and inform coarse-
grained descriptions; and 3) Synthetic patchy colloids as models for protein
self-assembly, to what extent the current patchy particles mimic protein self-
assembly, and what level of complexity in synthetic anisotropic colloids is
required to effectively mimic protein self-assembly. The proposed workshop is
expected to stimulate the development of unifying physical descriptions that
will advance understanding of protein self-assembly. Identifying the physical
forces behind the spontaneous assembly of these condensed phases is important in
elucidating normal protein function, and in designing novel biomaterials with
enhanced functional properties and applications.