* 1505598
* Devices and Materials for the Instrument Science of Advanced Gravitational-Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Gravitational waves are the messenger that will tell us about some of the most
highly energetic events in the universe, in this case the coherent motion of
very heavy masses undergoing high acceleration; such large masses can be found
in black holes, the merger of neutron star binary systems, supernovae, and the
echoes of the big bang. The discovery of gravitational waves as well as the
discovery of these sources with Advanced LIGO, the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational Wave Observatory built by the National Science Foundation to make
a direct detection of gravitational waves, would be a major milestone in the
history of science. Advanced LIGO encompasses an extremely diverse array of
underlying scientific and engineering disciplines: examples include lasers,
optics, low noise electronics, control systems, grid computing, algorithm
development, and handling large data sets.

The Advanced LIGO interferometers have turned on and commissioning of them has
increased their sensitivity far above previous detectors. The goal of a tenfold
sensitivity improvement is in sight. Because the search volume scales as
distance cubed, advanced LIGO will have more than 1000 times more sources within
its reach. To achieve this improved sensitivity, essentially everything except
for the vacuum system has been replaced. This includes the use of a 180 Watt
laser, quadruple pendulum suspensions, 40 kilogram test masses, active seismic
platforms, a signal-recycled interferometer, stable recycling cavities, an
output mode cleaner, DC readout, and improved thermal compensation. The higher
laser power presents challenges for the input optics, a responsibility of the
University of Florida. Moreover, this research has impacts that go beyond
gravitational wave science. High-power optical devices developed in this project
have commercial applications in the laser and optics industries.

This project will address items that could be needed in order to optimize the
performance of the detector. It also addresses basic research needed for future
upgrades and next generation detectors, which will further increase the science
reach of the observatories as well as work on detector characterization.
Simulations of the interferometers will be carried out to aid commissioning
work. Work on thermal adaptive mode-matching and devices for beam-jitter
suppression will be done. A novel scheme for sensing alignment errors will be
modeled and prototyped. Thermal coating noise as a function of temperature will
be measured. Looking further into the future, experiments to measure impurities
and free carrier absorption in high purity silicon for test masses will be
conducted. Considerable effort will be put towards improving the bidirectional
throughput of Faraday isolators that are key components of a squeezer for future
detectors.