* 1505933
* Core Collapse Supernova Gravitational Wave Signature Predictions Based on 3D Ab Initio Models with Increasing GR Realism
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Stephen Bruenn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 284,097.00

Core Collapse Supernovae (CCSN) are catastrophic events that mark the death of
massive stars and these violent explosions are responsible for most of the
elements in the Periodic Table. The theory of gravity developed by Newton is not
sufficient to describe the extreme densities in the CCSN mechanism. As such,
CCSN represent an excellent test bed for Einstein's theory of gravity. This
project will advance the description of gravity in current CCSN models, from an
essentially Newtonian description with a simple correction accounting for some
Einsteinian effects to a far more sophisticated approximation of Einsteinian
gravity, thereby improving significantly the realism of future CCSN studies. The
new models will be used to make predictions for the emission of gravitational
waves, ripples in the fabric of space-time, in core collapse supernovae. Such
supernovae are among the three primary sources that will produce gravitational
waves detectable by the Laser Interferometric Gravitational Wave Observatory
(LIGO). The PI will work closely with members of the LIGO Collaboration to
develop new tools for LIGO data analysis. This project will train a graduate
student in CCSN theory and gravitational wave astronomy and will provide a
research opportunity for an intern in the Fisk-Vanderbilt Ph.D.
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced multi-physics models of core collapse
supernovae that include multi-frequency neutrino transport with a complete set
of neutrino weak interactions and key relativistic corrections such as
gravitational redshift, have implemented to date only an effective self-
gravitational potential, which is computed using the Newtonian potential
obtained by solving the Poisson equation with a correction to the monopole term.
The latter is determined from an integral formulation of the Tolman-Oppenheimer-
Volkoff equation using angle-average densities. More realistic CCSN models
require more sophisticated treatments of the general relativistic gravity. In
this project, the PI and his students will implement the Conformally Flat
Approximation in CCSN models. This approximation has been shown to describe well
general relativistic gravity in systems without rapid rotation or black hole
formation, suitable for most CCSN studies. The new models will be used to
compute the emission of gravitational radiation in CCSN models using the weak-
field, slow-motion approximation and will provide new gravitational wave data to
the gravitational wave astronomy community.