* 1505778
* Tactic, Ionomer, and Long Branch Length Effects in Precision Polymer Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* K. Wagener, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 314,642.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The largest-volume plastic in use in the world is polyethylene. It is made in
various forms to meet the myriad of applications found today. Almost every
person in developed countries around the world encounters polyethylene on a
regular basis. The research in this project is designed to create new types of
polymers similar to polyethylene, and to control and better understand their
microstructure (i.e., the molecular structure of these different kinds of
polyethylene). Over several years new chemistry, known as ADMET chemistry, has
been developed in the PI's laboratory which permits synthesis of some polymer
molecules and control of their microstructure in a clear, precise manner.
Microstructure can be controlled more easily using ADMET chemistry than
virtually any other approach. If this project is successful, not only better
fundamental understanding but also potential improvements in properties and
performance could be realized, a result which would touch a significant portion
of the world's population.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Three specific objectives comprise this proposal, all of which will benefit from
collaboration with researchers providing complementary expertise.

Objective 1. The most challenging objective will be to synthesize tactic
versions of precision polymers with the substituent being a methyl group.
Objective 1 is designed to build linear polyethylene with tactic methyl groups
attached at precise spacer intervals. It will try to answer the question of how
far apart must these stereogenic centers be before they no longer influence
crystallization of the polymer (and ultimately its mechanical behavior). The
synthetic strategy, which is quite challenging, has already been elucidated. The
concept revolves around C2 symmetry within a monomer containing two stereogenic
centers possessing methyl substituents.

Objective 2. The synthesis and behavior of precision ionomers will be probed.
Such ionomers can be created with the polymer backbone being either cationic or
anionic. The primary question to be probed is whether combining the cationomer
precision polymer with the anionomer precision polymer will lead to highly
organized structures. Special molecular interactions and the resulting
morphologies will be determined.

Objective 3. Long-chain branching in polyethylene will be examined, a phenomenon
which relates to structural questions for LLDPE as well as metallocene
polyethylene. Precision polymers possessing branches 21 carbons long will be
prepared. Spacing distances between branches can be as short as every 9th carbon
or as long as every 75th carbon. The question here is related to how each "part"
of the polymer (the polyethylene backbone and the long-chain branch) will
interact, e.g. how will the individual long-chain branches crystallize and what
potentially new phases might be formed.