* 1505290
* UWM STEM CELL: An integrated approach to improve early college STEM education outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Kyle Swanson, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2019
* USD 249,658.00

UWM STEM CELL is a pilot project to address pedagogical and sociocultural issues
that contribute to the lack of persistence and the flow of talented and
interested students away from science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) majors at the early-career undergraduate level. Many aspirational STEM
students lack the cultural knowledge about how to operate successfully in a
university setting, have little idea what a STEM career entails, and have
academic backgrounds that are deficient. STEM CELL will fundamentally reorient
the institutional culture from an attrition model to one that is focused on
student outcomes emphasizing STEM persistence, learning, enthusiasm and informed
decision making. The project will sustain students in need of academic support,
provide individualized guidance regarding STEM major and career choices, and
immerse students in practical, integrative, early academic career experiences to
help inform their chosen fields of study and career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will accomplish its goals through the
comprehensive application of a suite of low-cost, high-impact interventions,
including intentional course alignment across disciplinary boundaries among
courses in mathematics, chemistry, and biology, implementation of active
learning modes of pedagogy, development of a learning community with integrated
academic and social supports, and explicit attention to issues of relevance
including the construction of a dynamic individual development plan. This
comprehensive intervention will be rigorously evaluated and tested by a
randomized trial, with the intervention explicitly co-planned alongside the
evaluation design. This evaluation will provide unambiguous information
regarding the effectiveness of this scalable, sustainable comprehensive
intervention and thus will be relevant to institutions of higher education
nationwide.