* 1505641
* Theoretical investigation of the stability of an NV center near the surface and decoherence mechanisms due to bulk and surface impurities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Deborah Santamore, Delaware State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,605.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Human Resource Development contribute funds to this award. It supports
theoretical research and education aimed at understanding a particular kind of
defect in crystalline diamond where a nitrogen atom replaces a carbon atom and
an adjacent carbon atom site is unoccupied. This NV center traps electrons in a
small region where they occupy a quantum state with angular momentum - in a
sense it appears as though the electronic state is spinning. Control of the
quantum state of the NV center is a route to performing computation through the
manipulation of quantum mechanical states - quantum computing.

The PI aims to study NV center interactions with various impurities and
contaminants in diamond. By elucidating how undesirable quantum mechanical
effects may be minimized, the research may lead to advances in ultra-high
resolution imaging and magnetic field detection. The PI will use formal
theoretical methods and computer simulations, to investigate the mechanism of
stability and loss of coherence - the deterioration of a quantum state. The
resulting models will be compared with the experimental results of collaborators
at Harvard and Delaware State University.

This award also supports the education of a graduate student and two
undergraduate students at Delaware State University, one of the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities. The students will benefit from exposure to
modeling, mathematical calculations, programming, and data analysis techniques,
and will have opportunities to interact with other researchers at the Institute
for Theoretical Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics at Harvard. The PI will
develop a new graduate course incorporating various many-body physics techniques
and results from the research. Analysis algorithms developed in this project
will be distributed to the greater scientific community through freely available
user-developed code libraries. The research results will also be incorporated
into a scientific presentation at the Physics Open House, an outreach activity
held annually on the Delaware State University campus to promote science in the
vicinity.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Human
Resource Development contribute funds to this award. It supports theoretical
research and education aimed to advance understanding and controlling the
stability of nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers due to structural defects and
contaminants. The PI aims to develop a theoretical framework for understanding
NV center interactions with various impurities and contaminants. The research
will concentrate on three specific objectives:

(1) Interactions of NV centers having various surface terminations with water
molecules covering the surface. The PI will develop a model to calculate the
stability of the NV center at various depths from the surface and to predict the
probability that the NV center will be neutralized and that a nitrogen atom will
migrate to the surface. (2) Interactions with bulk substitutional atom
impurities. The PI will determine how the impurity population distribution
changes at various implantation energies and temperatures, and will calculate
the decoherence rate of a NV spin in a dilute spin bath of substitutional atom
impurities. (3) Line broadening in electron spin resonance spectra. Line
broadening reduces the sensitivity of magnetic field detection in NV-based
devices. The PI will determine the cause of line broadening and will develop a
scheme to minimize it. By elucidating how undesirable quantum mechanical effects
may be minimized, the present research may lead to advances in ultra-high
resolution imaging and magnetic field detection.

The PI will use analytical and numerical methods, including computer
simulations, to investigate the mechanism of decoherence. The resulting models
will be compared with the experimental results of collaborators at Harvard and
Delaware State University. This award also supports the education of a graduate
student and two undergraduate students at Delaware State University, one of the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities. The students will benefit from
exposure to modeling, mathematical calculations, programming, and data analysis
techniques, and will have opportunities to interact with other researchers at
the Institute for Theoretical Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics at Harvard.
The PI will develop a new graduate course incorporating various many-body
physics techniques and results from the research. Analysis algorithms developed
in this project will be distributed to the greater scientific community through
freely available user-developed code libraries. The research results will also
be incorporated into a scientific presentation at the Physics Open House, an
outreach activity held annually on the Delaware State University campus to
promote science in the vicinity.