* 1505411
* Theoretical Investigations in Classical and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Abhay Ashtekar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,015,710.00

Recent observations have shown that about 70% of the energy density in the
universe cannot be attributed to matter. The simplest explanation of this `dark
energy' comes from the cosmological constant that Einstein had initially
introduced in his fundamental equations of general relativity. However, for most
of the 20th century, it was widely believed that the cosmological constant is
zero because all observations were compatible with this simplest possibility.
Therefore, the detailed mathematical theories describing the dynamics of compact
astronomical objects such as colliding black holes and neutron stars, and
gravitational waves they source, was based on this assumption. The goal of the
first part of this project is to systematically extend that theory to include a
non-zero cosmological constant. The extension will provide a firmer foundation
for gravitational wave science. The second part of the project contains studies
at the interface of strong gravity and quantum physics. They address fundamental
issues related to the quantum evaporation of black holes and the physics of the
earliest epoch of our universe when gravity is strong and quantum physics
indispensable. The proposed research will have an impact on a broad range of
research areas, including general relativity, geometric analysis, cosmology,
quantum field theory, and computational science. As a result, through this
research, young scientists will be trained in inter-disciplinary science.
Currently, these researchers include members of under-represented groups.
Through his editorship of series commemorating the centennial of the discovery
of general relativity, the PI will commission monographs aimed at communicating
the latest advances in science and technology to young researchers. Finally, as
in the past, personnel supported by this grant will contribute vigorously to
outreach activities through videos, semi-popular articles and public lectures.

The first part of the project will address issues arising from the fact that
even a tiniest value if the cosmological constant can cast a long shadow on the
theory of gravitational waves. As of now, we do not even have a gauge invariant
notion of gravitational waves in full, non-linear general relativity with a
positive cosmological constant. The goal is to construct a rigorous framework to
fill this gap and use it to extract the physics of gravitational waves in a more
reliable fashion. The results will open new avenues for analytic and numerical
work in the study of the gravitational collapse, compact binary coalescence,
energy, momentum and angular momentum emission in such processes, post-Newtonian
and post-Minkowskian approximation methods, etc. They are also likely to
stimulate research in geometric analysis through new mathematical conjectures
(related to positivity of a new notion of energy). The second part of the
project will address two types of issues: i) the conceptually fundamental
question of whether information is lost in evaporation of black holes; and, ii)
the emerging interplay between loop quantum gravity and observations related to
the very early universe. This is possible because loop quantum cosmology is now
sufficiently mature to make predictions for future observations based on its
pre-inflationary dynamics, and to use current observations to seek fundamental
principles that presumably dictate the initial conditions for our universe.