* 1505006
* An Engineer Like Me: How Perceived Similarity and Peer Effects Influence Student Major Choice
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Joyce Main, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2021
* USD 247,412.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project will investigate the
factors that influence the under-representation of female and minority students
in engineering. Data from the College of Engineering at Purdue University will
be used for the analyses, which provides an opportunity to examine a large
population of engineering students. The project has the following objectives:
(1) to investigate how students' peers and role models, both from the student
and faculty populations within each major, can affect students choice of major,
(2) to investigate how the messaging and information students receive in the
course of choosing their major can affect which field they will enter, and (3)
to establish how and why major choices change over time. The analysis will
combine methods from economics and education to provide comprehensive mixed-
methods analysis of how classroom environments and activities can influence
student major choice. The proposed research is aimed at explaining why
substantial variations in diversity exist across engineering disciplines as a
function of student classroom experiences the demographic composition of
students peers and faculty, but also the messages that students receive
regarding the values and career prospects of the different disciplines through
classroom activities and interventions. The successful completion of the project
will significantly complement ongoing efforts to increase recruitment efforts
across engineering disciplines.

The importance and the role of engineering education in today's economic
environment have been receiving growing attention. With the nation's call for a
larger and more diverse engineering labor force, it is timely and critical to
better understand how multiple factors including classroom environments and
peers, messaging from discipline representatives, and departmental-level
demographic composition intersect to influence students' academic and career
trajectories. This project has the potential to advance knowledge in several
fields, notably economics and engineering education. An important contribution
of this project will be the additional focus on messaging and information
available to students. This research project's interpretive inquiry approach
using both inductive and deductive strategies is based on a broad range of
interview participants. Findings will generate new insights that have important
implications for the development of strategies to recruit more women and
underrepresented minorities into the different engineering disciplines. If
messaging is shown to be an important avenue by which institutions can affect
major choice, this type of intervention will be very scalable and could have
significant impacts on the representation of female and minority students within
other STEM fields. The project includes efforts to communicate the results of
this work to the broader engineering education community.