* 1505932
* Advanced LIGO Search for Continuous Gravitational Waves from Isolated and Binary Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* J. Keith Riles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 990,000.00

The General Theory of Relativity discovered by Einstein tells us that the
familiar, everyday force of gravity is a manifestation of something much
stranger: the bending of the geometry of space-time by matter. Among the key
predictions of the theory is the existence of gravitational waves: ripples
moving at the speed of light in the geometry of space-time caused by the fast
motion of large masses. Although well tested in terms of their indirect effects
on binary systems of compact stars, the direct detection of gravitational waves
incident on Earth poses an outstanding challenge. The scientific rewards from
achieving this ability would be enormous - ranging from probing the extreme
dynamics of exploding stars to gleaning information about the state of the
Universe almost at the moment of the Big Bang itself. The effort to enable this
new window on the universe has occupied several decades of experimental and
technological developments that have pushed the boundaries across diverse fields
in the physical sciences. The detection of continuous gravitational waves from
rotating neutron stars would be especially interesting because many such sources
are expected to continue emitting for long durations, allowing follow-up
investigation of increasing precision, and because it is believed that these
waves will provide insight into the poorly known structure of these exotic
stars. The research to be carried out, on both the instrumental and analytical
sides, will provide training to undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-
the-art science at the frontier of knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will
focus on a number of specific areas related to the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (Advanced LIGO) Experiment: 1) co-leading the
ongoing LIGO Scientific Collaboration's search for continuous gravitational
waves; 2) carrying out searches for those waves from both isolated and binary
neutron stars using programs developed previously by the University of Michigan
gravitational waves group; 3) developing new search algorithms with improved
sensitivity and computational efficiency; and 4) detector characterization of
Advanced LIGO interferometers focused on spectral line identification and
mitigation.