* 1505342
* Holomorphic Dynamics in one and several variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Tatiana Firsova, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 119,998.00

Dynamical systems are mathematical models that allow researchers to study
physical phenomenon that evolve with time: from motion of the planets to stock
markets. The PI studies holomorphic dynamics, which refers to iterations of
certain complex-valued maps that admit a rich geometry. The subject has numerous
interactions with other areas of mathematics, in particular with the important
subjects of Teichmuller Theory and Multidimensional Complex Analysis. The PI
will continue her work concerning geometric aspects of holomorphic dynamics and
in particular she will work to extend certain parts of the the theory from
dynamics of one complex variable to several complex variables. The PI will
continue to provide special topical lectures to undergraduate and graduate
students in the hope of exciting the interest of students in the field of
dynamical systems and, more broadly, in mathematics.

The link between holomorphic dynamics and Teichmuller Theory can be to a large
extent explained by holomorphic motions. The PI, together with collaborators,
suggest a geometric approach to the proof of Slodkowski's lambda lemma. We
relate holomorphic motions to the technique of filling totally real manifolds by
holomorphic discs. We plan to use this approach to investigate the h-principle
for holomorphic motions over Riemann surfaces. Thurston's theorem on
postcritically finite rational maps is one of the central results in one-
dimensional holomorphic dynamics. Building on Thurston's work, A. Epstein
introduced deformation spaces, which give a unified approach to transversality
results in holomorphic dynamics. The PI, together with collaborators, will
investigate certain topological properties of these deformation spaces. In one-
dimensional holomorphic dynamics to a large extent the orbits of critical points
determine the dynamics of the map. For an automorphism of complex plane there
are no critical points however there are various analogs of the critical points
in different dynamically defined regions. The research will investigate these
critical loci and their application to the construction of topological models.
We also study the non-linearizable germs of analytic diffeomorphisms of complex
plane.