* 1505549
* Metal-insulator transitions and symmetry breaking in spin-orbit Mott materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Stephen Wilson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 457,389.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The goal of this project is to study the electronic and
structural properties of crystalline materials found at a new frontier of
condensed matter physics, one where materials possess both an appreciable
interaction between electrons in tandem with a strong coupling between their
inherent magnetism (spin) and their orbital motion. This unique combination of
energy scales is predicted to stabilize fundamentally new states of electronic
matter, ranging from new forms of superconductivity to new quantum entangled
states with far-term applications potential in quantum computing. Research
supported by the project focuses on understanding the materials pathways
necessary for realizing these new states and on exploring the interactions
responsible for driving the prototypical parent state of these materials - the
spin-orbit Mott phase - from an insulator into a metal. Supported activities
work to train the next generation of scientists utilizing national neutron and
x-ray user facilities as well as work to address the nation's growing deficit in
new materials discovery/synthesis by supporting the growth of new crystalline
materials. The project provides research experience to undergraduates from
underrepresented demographics through summer research internships as well as
conducts outreach activities aimed at inspiring precollege students to pursue
materials science/physics academic and career pathways.

Technical Abstract: The project focuses on experimentally exploring the
mechanisms through which new classes of spin-orbit Mott (SOM) materials are
driven from their parent insulating states into the metallic regime via
carrier/bandwidth tuning. The insulating phases of SOM systems are inherently
driven by a delicate interplay between strong spin-orbit coupling, crystal
field, and short-range Coulomb interactions. This unique balance of energy
scales in SOM compounds is predicted to host nearby exotic ground states ranging
from high temperature superconductivity, to novel forms of quantum spin liquids,
to correlated topological phases. Models of these new phases place them within
close proximity to the parent SOM state. The primary goal of the project is to
understand how interactions evolve once this parent state is destabilized and
driven into nearby materials phase space - specifically, to resolve the role of
electron correlations and the evolution of electronic and structural degrees of
freedom as the metallic state is approached. Searching for new states/phase
behaviors beyond the melting of the spin-orbit Mott phase is a second,
overlapping goal of the supported research. Research activities are comprised of
a combined materials synthesis, bulk electron properties characterization, and
neutron/x-ray scattering effort aimed at forming a comprehensive picture of
interactions in perturbed SOM states in classes of Ruddlesden-Popper,
pyrochlore, and geometrically frustrated iridates. Students at the graduate and
undergraduate levels will be trained in materials synthesis techniques as well
as in the use of neutron and x-ray scattering at national user facilities,
helping to build the core of the next generation of the national user community.