* 1505633
* Breakthrough: Collaborative: Secure Algorithms for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Mo-Yuen Chow, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 166,654.00

Modern systems such as the electric smart grid consist of both cyber and
physical components that must work together; these are called cyber-physical
systems, or CPS. Securing such systems goes beyond just cyber security or
physical security into cyber-physical security. While the threats multiply
within a CPS, physical aspects also can reduce the threat space. Unlike purely
cyber systems, such as the internet, CPS are grounded in physical reality. In
this project, this physical reality is used to limit an attacker's ability to
disrupt the system by limiting his/her ability to lie about his/her actions; if
an attacker is inconsistent with physical reality, his/her actions are
detectable and damage his/her reputation for future interactions with the
system. The impacts of this work are far-reaching, as it creates a basis for
developing inherently security CPS for not only the electric smart grid, but
also advanced transportation and building environmental systems. A new
generation of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers are being trained
through this research.

This project formulates a novel methodology that incorporates knowledge from
both the cyber and physical domains into a distributed algorithm and ensures the
trustworthiness, thus security, of the composed system. Metrics for security are
also derived and rest on logical invariants that express correctness. The
invariants either check the validity of a local action or the accuracy of remote
data. They may be used as guards against an action, or may be incorporated into
a dynamic reputation-based algorithm.

As a testbed, a multilateral energy system on an electrical network will be
studied. Preliminary studies of this system have resulted in algorithms that
isolate malicious nodes within the context of a single algorithm, using a
reputation metric that compares cyber information flows to physically measurable
signals. The work will be extended to other algorithms and other related power
systems, a generalizable framework will be developed, and more complete metrics
will be derived.

The project has important broader impact. It develops new approaches for
securing critical infrastructure based on both and cyber and physical system
aspects. The project also includes graduate and undergraduate involvement in
cyber-physical systems research and design through involvement with testbeds and
the Missouri Science and Technology Solar House team which designs and
constructs houses for competition in the US Department of Energy Solar
Decathlon.