* 1505219
* Research Initiation Award: Characterization of Crystal Structures of Novel Materials using State-of the-Art Computational Techniques and Applications
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kevin Riley, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 235,363.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Xavier University will conduct
research in computational chemistry. This research will aid in enhancing
Xavier's research capabilities and the educational experiences of
undergraduates. This project may increase the retention and graduation rates of
undergraduate students at Xavier University, a primarily undergraduate
institution, by providing students with cutting-edge skills and research
opportunities that can increase their success in STEM fields. The research and
educational efforts are expected to expand the participation of groups
underrepresented in computational chemistry and support the nation's efforts in
building a robust STEM workforce.

The aim of this Research Initiation Award proposal is to involve undergraduate
students at Xavier University in computational chemistry research. This study
will investigate the nature of R-X...pi interactions, a newly discovered type of
noncovalent interaction whose properties have not yet been characterized
systematically. R-X...pi interactions have been identified as being important in
protein-ligand complexes and have begun to be used to compose new materials,
strongly indicating the efficacy of this interaction motif as a building block
in the design of novel chemical structures. The proposed research aims to
elucidate the properties of R-X...pi interactions and compare these properties
to those of more common noncovalent interaction types. This research will offer
students the opportunity to learn generally about the scientific method,
analysis of scientific data, and presentation of scientific results and, more
specifically, to learn about the operation of computers (unix environment),
molecular electronic methods, and noncovalent interactions. This research
experience will offer the students a chance to explore scientific research as a
career path.