* 1505535
* Combined Macroscopic and Nanoscopic Studies of the Photovoltaic Behavior of Organic Perovskite Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Alexei Gruverman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 12/31/2017
* USD 480,000.00

Non-technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of cost-effective
photovoltaic cells is one of the long-term, clean energy solutions for clean
energy, air pollution, and energy security. An ideal strategy is to achieve
efficient photovoltaic cells via depositing a naturally abundant active layer
using a low-cost, low-temperature process. Organic perovskites are emerging as
photovoltaic materials characterized by their excellent crystallinity, large
optical extinction coefficient, and a suitable bandgap. In the last several
years, the organic perovskite-based photovoltaic devices have experienced a
faster increase in efficiency than any other solar cell technology. However, the
basic understanding on the mechanisms of the photovoltaic behavior of organic
perovskites is still in its infancy. This project explores the fundamental
mechanisms with the ultimate goal to process organic perovskite materials with
superior physicochemical properties for solar cell applications, and thus
contributes to the technological development of renewable energy sources. The
educational activities are well integrated with the research including: (1)
promoting research training and teaching in nanoscience and clean energy
technology for graduates and undergraduate students; (2) involving K-12 student
and Nebraska residents through open-to-the-public events, such as 'Sunday with a
Scientist' and 'Nanocamp'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate,
at both the macro- and nanoscopic levels, two of the most important fundamental
aspects related to the physical mechanisms of photovoltaic behavior of the
organolead trihalide perovskite materials: (1) the role of chlorine (Cl)
concentration in enhancing the photovoltaic behavior through the increased
carrier diffusion length, and (2) the origin of the switchable photovoltaic
effect. This project builds upon the principal investigator's expertise on
stable high-quality crystalline perovskite films and high-efficiency perovskite
solar cell devices, control of preferential grain orientation by Cl
incorporation, and the switchable photovoltaic effect. Scanning probe microscopy
(including conducting atomic force microscopy, piezoresponse force microscopy
and Kelvin probe force microscopy) and macroscopic testing techniques (such as
transient photovoltage, transient photocurrent, impedance spectroscopy, steady
photocurrent and dark-current measurements) are used to investigate the effect
of grain size and orientation on charge generation, transport, and recombination
in perovskite thin films and devices. A combination of nanoscale studies of
perovskite solar cells provides information critically important for
understanding the underlying physical mechanism of the photovoltaic effect and
enhancement of the functionalities of the perovskite-based solar cell devices.