* 1505481
* Research Initiation Award: Evolutionary and ecological impacts of horizontal gene transfer in arthropods
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Jennifer Kovacs, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 07/31/2020
* USD 239,221.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Spelman College will conduct
research on the movement of genetic material between organisms by means other
than reproduction. This project will provide valuable research experience and
mentorship for several minority undergraduate females at Spelman College and
also during their summers at the University of Rochester. The project has the
potential to be a model for increasing the number of minority females pursuing
degree programs in STEM by infusing cutting-edge research and research
techniques into the Spelman classroom. In addition, the project will help
Spelman build its research capacity and enhance the educational and research
experiences of their undergraduate females. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to identify and characterize horizontal gene transfers (HGTs)
of bacterial and fungal origin among niche-sharing arthropod species,
specifically among blood-feeding and phloem-feeding arthropods. Specifically,
this study aims to: Identify HGTs in the genomes of multiple arthropod species
that share an ecological niche; and 2) Determine the potential functions,
origins, and transfer mechanisms of identified HT genes in their recipient
arthropod hosts. The results from Aim 1 would allow for the largest comparison
of HGTs in multiple host arthropod species from multiple donor species done to
date. The resulting data set obtained will be used to identify patterns in gene
function, donor species, transfer mechanisms, and transfer rates using a variety
of bioinformatic tools, as well as molecular methods. Findings from this work
will allow for a better understanding of the role that HGT plays in generating
phenotypic novelty in eukaryotes. The knowledge and information generated by
this work will help to address questions surrounding the mechanisms, rates, and
roles of HGT in eukaryotes, as well as contribute to work on genome evolution
and gene regulation and functionalization. This work will be conducted in
collaboration with the University of Rochester and the research will be
incorporated into a research-based ecology course.