* 1505371
* Montana Tribal College Faculty Professional Development Workshop
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Ke Wu, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 05/31/2016
* USD 49,370.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
STEM instructional and research capacities of specific institutions of higher
education that serve the Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM
curricular offerings at these institutions expands the opportunities of their
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a
community and generational appreciation for science and mathematics education.
The focus of the proposal from the University of Montana (UM) is on developing
faculty at Tribal instituions,so they too will be able to support the needs of
their students. In addition, through a pilot workshop UM hopes to build
collaborative efforts with the Montana tribal colleges,which could provide more
opportunities for tribal students to do research at UM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Montana will conduct a pilot professional development workshop for
Montana tribal college faculty, and establish partnerships among the seven
Montana tribal colleges and UM. Addressing a request of Montana tribal college
(TC) faculty for professional development, the Montana Tribal College Faculty
Professional Development Workshop will host tribal college faculty members on
the UM campus to investigate innovative instructional and research practices
while also building a collaboration network among the TC faculty and UM faculty
mentors. The workshop will divide TC faculty into research groups each working
with a UM faculty member. The groups will investigate laboratory research
practices that are appropriate for the TC's campus laboratory infrastructures,
the needs of their students, and the knowledge, skills, and abilities of the TC
faculty members. The research group model will yield a faculty network, as TC
faculty learn from each other and the UM faculty partners for future research
discussions and collaborations. The justification and design of the workshop is
based upon recent visits to each of Montana's tribal colleges. TC faculty
consistently described limitations to research practices largely inherent to
their teaching demands. Commonly, TC faculty expressed the limitation in
instructing large numbers of classes each semester that lead to little time for
incorporating new and novel curriculum development and research into their
classrooms. The time restrictions also limit their networking with collaborators
and fellow TC faculty on other TC campuses.