* 1505343
* Modeling Electron Delocalization and Bond Dissociation on Metal Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Benjamin Janesko, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on a suite of theoretical tools that will
quantify electron delocalization on metal surfaces. Chemical reactions on metal
and metal oxide surfaces are central to phenomena from heterogeneous catalysis
to corrosion to the properties of metal nanostructures. Quantum mechanics
postulates that the electrons in a molecule, solid, or surface are not spatially
restricted to one point, but delocalize in a region of space. For example, the
covalent bonds that hold molecules together involve electrons delocalizing
between atoms. Chemical reactions converting iron into rust, or simple molecules
into pharmaceuticals, must break bonds and temporarily re-localize electrons to
atoms. Better understanding of delocalization in surface chemistry could have an
enormous impact on developing industrial catalysts, nanomaterials, and many
other systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, our understanding of
delocalization on surfaces faces two major limitations. First, delocalization is
a fundamentally non-classical and non-intuitive phenomenon. Second, the
equations modeling the interaction of electrons with each other generally cannot
be solved exactly. The standard approximations used in computer simulations of
electrons on metal surfaces are particularly inaccurate for the delocalized and
stretched bonds which are important in catalysis. More accurate approximations
often require enormously demanding computational resources. Accordingly, better
models would be a tremendous benefit. The PI has developed new tools that
quantify electronic delocalization in space. This award supports application of
these tools to the fundamental and practical problems associated with electron
delocalization on metal surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates
teaching and undergraduate research, providing specific research projects for
undergraduate researchers and specific mentoring roles for graduate students.
The PI will also develop an online component for his new course "Computational
Chemistry for Experimentalists", aimed at providing non-specialist users at his
institution and around the world with a practical introduction to electronic
structure theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on a suite of theoretical tools that will quantify
electron delocalization on metal surfaces. Chemical reactions on metal and metal
oxide surfaces are central to phenomena from heterogeneous catalysis to
corrosion to the properties of metal nanostructures. Computational models of
reactions at surfaces must capture both the non-classical delocalization of
electrons in chemical bonds, and the correlation-induced re-localization that
occurs during bond breaking. The standard density functional theory
approximations in surface science have major limitations for modeling these
effects. This leads to significant errors in predicted reaction rates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's group has developed and implemented a suite of
tools, based on the one-particle density matrix, which quantify delocalization
in calculated wavefunctions. The team will use these tools to quantify how the
presence of a catalyst surface affects the delicate interplay between
delocalization and correlation-induced "re-localization" central to bond
breaking and reaction rates. They will also use the tools in real-space models
of non-dynamical correlation for computationally tractable treatments of
chemistry at metal surfaces. The fundamental ingredient in such models is the
extent to which an electron at a given point delocalizes past the expected
length scale of a standard (generalized gradient approximation) density
functional. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates teaching and
undergraduate research, providing specific research projects for undergraduate
researchers and specific mentoring roles for graduate students. The PI will also
develop an online component for his new course "Computational Chemistry for
Experimentalists", aimed at providing non-specialist users at his institution
and around the world with a practical introduction to electronic structure
theory.