* 1505230
* Particle Astrophysics with IceCube at Georgia Tech
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Ignacio Taboada, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2019
* USD 325,288.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 gigaton Cherenkov detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection
medium for high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the
neutrinos observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for
atmospheric neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive
air showers by Cosmic Rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy.
These may be used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher
energies, astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe.
Because of their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not
deflected by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-
filled universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena.

Students and postdocs working on this project will benefit by training in
particle astrophysics, instrumentation and data analysis of very large data
sets. An educational program including high-school students, teachers and
undergraduate students will continue. In collaboration with CEISMC and GoSTEM at
Georgia Tech the PI and members of his group present lectures and hands on
demonstrations on the topics of particle and nuclear physics and astrophysics.

The most powerful events in nature are usually transitory or episodic. Examples
are the explosions of massive stars (core collapse supernovae, CC-SNe), high-
energy emission by super-massive black holes at the center of galaxies (active
galactic nuclei, AGNs), and the very energetic jets that power gamma-ray bursts
(GRBs). This award will support the use of IceCube data to study very-high-
energy neutrino astrophysical transients, including GRBs, choked GRBs and,
potentially, still unknown types of astrophysical objects. The project will
address two topics: a) Are choked GRBs related to CC-SNe and do they produce
neutrinos? b) Are the sources of the astrophysical neutrino flux, recently
discovered by IceCube, transient? Using IceCube data the Georgia Tech group will
search for neutrino transients of one second to one day in duration in the 30 to
300 billion electron-volts energy range. The discovery of a neutrino burst with
this search may reveal that CC-SNe and GRBs are part of a continuous class of
astrophysical objects and that jets are also a feature of CC-SNe.