* 1505158
* RAPID: Tracking Recovery from the 2014 Coral Bleaching Event in Hawaiian Waters: Water Quality Gradients, Ecological Factors, and Reef Resilience to Climate Change
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Peter Marko, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2016
* USD 163,308.00

Corals reefs provide habitat for millions of coral-associated species and
support the basic livelihoods of hundreds of millions of people globally.
Unfortunately, coral reefs are very sensitive to elevated ocean temperatures and
are already showing major impacts from thermal stress events. Warm weather can
cause coral bleaching, a stress response that involves the loss of the
microscopic algae that live inside coral cells and that corals depend on for
food. Without these algae, many corals cannot survive such that, as bleaching
events become more common on a warming Earth, coral reefs may decline worldwide.
This project will further the understanding of how different corals respond to
and recover from bleaching (by re-gaining their symbiotic algae) along the
coastline of the main Hawaiian Islands. These coral reefs experience a severe
bleaching event that started in late summer 2014. This project will document the
extent of bleaching and mortality among different species of corals as well as
track the recovery of individual corals using a variety of measurements of coral
health. By studying reefs that differ in water quality, the research will
examine the idea that coral reefs exposed to greater land-based pollution suffer
more extensive bleaching and are also less likely to recover from bleaching. The
project will also use molecular methods to identify and compare coral genes that
confer greater resistance to bleaching. The research will address basic
scientific questions about coral bleaching but will also generate data necessary
to gauge how and if managers and decision makers can increase coral reef
resilience through improvements in coastal water quality. This multi-
disciplinary project will provide financial support and training for one
graduate student and one postdoctoral researcher. The scientific results will be
translated to material for K-12 students, higher education trainees, and the
public through the researchers ongoing relationships with local community
education programs.

Coral reefs of the Hawaiian Islands are currently experiencing a severe
bleaching event that poses a substantial threat to the integrity of the largest
area of coral reef habitat in US waters, exceeding levels recorded in 1996
during the only major bleaching event previously documented for Hawaii. This
study will document the heterogeneity of this event, follow both reef and
colony-scale recovery from bleaching, identify the factors driving fitness
differences between colonies, and evaluate the correlates of reef sensitivity
and resilience against the backdrop of nearshore water quality as a means to
understand the impacts of land-based stressors on the abilities of corals to
resist and recover from bleaching. The study will focus on the goals of: (1)
documenting the spatial and taxonomic patterns of coral responses to the 2014
temperature anomaly in Hawaii; (2) testing the links between water quality and
reef resilience; and (3) identifying genetic and environmental factors
responsible for heterogeneity in bleaching response and recovery. The
researchers will deploy data loggers and take scheduled water samples to record
temperature, light (PAR), sediment and nutrient concentrations, pH and
alkalinity, conduct periodic video transects at each site to capture species-
and genotype-specific differences in response and recovery to the high
temperature anomaly, repeatedly assay the physiological state of individually
tagged coral colonies during the bleaching event and recovery, and characterize
coral holobiont genomes and microbial community composition.