* 1505400
* Towards a Quantitative Knob for Controlling the Shape of Noble-Metal Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Younan Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 669,999.00

Non-Technical Abstract Controlling the shape of nanocrystals has implications
that go far beyond aesthetic appeal. For nanocrystals made of precious metals
such as silver, gold, palladium and platinum, the shape determines not only
their physicochemical properties but also their relevance for applications in
catalysis, electronics, photonics, display, sensing, medicine, environmental
protection, and energy production and storage. Taking silver nanorods as an
example, they can be designed with superior electrical and thermal conductivity,
while having no optical absorption in the visible region, to meet the
requirements for touchscreen displays, energy-efficient transparent solar films,
and smart windows. The shape of a nanocrystal is determined by the twin
structure and growth pattern of the seed, which are, in turn, correlated with
the reduction kinetics involved in a synthesis. With the support of the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the
ultimate goal of this research is to establish the role of reduction rate as a
quantitative knob for manipulating the shape of nanocrystals. This research has
profound impacts on the advancement of a number of disciplines by forging links
between different fields, including chemistry, physics, materials science,
catalysis, photonics, electronics, and energy technology. The immediate outputs
of this research are advanced nanomaterials with substantially improved
performance for a broad range of applications, including those related to energy
production (e.g., fuel cells), protection of the environment (e.g., catalytic
converters), national security, and public healthcare. The ability to produce
nanocrystals of precious metals with well-controlled shapes also offers a
practical strategy for achieving sustainable and prolific use of these scarce
elements that only exist in the Earth's crust at a level of parts per billion.
The multidisciplinary and collaborative activity greatly enhances graduate and
undergraduate education and also provides a natural vehicle to promote the
diversity in higher education and enrich the K-12 education.

Technical Abstract The principal investigator will study the nucleation and
growth of nanocrystals by achieving a quantitative understanding of the
correlations between the reduction rate of a precursor and the number of twin
defects in a seed, as well as its growth pattern. Using palladium as a model
system, the research team will develop spectroscopy methods to determine the
kinetic parameters (including rate constant and activation energy) of various
reduction reactions used for nanocrystal synthesis and then determine the range
of reduction rates responsible for the formation of a specific type of seeds
characterized by a single-crystal, singly-twinned, multiply-twinned, or
stacking-fault-lined structure. The kinetic parameters will also be applied to
analyze the growth patterns of cubic and decahedral seeds (with single-crystal
and five-fold twinned structures, respectively) in an effort to achieve a deep
understanding of new phenomena such as symmetry breaking or reduction. As a
powerful demonstration, the quantitative knowledge about the effects of
reduction rate on the nucleation and growth of seeds will be further applied to
design synthetic protocols for the production of silver nanorods with no optical
absorption in the entire visible region by working with palladium decahedral
seeds smaller than 20 nm. Taken together, this research will bring major
advances to the field of nanotechnology by unraveling the essential knowledge
and design rule for the deterministic syntheses of nanocrystals with well-
controlled shapes and related properties central to a broad range of fundamental
studies and industrially important applications.