* 1505202
* Interdisciplinary Coaching As a Nexus for transforming how institutions support undergraduates in STEM (iCAN)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Brian Moore, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2018
* USD 249,784.00

A significant need exists to increase the number of STEM majors from
underrepresented populations who are entering the STEM workforce. Nationally,
fewer than 40% of undergraduates who intend to major in a STEM field complete a
STEM degree. Traditional institutional reform efforts focus on system-level
changes in instructor behaviors and supports. Unfortunately, current
institutional reform efforts have not had an immediate wide-scale impact on the
attrition rate of STEM majors. This project will examine how practicing in-
service teachers can use mobile technologies to coach undergraduates in STEM
majors who have executive functioning difficulties (e.g., higher order cognitive
abilities such as planning, problem resolution, and mental flexibility) so that
they can successfully complete introductory STEM
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "Interdisciplinary Coaching As a Nexus for
Transforming how Institutions Support Undergraduates in STEM (iCAN)" is an
exploratory project that will occur over two years. iCAN is a hybrid model of
supports that relies on team coaching and mobile technologies (e.g., tablets
&amp; smartphones) to help undergraduates achieve executive function abilities
that are critical to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
success. The project team will systematically investigate how a successful model
for enhancing undergraduate STEM learning and persistence at Landmark, a small
rural college in Vermont, can be migrated to the University of Central Florida,
which is the second largest university in the United States. The project
benefits both the graduate student teachers and undergraduate STEM majors. It
also provides practicing teachers with insights regarding how to better prepare
students to be successful in STEM majors at the undergraduate level. If this
program proves as effective as expected, it will enhance STEM learning,
persistence, and entry into the STEM workforce for all undergraduate students,
particularly those with executive function deficits.