* 1505839
* Molecular-mimicking Self-assembly of Inorganic Nanoparticles Tethered with Charged Block Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Zhihong Nie, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 299,729.00

Professor Zhihong Nie from the University of Maryland-College Park is being
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
in the Chemistry Division to develop a deeper understanding of the interactions
between nanoparticles. Nanoparticles (with diameters less than 1000th of that of
a human hair) have properties that differ in important and useful ways from
those of the corresponding bulk material. However, to realize the full potential
of nanotechnology, it is essential to be able to arrange nanoparticles in
specific two- and three-dimensional patterns that can enhance their properties
or even provide new properties. By controlling such interactions, it may well be
possible to cause nanoparticles to self-organize into desired two- and three-
dimensional patterns that would open the door to new applications in chemistry,
physics, biology, and other sciences. The broader impacts of the proposed
research program involve training students particularly from under-represented
groups to acquire skills and knowledge in nanoparticles, as well as outreach
activities including mentoring economically disadvantaged high school students,
organizing one-day STEM event for academically advanced 7-10th grade students,
and writing informative web-based articles for educating the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed work seeks to create a new class of hybrid
building blocks and to assemble them as molecular mimics into hierarchically-
ordered nanostructures. The functionalization of nanoparticles with charged
polymers encodes the nanoparticles with assembly instructions, thus guiding the
self-assembly of nanoparticles at multiple hierarchical levels in a step-wise
fashion. This project will use a combination of computational and experimental
methods to gain a fundamental understanding of how to program the interactions
between nanoparticles and to control the properties of assembled nanoparticles.
The assembled nanostructures could find applications in such areas as
metamaterials, coatings, sensors, medicine, and optoelectronics.