* 1505197
* Research Initiation Award: Surface modification of thiol-terminated silicon to build reusable antifouling layer
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Xiaoning Zhang, Paine College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 193,957.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Paine College will conduct
research to develop bio-fouling resistant surfaces. The project will enhance the
research capabilities of the PI as well as teaching and learning at Paine
College. The project will provide undergraduate students with research
opportunities and advance skills in chemistry. This experience will help to
build the competency of the undergraduate students and support the nation's
efforts in building a robust STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will investigate an approach that will allow thiol-terminated surfaces to be
used and re-used by attaching molecules with antifouling functional groups via a
disulfide bond. The specific objectives are to: 1) engineer silicon-based thin
films for antifouling functionalization; and 2) confirm antifouling function of
chemically modified substrates. Findings from this project will provide new
knowledge on silicon surface modification. This approach may be used for the
modification of surfaces of other materials, such as carbon-based materials. The
development of techniques for surface modification also can be used for building
protein arrays with nano-sized features on silicon or carbon surfaces. The
results of this project may be transferable to the shipping and biomedical
industries, and become a solution to reduce the costs associated with fouling.
This project will be conducted in collaboration with Marshall University and the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.