* 1505399
* Collaborative Proposal: Warfare, Landscape Alteration And Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Charles Golden, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,394.00

The historical arc of violence between communities and states is a concern
worldwide. Warfare deeply impacts the development of governance, economy,
language, technology and more, and is a central topic of study in the social
sciences. Archaeologists are uniquely positioned to study the development and
impacts of warfare over many centuries, even in those societies for which there
is limited historical information. Dr. Andrew Scherer of Brown University, Dr.
Charles Golden of Brandeis University, and their Guatemalan collaborators will
explore the conduct and impact of warfare among Classic period (AD 250 - 900)
Maya kingdoms, offering a case study in which historical records complement the
material remains studied by archaeologists. This research will produce important
data providing a rich comparison with other societies in the ancient and
historical Americas, as well as the states and chiefdoms in Eurasia and Africa
including Mesopotamia, Greece and Egypt that have long provided much of our
understandings of the development of war and statecraft. This research has the
practical benefit of strengthening collaborative research ties between American
and Guatemalan scientists, and provides training opportunities for American and
Guatemalan undergraduate and graduate students. Further, the research zone is
being devastated by looting, illegal logging, slash-and-burn agriculture, forest
fires, and ranching. This work will provide government authorities, land-use
managers, and local communities with data detailing the location and extent of
archaeological sites and extends infrastructural support to help combat this
destruction. The project will provide employment opportunities for impoverished
communities in the area around the park. The project will therefore demonstrate
America's commitment to the advancement of knowledge, the protection of natural
and cultural resources, and the betterment of lives in neighboring countries and
developing economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Maya were once thought to be one
of the few ancient states without warfare, their rulers concerned with little
more than religious rituals. More recent research has revealed that ancient Maya
society had more in common with other ancient and modern states, and that
warfare constituted a tragic but important component of statecraft. Yet our
understanding of Maya warfare has been derived largely from art and hieroglyphic
inscriptions with little understanding of how it was actually conducted,
supported logistically, how it may have impacted society, and its role as a
cause and effect of political formation and collapse. Scherer and Golden will
use as their case study the Classic period kingdoms of Piedras Negras and
Yaxchilan. They have previously conducted research on fortifications at
boundaries of these kingdoms, dating to the eighth century AD. These have been
interpreted as indicative of escalating violence immediately preceding the
political collapse of these states. To determine whether warfare and defense
were concerns from the foundation of these kingdoms, shaping in part their
political and economic development, Scherer, Golden, and collaborators will
study defenses associated directly with the political capitals of Piedras Negras
and Yaxchilan. Preliminary observations by the co-PIs and their local
collaborators suggest such defenses do exist, contrary to the assumption that
most such capitals did not have fortifications.