* 1505817
* Tuning Reactivity, Electronic Structure and Properties via Pressure: Predicting Novel Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Eva Zurek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2019
* USD 345,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education whose ultimate goal is to rationally
design new superconductors, materials through which electric current can flow
without losing energy, via computational modeling. Replacing copper wires with
superconducting power lines would have a tremendous impact on the electrical
power infrastructure of the USA, but unfortunately all of the currently known
superconductors must be cooled down to very low temperatures before they become
superconducting. Research suggests that hydrogen-rich solids could potentially
behave as superconductors at high temperatures, and they will therefore be the
focus of this project.

Just like diamond can be synthesized at high pressure within the earth,
researchers can use pressure as a variable to create new materials with unusual
properties that may remain stable when the pressure is released. A number of new
superconductors have been synthesized in this way. However, since these
experiments are very difficult to perform, computational predictions can
accelerate new materials discovery. The PI will carry out calculations based
upon quantum mechanics to predict promising new targets for synthesis, and
collaborate with leading experimental groups in high-pressure research that will
attempt to synthesize these materials. To advance this goal the PI will further
develop a set of software tools, which can be used to computationally predict
the structure of a solid without any experimental information. These tools are
made freely available to the materials science, physics and chemistry
communities, thereby advancing rational materials design as well as current and
future discoveries in science and engineering.

Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in rational computational
materials design and programming, thereby preparing them for future careers
where synergy between theory, computation and experiment leads to innovation.
Student and faculty exchange with a primarily undergraduate, minority serving
institution (California State University San Bernardino) will expose these
students to research and future career opportunities in STEM fields, and train
them in state-of-the-art materials modeling techniques.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education that will lead towards
the rational design of novel superconductors. The PI will computationally
predict the crystal structures of materials with unique stoichiometries and
structures that can be synthesized using the pressure variable, and study their
electronic structures and properties via first-principles calculations. Focus
will be placed on compounds containing hydrogen doped with a p-block element
because strong covalent bonds between the p-block atoms may render these
structures metastable upon decompression to atmospheric pressures, and both
experiment and theory suggest that binary hydrides may have a high
superconducting transition temperature. The PI will also study binary polar
intermetallics, as it has already been demonstrated that many of these can be
synthesized at modest pressures, remain stable at atmospheric conditions, and
behave as BCS superconductors. New, perhaps completely unexpected, chemistry and
totally new types of materials will be discovered theoretically, and the
predictions will be confirmed by leading experimental groups in high pressure
research.

The award will also support the further development of the "XtalOpt"
evolutionary algorithm, which can be used to predict the structure of an
extended system given only its stoichiometry. Key developments will increase the
size and complexity of the unit cells that can be predicted without any
experimental information, and accelerate the progress of a priori structure
prediction for extended systems. The crystallography suite within the highly
popular chemical builder, editor and visualizer "Avogadro", will be further
advanced. Because XtalOpt and Avogadro are written under licenses approved by
the Open Source Initiative, the program code can be re-used, thereby
contributing towards cyberinfrastructure as well as current and future
discoveries in science and engineering.

Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in rational computational
materials design and programming, thereby preparing them for future careers
where synergy between theory, computation and experiment leads to innovation.
Student and faculty exchange with a primarily undergraduate, minority serving
institution (California State University San Bernardino) will expose these
students to research and future career opportunities in STEM fields, and train
them in state-of-the-art materials modeling techniques.