* 1505196
* Precision Neutron Decay Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Fred Wietfeldt, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 699,989.00

The neutron is a key building block of ordinary matter, but when freed from the
confines of an atom the neutron is unstable and decays into other elementary
particles: a proton, an electron, and an antineutrino (a lightweight neutral
particle), with an average lifetime of about 15 minutes. Neutron decay is a
useful laboratory for studying details of the force responsible - the weak
nuclear force - one of the four fundamental forces of nature. This award will
support an experiment in which beams of free neutrons pass through specialized
detectors that precisely measure the neutron decay lifetime and the angles
between the emitted particles. From these results the scientists can test and
refine the theory of the weak nuclear force and better understand the physics of
the sun, stars, the Big Bang, and important nuclear reactions. This work, at the
"precision frontier" of particle and nuclear physics, complements research at
the "high energy frontier", for example at the Large Hadron Collider in Europe.
This project is also an excellent opportunity to train undergraduate and
graduate students in the general methods and theory of neutron science that are
applicable to diverse fields in physics, chemistry, materials science, and
biology research at major neutron sources around the world.

The beta decay of the free neutron is the prototype semileptonic weak
interaction and simplest nuclear beta decay. There are no complications from
nuclear structure, and the decay energy is small compared to the nucleon mass so
recoil-order weak form factors enter below the 0.1% level. Therefore neutron
decay is an attractive system for precise low energy weak interaction
measurements. The neutron lifetime establishes the time scale and temperature of
nucleon "freeze out" shortly after the Big Bang, which sets the neutron to
proton ratio during the era of primordial nucleosynthesis and hence the helium
abundance, and indirectly constrains the effective number of light neutrinos.
The electron-antineutrino correlation "a" gives lambda, the ratio of axial
vector (GA) and vector (GV) weak nucleon couplings. With the neutron lifetime it
can be used to determine Vud, the first element of the Cabbibo-Kobayashi-Maskawa
matrix, and constrain new physics beyond the Standard Model such as weak scalar
and tensor forces. The present experimental situations with both the neutron
lifetime and lambda are unsatisfactory, there is relatively poor agreement among
previous measurements. The proposed program consists of three projects: 1) A
continuation of the aCORN experiment at the NIST Center for Neutron Research
toward an ultimate goal of measuring "a" to < 0.5% uncertainty (a factor of 10
improvement); 2) a phased program to improve the neutron lifetime measurement
using the beam method; and 3) development of a 3He gas scintillation absolute
neutron flux counter to support the neutron lifetime program.