* 1505136
* Theory and Methods for Dependent Tensor Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Peter Hoff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Modern scientific studies often gather data under combinations of multiple
factors. For example, neuro imaging experiments record brain activity at
multiple spatial locations, at multiple time points, and under a variety of
experimental stimuli. Studies of social networks record social links of a
variety of types from multiple initiators of social activity to multiple
receivers of the activity. Data such as these are naturally represented not as
lists or tables of numbers, but as multi-indexed arrays, or tensors. However,
few tools are available for the statistical analysis of such data, and as a
result, scientists frequently analyze tensor data using methods that ignore the
tensor structure of the data. This can lead to inefficient use of data, and
important patterns in the data being overlooked. This project will remedy this
situation by developing usable, practical statistical tools for the analysis of
tensor data.

Currently available tools for statistical inference and parameter estimation are
generally based on least-squares criteria and the assumption of residual
independence. Such limitations can lead to highly sub-optimal inference: In
general, great improvements in estimator performance can be obtained by
appropriately accounting for residual dependence. Additionally, estimation of
high-dimensional datasets can often be greatly improved by employing shrinkage
techniques, such as empirical Bayes methods, that are based on variance models
for the parameters. In this project, we will first develop theory and methods
for covariance modeling of tensor-valued data. These methods will lead to the
development of Bayes and empirical Bayes methods, from which we will develop a
general data analysis framework for tensor data of a variety of types.