* 1505621
* Degree of short-to-medium-range order in metallic glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* En (Evan) Ma, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 12/31/2019
* USD 372,209.00

Nontechnical abstract Most metals and alloys in use are crystals, with an
internal structure characterized by long-range order. Their structures have been
well studied over the past century, providing concrete basis of their
properties. Such a structure-property paradigm is well established in the field
of materials science. In contrast, metallic glasses (MGs) obtained by fast
cooling of their parent liquids have a liquid-like amorphous structure with no
discernable microstructure inside. Though lacking long-range periodicity, MGs do
have structure, at the level of nearest-neighbor atomic coordination and
positional correlations on the length scale of a couple of nanometers. This
structural organization is difficult to characterize and remains poorly
understood. As a result, the understanding of the links between the atomic
structure and properties in MGs lags far behind that achieved for conventional
metals. This project aims to resolve the short-to-medium range order in MGs,
using computer simulation approaches. The detailed structural information is
expected to shed light on the macroscopic behavior of these glasses, enabling
better judgement in designing their applications. In terms of education, this
research has significance in enriching key materials science subjects, in
particular the core subject of Structure of Materials. Many of the computer
molecular dynamics simulations are amenable to the participation of
undergraduate students in Senior Design/Research Experience courses, providing
interesting case studies to compare with the familiar crystal symmetry learnt
previously in the classroom.

Technical abstract The goal of this project is to 1) quantify the degree and
extent of short-range order (SRO) realizable in metallic glasses (MGs), and 2)
reliably identify the characteristic patterns of medium-range order (MRO) in
different types of MGs. This basic understanding of the ordering in amorphous
solids is a fundamental materials science issue, but has been difficult to
achieve so far because the MG configurations constructed to date, either by
fitting to scattering data or by liquid quenching in molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations, are inherently far less ordered than experimental glasses. The
project aims to develop efficient MD simulation routes that are capable of
producing MG structures having potential energy, atomic density, elastic
constants, and therefore degree of order all similar to real-world MGs. A focus
is algorithm development to accelerate MD in the search of deeper energy basins.
The plan is to use 1) prolonged aging, 2) cyclic-stress-assisted aging, and 3) a
new deletion-addition protocol, building upon amorphous structures obtained from
simulated collapse of crystals or vapor deposition. Preliminary results suggest
that these approaches (and their combination) can access low-energy glassy
states along the way towards eventual crystallization. The configurations
captured provide an unprecedented opportunity to uncover the SRO/MRO at a level
of make-up and saturation that resembles those in laboratory glasses, to allow
connections with atomistic mechanisms underlying shear transformations,
relaxation and other glass properties. The results are expected to be a major
step-forward towards establishing concrete structure-property relations in MGs.