* 1505874
* Bacterial Reaction Centers With New Photochemical Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* James Allen, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2019
* USD 658,512.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences are jointly funding Professor James Allen and Dr. JoAnn
Williams of Arizona State University to investigate the factors that give
photosynthetic organisms the ability to convert light into chemical energy. The
overall objective of this project is to engineer novel metal clusters that can
catalyze light-induced oxidation reactions. A variety of experimental techniques
are available in their laboratory and those of their collaborators to probe the
activity of the novel metal clusters. The studies are directed at providing
insight into the requirements needed for metal clusters to perform complex
multi-electron reactions, including the production of molecular oxygen from
water. The research of Professor Allen and Dr. Williams in using protein design
to answer fundamental scientific questions about photosynthetic reactions and
includes diverse participation in scientific research, including an important
element of undergraduate exposure to modern research at the chemistry/biology
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In all photosynthetic systems, the primary
energy transduction event is the light-induced generation of a charge-separated
state in a pigment-protein complex. Detailed spectroscopic studies and three-
dimensional structures of these complexes form a firm foundation for
understanding many of their functions. However, the mechanism by which the
manganese cluster of photosystem II catalyzes the essential biological process
of water oxidation is a major outstanding question in the field. Thus this
project is directed towards dissecting this capacity. The bacterial reaction
center will serve as a platform to recreate features of the manganese cluster of
photosystem II in a well-defined protein environment. Characterization of key
properties of a variety of manganese clusters would reveal common motifs in
metal clusters that facilitate oxidation reactions. Overall, the insight gained
from these studies should help establish molecular concepts that explain how
manganese cofactors in proteins efficiently perform intricate chemical
reactions, as well as lead to the development of novel biological systems that
are capable of accomplishing beneficial light-directed catalytic processes.