* 1505463
* Elementary Particle Physics with ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrew Haas, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,438,646.00

This award will support a group of four highly experienced PI's to work on the
ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, Geneva,
Switzerland, the European particle physics laboratory. The LHC machine and ATLAS
detector were built using funds from the NSF and from other agencies around the
world. It proved its worth three years ago when scientists discovered the Higgs
Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model" (SM)
that accounts for so much of the known matter in the universe. In spite of its
success, the Standard Model still leaves a number of questions about the
fundamental structure of the universe unanswered, giving rise to research
exploring Beyond the Standard Model (BSM). This award will allow the PI's to
continue their leading role in studies of the Higgs width and couplings,
properties that have so far established it as the SM object anticipated. It will
also support their continuing search for BSM that could materialize at the
higher energy experiments that are currently underway. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
group supports a vigorous broader impact program. The centerpiece of this is a
large, modular, multi-panel exhibit of ATLAS and the LHC. This has been used at
major science festivals in NYC and Washington DC, and will be sent to other
festivals around the country. They also plan to continue their leadership role
in the ATLAS Zooniverse project, which allows the public to view and analyze
ATLAS events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be leveraged by the
group's expertise in the operations of the ATLAS trigger, responsible for
selection of the interesting reactions that occur in ATLAS. This becomes
increasingly key to the physics potential of the LHC in Run2. In this run the
LHC will operate at 13 TeV, almost double its currently highest energy of 8 TeV.
In addition to conventional approaches to the trigger, and to enhancing
sensitivity to new physics, the group will attempt prototyping new strategies
such as "data scouting" that can fill holes in traditional off-line data
analysis pipelines. They will also work on including the transverse momentum
trigger, the trigger menu, trigger software, statistical methods and tools,
analysis tools, pileup simulation techniques, and event visualization tools.
They also plan detailed study of silicon detector properties using the
infrastructure they have developed for the ATLAS upgrade.