* 1505322
* MATH-GAINS: Growing as Adaptive Instructors in Gateway to STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Xin Li, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 05/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

This project will address the national need to improve quantity and increase
quality of the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
workforce. Along these lines, calculus courses are a gateway to STEM majors and
careers; however, the national success rate in these courses is still too low.
The premise of the project is that to increase student learning and success in
calculus courses, a shift in teaching practices will need to occur. While past
efforts have produced a variety of best practices for teaching calculus, these
practices are still not used as widely as desired. The University of Central
Florida (UCF) MATH-GAINS project will create a departmental model that can be
used to address this national need. First, MATH-GAINS will develop a culture in
which Department of Mathematics faculty members persistently apply best
practices in their teaching of calculus courses. Instructors will work in teams
to learn about and practice these teaching strategies and measure student
learning in their courses. The project will provide professional development,
feedback, and opportunities for reflection. The process of adopting these
teaching strategies will be studied to identify the factors that enable faculty
at a large, research-intensive university to successfully implement such methods
so that the model could be adapted by other departments and institutions.
Additionally, MATH-GAINS will allow studies of best teaching practices for
postsecondary calculus. A target group of 30 students will be persistently
impacted over the three-semester calculus sequence, resulting in increased
student understanding of the mathematics, retention and graduation rates for
these students, and knowledge about the cumulative effect of evidence-based
instruction for researchers and faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MATH-GAINS
project will build on research-based change strategies, and its implementation
design will use critical features identified by those theories of change to
shift the culture of mathematics faculty. Instructors will participate in long-
term interventions that allow them the flexibility to choose instructional
strategies that match their interests. Each year, learning communities
consisting of faculty members and graduate teaching assistants will learn from
the literature, select from a menu of evidence-based teaching practices, develop
learning materials for projects involving those practices, and implement their
projects during both fall and spring semesters. The Reformed Teaching
Observation Protocol will be used to assess the level of implementation of
evidence-based practices, prompt faculty reflection, and suggest avenues for
improvement. Faculty will collect data on student learning to assess the
effectiveness of their implemented practices for diverse student populations in
calculus. On-going evaluation will build the knowledge base for the creation of
a model for institutional change, where application of evidence based teaching
practices in calculus becomes standard and perpetual faculty practice. Faculty
participants from each year's learning community will disseminate their projects
to other faculty locally, regionally, and nationally.