* 1505123
* 2015 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (German-American: Potsdam, Germany, April 2015; China-America: Irvine, California, June 2015; U.S.: Irvine, California, September 2015)
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 03/31/2016
* USD 110,000.00

The Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering, provide emerging engineering leaders from academia, industry,
and government laboratories the opportunity to share research insights to
facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and research
methodologies. The nature of emerging technologies and how they fit together to
create products and processes that drive economic growth in an increasingly
competitive environment have heightened the need for engineers to understand
each other's disciplines and enhance the value in that interaction, particularly
among those developing and using these new technologies. The symposia serve as a
catalyst to spur engineering innovation and foster collaborative networks of
researchers within the United States and between engineers from the United
States and partnering countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for three Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) symposia, to be held in
2015: German-American Frontiers of Engineering (April 16-18, in Potsdam,
Germany), China-America Frontiers of Engineering (June 1-3, in Irvine,
California), and U.S. Frontiers of Engineering (September 9-11, in Irvine,
California). Each FOE symposium will focus on four topical areas. The four
topics for the 2015 German-American FOE are nano-to-micro robotics, synthetic
membranes and their applications, particle accelerators and their applications,
and protecting user privacy in the age of big data. The four topics for the 2015
China-America FOE are advanced manufacturing, clean water, devices for health
care, and big data. Finally, the four topics for the U.S. symposium are
metamaterials and compliant mechanisms, cybersecurity, engineering the search
for earth-like exoplanets, and forecasting natural disasters. About 100
outstanding young engineers for the U.S. symposium and 30 from each country for
the bilateral symposia will participate. Each two and one-half day symposium
will include four formal sessions, technical tours, break-out sessions, and
opportunities for developing collaborative research partnerships. Sessions will
consist of presentations on cutting-edge research, innovations, and emerging
research opportunities in engineering fields relevant to the symposium. Papers
from the U.S. FOE symposium will be published in a volume available on the
National Academies Press website at http://www.nap.edu.