* 1505301
* Research Initiation Award: Small Molecule Inhibitors of the Phosphoenolpyruvate-Phosphotransferase System
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Patrick Ymele-Leki, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2018
* USD 238,828.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award will further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at his home institution, and
involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The goal of the project
is to develop a new generation of agents for the control of microorganisms. This
may lead to the development of novel microbial control strategies leading to the
development of new techniques and protocols with applications in engineering as
well as the physical, biological, medical and pharmaceutical sciences. This
project will enhance the research experience and training of undergraduate
students at Howard University. Additionally, it will produce knowledge, tools,
and applications that will: help sustain existing scientific and educational
efforts at Howard University; be integrated into existing courses; and help
develop new courses with an interdisciplinary focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to identify and characterize small-molecule inhibitors of the
bacterial phosphoenolpyruvate-carbohydrate phosphotransferease system (PTS). The
studies specifically aim to measure specificity and potency of candidate
compounds to inhibit PTS activity; to evaluate the broad-spectrum inhibition of
biofilm formation by candidate compounds; and to establish the mechanism of
action of selected candidate compounds. Given the connection between PTS
activity and biofilm formation, this project hypothesizes that the
identification of small-molecule modulators of the PTS will reveal new tools and
approaches to regulate biofilm formation by interfering with microbial metabolic
functions. Identification of novel interactions between chemical structures and
targets will result from this project.