* 1505635
* Direct Electrodeposition of Crystalline Groups IV and III-V Semiconductors by Electrochemical Liquid-Liquid-Solid Growth
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Stephen Maldonado, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2019
* USD 459,777.00

With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Solid State and Materials Research
Program of the Division of Materials Research, Prof. Stephen Maldonado of the
University of Michigan aims to develop a novel, low-energy method for the
preparation of technologically important crystalline semiconducting materials.
Semiconductors are important materials for the fabrication of batteries, solar
cells, and ultrafast microelectronics. Currently, energy-intensive methods are
required for preparing high quality covalent semiconductors. This project
provides to graduate and undergraduate students research training in
electrochemistry, materials science, and advanced electron microscopic methods
relevant to the fields of energy conversion/storage and microelectronics. In
addition to disseminating research results in the form of publications and
presentations at national conferences, Prof. Maldonado aimes to develop a new
laboratory exercise on making semiconductor devices to introduce
electrochemistry in the undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research explores the use of electrochemical liquid-liquid-solid (ec-LLS)
deposition as a synthetic and low-energy crystal growth method of
semiconductors. The appeal of ec-LLS method is that it is a one-pot approach in
which liquid metals are used simultaneously as sources of electrons for the
reduction of semiconductor feedstock and as media for growing semiconductor
crystals even at low temperatures. There are three main thrusts in this project.
The first thrust aims to identify strategies and ec-LLS deposition parameters
that effect desirable properties in Group IV (Ge, Si) macroscale crystals and
micro/nanowires. This knowledge is essential for the predictive control of the
morphological, crystallographic, and electronic properties of crystalline
covalent semiconductors prepared through ec-LLS method. The second thrust
involves ex-situ and in-situ (e.g. within optical and transmission electron
microscopes) analyses to follow the nucleation and crystal growth steps in ec-
LLS directly and in real time. The correlation between the current-time data and
the specific nucleation and crystal growth steps provides real time feedback on
the effects of various physicochemical and electrochemical factors on the
crystals formed from ec-LLS. The third thrust focuses on understanding and
controlling ec-LLS processes for tailored III-V (GaAs, InAs, GaSb, InSb)
nanoparticles and nanowires.