* 1505678
* New Experimental Techniques for Neutrino Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,10/31/2018
* Joseph Formaggio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 10/31/2018
* USD 561,000.00

Neutrinos are amongst the most abundant particles in the Universe, they are keys
to many astrophysical processes, and they may hold the key to explaining the
matter-antimatter asymmetry of the Universe. They are known to occur in nature
in three types, or "flavors." It has also been observed that neutrinos could
switch flavors through a process known as neutrino oscillation. From such
oscillation experiments, it is found that neutrinos must have a mass. This is
the first known indication that there is physics beyond the very successful
Standard Model of Particle Physics. Neutrino mass remains one of the most
important open questions in physics and so experiments are searching for ways to
determine it since with their abundance they could play an important role in the
evolution of our Universe. Direct laboratory determinations based on the precise
measurement of the beta spectrum have been expanding over the past 80 years due
to increasingly powerful electron spectrometry techniques. In 2009, the PI
proposed a new technique by which the energy spectrum of low energy electrons
can be extracted. The technique, known as Cyclotron Radiation Emission
Spectroscopy (CRES), relies on the detection and measurement of coherent
radiation created from the cyclotron motion of electrons in a magnetic field.

Knowledge of neutrino masses has broad implications for the scientific
community, particularly in the fields of nuclear physics, particle physics, and
cosmology. The CRES technique, being a general spectroscopic technique for low
energy electrons, has broad applicability. Examples of possible application
include detection of rare radioactive isotopes for nuclear non-proliferation,
Fiertz interference term measurements, low energy electron-atom scattering, and
high voltage metrology. The PI wishes to target undergraduate student
participation in such research toward underrepresented minorities, particularly
toward members of the Native American community.

After three years of research and development, the Project 8 experiment has
successfully demonstrated the first detection of cyclotron radiation from single
electrons. With the proof of principle firmly established, this award provides
continued support for the next stage of the R&D program, moving toward a
neutrino mass measurement from tritium beta decay. In particular, the next phase
is to make a first measurement of a tritium beta spectrum in order to determine
the scalability of the technique. Such a direct measurement in the sub-eV
neutrino mass range is important for cosmology, the structure of the new
Standard Model, and it will illuminate a key unknown in the search for neutrino-
less double beta decay.