* 1505223
* HCC: Small: Modeling and Supporting Creativity During Collaborative STEM Activities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Winslow Burleson, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2018
* USD 439,946.00

This research will advance a novel technological approach that relies on machine
learning techniques in general and Natural Language Processing (NLP) in
particular to develop models and support for creativity during collaborative
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) educational activities.
We will extend existing educational software with NLP capabilities to
automatically assess and subsequently support creativity during collaborative
tasks. The research questions are: (1) Which factors influence moment-by-moment
creativity during collaborative problem solving activities? (2) How can NLP be
used to build student models that detect those factors? (3) How can an ITS use
this information to create personalized interventions to support creativity? The
first phase in this research will collect data from students solving problems in
pairs with an educational application to identify factors that are relevant to
creativity processes and outcomes. These data will be used to derive
computational student models for automatically assessing student creativity in
terms of both moment-to-moment processes and outcomes through machine learning
methodologies focusing on an NLP approach. In addition to providing automatic
assessment, the models will also inform factors that influence creativity during
collaboration through educational data mining techniques. The final phase of the
work will design and test a set of interventions to foster creativity during
collaborative activities. Using data corresponding to pairs of students solving
open-ended STEM-based problems, this research will develop a rich and nuanced
understanding of creativity processes and outcomes in collaborative contexts,
and how these relate to knowledge, affect and creative thinking styles. Relying
on that understanding, it will develop and evaluate novel student models that
recognize salient, creativity-related events through NLP techniques, as well as
personalized support for creativity during collaborative activities and
evaluating that support through an experiment with university students. This
project will pave the way for a new class of collaborative cyberlearning
technologies to both assess and foster creativity, through just-in-time
personalized support based on easily deployed NLP-based student models.