* 1505410
* Bone Scaffolds for Heat Shock Protein Induced Regeneration and Healing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/10/2014,08/31/2016
* Marissa Rylander, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 189,284.00

PI: Rylander, Nicole&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1067654&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: Bone related disorders associated
with cancer, injury, abnormal development, and degenerative conditions
dramatically diminish the health and quality of life of millions of people.
These disorders can cause significant disability through loss of bone or its
functionality, creating a need for bone replacements (over 3 million orthopaedic
procedures performed annually) or effective regenerative strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;Conditioning using thermal and tensile stress can up-regulate ECM
production, cell proliferation, and molecular chaperones called heat shock
proteins (HSPs). A link has been shown between up-regulated HSPs and enhanced
cell proliferation and collagen biosynthesis needed for ECM formation. The
ultimate goal is to develop a transformative, superior bone scaffold through
stress conditioning and HSP delivery with the capability to enhance wound
healing and bone regeneration in vivo. Ideal stress conditioning strategies and
exogenous HSP delivery protocols will be identified to create more functional
bone scaffolds and the efficacy of these scaffolds to promote healing in a
rodent craniofacial defect model will be tested. Study objectives are to 1)
Construct a novel microbioreactor system to apply combinatorial
(thermal+tensile) stress and create a scaffold capable of exogenous HSP delivery
and wound healing, 2) Apply combinatorial thermal and tensile stress alone and
in combination with HSP delivery to bone scaffolds using the microbioreactor
system and determine ideal conditions for enhancing bone formation, and 3)
Evaluate effectiveness of bone scaffolds preconditioned with thermal+tensile
stress and HSP delivery to heal bone defects in a rat craniofacial defect model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This will be the first study focused
on harnessing the potential of HSP based bone regeneration through combinatorial
stress conditioning and exogenous HSP delivery in development of functional bone
scaffolds. Another novel aspect will be the combined use of thermal and tensile
stress to enhance cell proliferation and bone ECM formation within bone
scaffolds and in an in vivo craniofacial bone defect model. A first-of-its-kind
microbioreactor system will be created and utilized to apply thermal and tensile
stress in combination to allow determination of optimal stress conditioning
protocols to promote bone formation. We seek to create a superior bone scaffold
which is transformative due to the use of novel fabrication methods comprised of
co-electrospinning polymers coupled with integrated HSP releasing microspheres,
conditioning with thermal+tensile stress, and surface encapsulation of
microspheres for HSP release from the scaffold to the surrounding tissue.
Scaffolds capable of controlled HSP delivery spatially and temporally within the
scaffold and to the surrounding wound site will provide a unique avenue to
stimulate bone healing and promote successful integration of the scaffold within
existing bone in patients with injured or diseased tissue. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This research will establish a new methodology for enhancing bone
growth and regeneration for development of more viable bone replacements and
strategies for stimulating bone regeneration in patients. Knowledge gained from
this study will directly translate to restoring functionality of bone tissue and
eliminating the existing disabilities associated with bone-related impairments.
Ultimately, stress conditioning strategies and HSP delivery methods can be
utilized for development of a wide array of engineered tissue replacements such
as ligaments, tendons, muscles, and nerves to permit stimulation of healing of
any type of injured or diseased tissue in patients. This research will enable
students to gain experience in tissue engineering, biotransport, imaging, and
cell biology at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school level. Two
underrepresented graduate students will be supported. Minority undergraduate
students will be integrated into every aspect of the research to facilitate a
mechanism for students to perceive the relevance of their education to research
thereby inspiring them to excel in their studies and promote pursuance of
graduate school. High school students with disabilities will experience first-
hand research techniques related to this project such as fabrication of
scaffolds and microspheres, testing of material properties using the Instron,
conditioning scaffolds, and measuring scaffold response. This opportunity will
create fascination with biomedical engineering and encourage students that
despite their challenges a future in research is attainable.