* 1505127
* Structural and Chemical Changes due to Electrical Stress in Phase-Change Nanowires: An In-Situ Electron Microscopy Study
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Ritesh Agarwal, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical Description:

Almost all electronic products utilize memory devices to store and access
information. The requirements for these memory devices include high-density
information storage capacity, fast read/write speed and low power consumption.
There is a need to continuously discover new materials for memory devices with
superior properties to meet the increasing demand of the information technology.
Amongst many types of materials, phase change materials are a very promising
system as they can switch very rapidly and reversibly between high and low
resistance states when electrical current pulses are applied. However, many
challenges remain to be overcome in order to make the technology commercially
viable. A major one is that a large electrical current is required to change the
resistance states. The large current reduces power efficiency and leads to
material's degradation. This research project tackles this materials science
challenge and studies the degradation mechanisms via advanced microscopy
techniques. The research findings can be used to design better materials for
future electronic memory devices. In this project, research, training and
educational activities are tightly integrated. The latters include (1) the
involvement of undergraduates in the research laboratory, (2) incorporation of
the latest research results in the teaching module, and (3) training of high-
school and college teachers in the Philadelphia district with a high minority
student population.

Technical Description:

This research project studies the effect of electric field on the structural and
chemical changes in phase change nanowires made of germanium-antimony-tellurium
(Ge-Sb-Te) alloys. The research team utilizes a unique lateral configuration of
nanowire devices to directly investigate the changes in Ge-Sb-Te nanowire
structure, morphology and chemical composition via in-situ electron microscopy
measurements while operating the device under an electrical bias. The goal is to
understand the fundamental mechanisms operative behind the functioning of phase
change materials, especially the effect of electric field and current on atomic
migration and recrystallization. The research provides insights into the atomic
processes that are responsible for the functioning of phase change memory
devices and their failure mechanisms. The insights obtained will impact the
development of novel materials for non-volatile, ultra-dense, ultrafast and
energy efficient memory devices .