* 1505306
* Southeast Atmosphere Studies Workshop: Intensive Observation Period Modeling to Improve Mechanistic Representation of Trends; Princeton, New Jersey; June 2015
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Jingqiu Mao, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports a small modeling workshop to be held at the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
(NOAA/GFDL) in Princeton, NJ to bring together a group of scientists to focus on
using the data collected in 2013 during the Southeast Atmosphere Studies (SAS),
a field campaign supported in part by the Atmospheric Chemistry Program at
National Science Foundation, to investigate biosphere-atmosphere interactions
and the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) in the atmosphere. The
purpose of the workshop is to evaluate, diagnose and improve climate and air
quality modeling of different temporal and spatial scales for improving
representation of fundamental atmospheric processes. The effort will focus
primarily on models that simulate the formation of SOA and other trace species
in the troposphere over the Southeast US, with the ultimate goal of
understanding the radiative impacts of these species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected results of the workshop are to: (1) reconcile the discrepancies on
biogenic volatile organic compound emission inventories among global and
regional models; (2) make recommendations for a condensed isoprene gas-phase
chemistry for use in 3-D chemical models; (3) identify the extent to which major
SOA precursors and production pathways can be constrained using data from SAS;
(4) summarize the possible impact of atmospheric chemistry on regional climate
over Southeast US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is enabling the community
of US scientists to work together to utilize the massive amounts of data
collected during the SAS campaign to answer some key questions of societal
interest. For example, an important question is: what are the roles of
anthropogenic and biogenic emissions in contributing to high ozone and
particulate matter concentrations over the Southeast US? And what is the best
strategy for modeling SOA over this region? These questions are important for
gaining a better understanding of air quality and climate in the Southeast US.