* 1505669
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Perfluoroether-based Polymer Electrolytes for Lithium Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nitash Balsara, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 198,000.00

Nitash Balsara / Joseph DeSimone 1505669 / 1510579

Although electric and hybrid vehicles have the potential to reduce dependence on
fossil fuels for transportation, the rechargeable lithium batteries that
currently power them suffer from many problems. Current designs can hold 10% of
their theoretical amount of energy content, contain highly flammable organic
liquid electrolytes, are relatively costly, and do not last as long as a typical
automobile. New battery materials are needed to address these problems. The
objective of this project is to develop high-performance electrolytes for
lithium batteries that have no flammable components, potentially leading to
improved safety. These electrolytes will be based on nonflammable fluorinated
polymers designed to dissolve lithium ions and maintain high ion conductivity
for improved charging and discharging rates. The proposed research will make and
test these new polymer materials for battery applications, and try to understand
the fundamental science underlying their performance. The proposed educational
activities associated with this project include an engineering summer camp for
underserved high school students in the Oakland-Berkeley area that features
hands-on projects related to lithium batteries.

The overall goal of the proposed research is to develop perfluoropolyether
(PFPE)-based electrolytes for lithium batteries. It is believed that this
material is a promising new electrolyte for two principal reasons. First, PFPE
materials are a class of fluoropolymers that are intrinsically nonflammable and
exhibit low vapor pressure as well as thermal, chemical and oxidative stability.
Second, for lithium ion battery applications, PFPE-based electrolytes also can
dissolve lithium salts with fluoridated anions. This electrolyte system
possesses high conductivity dominated by molecular lithium ion (Li+) transport,
owing to the low glass transition temperature of the PFPE materials, and the
solvation of fluorinated anions by fluorinated polymers, which immobilizes the
anion on the polymer. The proposed research will synthesize functionalized homo-
and block co-polymer perfluoropolyethers and lithium salts, characterize the
electrochemical properties of these electrolytes, and assess their ion transport
and cycling performance in electrochemical energy storage test devices. Selected
research outcomes will be used to support the development of a start-up company
and provide entrepreneurial training for students involved on the project.
Additional education and outreach activities are also planned in coordination
with the Professional Development Program at UC Berkeley and with the Research
Triangle Electrochemical Society Student Chapter.