* 1506803
* Synthetic control of electron-phonon coupling in semiconductor quantum dots
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,08/31/2021
* David Kelley, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2021
* USD 520,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program is funding Professors Anne Myers Kelley and David Kelley at the
University of California at Merced to apply laser-based spectroscopic techniques
and computational modeling to study mechanisms whereby light energy is converted
to heat in quantum dots (QDs) which are small semiconductor structures
containing hundreds to thousands of atoms. The quantitative understanding that
will be gained regarding these processes will enable the controlled chemical
synthesis of QDs that are optimized for several types of technological
applications. These include efficient solar energy capture and conversion, low
power dissipation artificial lighting, and laser-based biological imaging for
medical diagnostics. UC Merced is a Hispanic Serving Institution and more than
half of its undergraduates are first-generation college students, and this
research will actively involve both graduate and undergraduate students from
traditionally underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
accurately measure and quantitatively understand the factors that determine the
extent of electron-phonon coupling (EPC) in nanometer sized semiconductor
quantum dots (QDs) and to synthetically control the extent of EPC. Preliminary
calculations suggest that by judicious choice of materials and morphology it is
possible to greatly increase or decrease the magnitude of EPC in core-shell and
core-alloy-shell structures compared to single component QDs. Both well-known
and novel structures based on II-VI semiconductors are synthesized and
characterized and their EPC measured through quantitative resonance Raman
spectroscopy, including analysis of absolute excitation profiles, overtone
intensities, and depolarization ratios,. This study tests the hypothesis that
EPC for optical phonons in polar crystals is determined largely by the amount of
charge separation produced by electron-hole pair formation via the Fr√∂hlich
mechanism, and that it can be varied by controlling the valence and conduction
band energies such that the electron and hole wavefunctions have different
amounts of overlap. The novelty of this approach is to not only measure EPC
accurately for specific materials but also engineer structures that permit the
control of EPC.