* 1506181
* SusChEM: Molecular and Structural Dissection of Methyl Coenzyme M Reductase for Methane Production
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Mishtu Dey, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2020
* USD 460,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Mishtu Dey of the University of Iowa to study the
structure and mechanism of the the enzyme methyl coenzyme M reductase (MCR).
Biological methane is produced by a process called methanogenesis through the
action of a group of microbes called methanogens. The methanogens use simple
one- and two-carbon compounds as substrates to form methane utilizing one of
Nature's most fascinating nickel enzymes, methyl coenzyme M reductase.
Approximately one billion tons of methane is generated every year by
methanogenesis. In view of its relative abundance and clean burning properties,
methane continues to be an attractive fuel. On the other hand, methane is also a
potent greenhouse gas. This project is focused on elucidating specific aspects
of the mechanism of function of MCR. A greater understanding of MCR mechanism
and the process of methanogenesis may enable design of enzymes for reducing
agricultural methane emissions and provide a basis for improving bioreactor
technology to produce, capture, and store methane as a source of sustainable
energy. The research plan is integrated into an interactive science project to
engage middle school students in the art of
crystallography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
investigate the mechanism of methane formation by MCR and biosynthesis of
unusual post-translational modifications (PTMs) present in this globally
important metalloenzyme responsible for biological methane production. Here,
structural and mechanistic enzymology approaches are used to investigate enzyme-
catalyzed C-heteroatom bond activation and biological methylation reactions. The
proposed studies may provide important insights into the mechanism of biological
methane formation and may illuminate Nature's strategies to carry out unusual
PTMs. The knowledge gained from the proposed research offers important insights
into how energy-rich molecules, such as methane, are synthesized within the
hydrophobic reaction chamber of a buried metalloenzyme active site. The
comprehensive structure-function study has applications in bioengineering and
bioenergy/biofuel industries. The proposed project involves training students at
various levels of education.