* 1506744
* Electron Transfer Mediators at Environmental Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Paul Tratnyek, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Paul G. Tratnyek of the Oregon Health &amp;
Science University to investigate fundamental and applied aspects of how
substances termed "electron shuttles" mediate redox reactions at solid-solution
surfaces in the environment. Redox (oxidation-reduction) reactions are integral
to many of the most important aspects of environmental chemistry, ranging from
elemental cycling, to microbial fuel cells, to contaminant fate and remediation.
Many of these redox processes are known to be strongly influenced by natural and
artificial electron shuttles, but the role of interfaces in electron shuttle
effects is hard to characterize and poorly understood. In additional to the
laboratory research performed by graduate students, undergraduates, and high
school interns, this project includes significant outreach activity with
workshops for water industry professionals run by Clackamas Community College.
One goal of these workshops is to better understand and utilize redox shuttle
effects in the protection of safe drinking water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach of this project is to use electrodes as model systems for environmental
interfaces. Electrodes are modified in various ways with electron shuttle
compounds followed by measurement of redox processes using electrochemical
instrumentation. The project scope includes different types of electrode
materials (e.g., noble metals vs. iron oxide minerals), shuttle-electrode
interactions (e.g., bonded vs. non-bonded), and shuttle types (quinones,
flavins, porphyrins, siderophores, etc.). Interfacial effects on ETM properties
will be studied using electrode-based model systems that allow systematic
characterization of ETM-interface structure and reactivity. Electrode model
systems will be used to represent three types of scenarios: (i) solution phase
ETM effects only, vs. ETM-interface&lt;br/&gt;interactions that are (ii) non-
specific and non-bonded (i.e., ?outer-sphere?) or (iii) specific and bonded
(i.e., ?inner sphere?). The surfaces will include electrodes made of glass
carbon and gold (to isolate outer and inner-sphere interactions, respectively)
and iron oxides grown on metallic iron electrodes (to represent environmental
mineral surfaces). ETMs will be selected from four classes of environmentally
important redox-active organics: quinones, flavins, porphyrins, and
siderophores. Each system will be characterized electrochemically, primarily by
cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).
Complementary spectroscopic methods will be applied as needed: including UV-vis,
FTIR, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) spectroscopy. Quantitative results
(potential, current, impedance) will be used to derive properties of interfacial
ETMs and these will be compared to values determined for solution-phase ETMs
using various methods (experimental and computational). The overall results will
be used to assess the overall significance of interfacial effects on
environmental redox properties.