* 1506589
* SusChEM: Rheology of Cellulose and other Biopolymers in Ionic Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 01/31/2020
* USD 345,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: Cellulose is the most abundant renewable
polymeric natural resource on our planet. For many years cellulose has been
chemically modified to make it water-soluble or at least water-dispersible,
enabling solution processing of cellulose. However, the modifications are
expensive and inhibit the crystallization of cellulose that imparts final
mechanical properties. Ionic liquids are nonvolatile solvents and recently,
certain ionic liquids have been found to dissolve native cellulose. There is a
large inductrial research effort aimed at fiber spinning and other solution
processing operations on unmodified cellulose with companies developing large
patent portfolios on cellulose/ionic liquid solutions. In support of such
technologies, a fundamental study of the flow properties of cellulose solutions
in ionic liquids is planned. Since there are several unusual aspects of
cellulose/ionic liquid rheology, including a seemingly large effect of trace
amounts of water, this research may be transformative and enabling. This study
will provide a basis for understanding the rheology of native cellulose,
enabling it to be processed in ionic liquid solutions. This green processing
scheme allows cellulose to be processed without chemical modification, which is
already known to produce fibers with superior mechanical properties, and ionic
liquids are nonvolatile and routinely water-extracted from the cellulose to be
&gt;99% recovered without use of any volatile organic solvents. Consequently,
ionic liquid solutions may provide a viable pathway to high modulus polymer
products from renewable resources that are non-petroleum
based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: At a given concentration,
ionic liquid solutions have higher viscosity than aqueous solutions and are
slightly more elastic (longer relaxation time); both are advantageous for
stability of coating and fiber spinning operations. The planned rheology
experiments will thoroughly characterize the viscoelastic response of cellulose
in three ionic liquids (one that appears to be a theta-solvent and another that
preliminary data suggests to be a good solvent) over wide ranges of temperature
and concentration. While the concentration dependences of viscosity, relaxation
time and terminal modulus of dry cellulose/ionic liquid solutions in linear
response have the expected scalings, the linear viscoelasticity is quite
sensitive to small quantities of water. Additionally, unexpected results are
observed in stronger shear flows relevant to coating, fiber spinning and other
solution processing; the shear viscosity is significantly larger than the linear
viscosity from oscillatory shear, whereas conventional polymer solutions either
show the two to be identical or find the shear viscosity is lower from chain
alignment in shear. This will be explored in detail using X-ray scattering in
shear flow to detect alignment of cellulose chains. The PI and his team will
also begin to explore the solution rheology of other polysaccharides
(chitin/chitosan, the second-most abundant polymeric natural resource on the
planet) in ionic liquids.