* 1506343
* Engineered Three-Body Interactions in Quantum-Degenerate Atomic Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Eite Tiesinga, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 03/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

At its most fundamental the physical description of the world around us seems to
require two ingredients: elementary particles and interactions between pairs of
such particles. For example, photons, the elementary particle of light, can
scatter from a single electron and charged electrons will repel each other via
the Coulomb force. Even objects that contain many elementary particles seem to
interact in pairs. The scattering between atoms, with their many protons,
neutrons, and electrons, for example, is often described in terms of
interactions between pairs of them. At a bigger scale the motion of the moon,
earth, and sun is describable in terms of the gravitational attraction between
pairs of them. The composition of the moon, earth, or sun does not matter. This
work, however, will focus on the study of three-body interactions, those that
are not simply the sum of the pair-wise interactions, but those whose effect is
zero when one of the three bodies is removed, and examine their influence on the
physical description of the world. This project will train a University of
Maryland graduate student. The student will be exposed to quantum physics at a
fundamental yet practical level. The proximity to local atomic-physics
laboratories, including the Joint Quantum Institute and NIST, will also greatly
benefit the student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In atomic, molecular, and optical
physics, there are several cases where three-body interactions are known to
matter. For example, in the description of interacting, reacting, and colliding
molecules, such forces arise in the so-called Born-Oppenheimer approximation
when integrating out the fast electron motion. Conceived in nuclear physics,
tri-atomic Efimov states are now studied with ultra-cold atoms at temperatures
on the order of a nanoKelvin. Binding of these weakly-bound states crucially
depends on a so-called three-body parameter. In all cases three-body
interactions emerge when high-energy modes or fast constituents are "eliminated"
from the description. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This group will design or engineer
many-body systems of ultra-cold atoms or molecules held in laser-generated
periodic potentials that solely interact through three-body forces. More
precisely, starting from a Hamiltonian, where atoms do interact through pair-
wise interactions, the investigators will derive effective Hamiltonians that
only contain three-body interactions. The ability to freely adjust the periodic
trapping potential as well as the strength of the two-particle interactions will
be crucial. Research into such effective many-body Hamiltonians has intellectual
merit for two separate reasons. Firstly, the research addresses fundamental
questions about the origin or emergence of three-body forces. Moreover, for the
first time it may be possible to create a realistic system with controllable
two-body forces and thereby highlight the role of three-body forces. A second
intellectual merit of a design of such a Hamiltonian is that they might have
quantum ground states or phases with unique order. For example, it can lead to
superfluids with pairs of atoms. This approach relies on controllable
cancellations between contributions to the two-body interaction, leaving only
three-body interactions. In addition, it relies on time-dependent changes in and
driving of the single-particle optical-lattice potential to populate a subset of
levels, whose energies simulate three-body interactions. There will be impact in
other fields of physics where effective field theories and collective phenomena
are important, such as condensed matter and high-energy physics. In particular,
with atomic system one can study processes that are fundamental but far-less
accessible in systems investigated by those fields.