* 1506859
* EAPSI:Development of Novel Catalysts for the Chemical Synthesis of Bioactive Molecules
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Matthew Horwitz, Horwitz                 Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The medicinal drugs that millions of people take every day contain bioactive
molecules that are generally derived from natural products. The efficient
construction of natural products and drug-like molecules necessitates high
yielding and selective chemical reactions. Such reactions are enabled by the
design and experimental development of new catalysts. This project will explore
a family of catalysts developed in the host lab in systems that are familiar to
the American collaborators. Under the guidance of Professor Xiaoming Feng at
Sichuan University in Chengdu, China, the EAPSI fellow will utilize the new
catalysts to study new types of reactivity and to apply these new methods in the
synthesis of important targets. This investigation is expected to facilitate new
reaction development that may open the door to new natural products and new
medicines.

This project aims to apply novel organocatalyts and transition metal-catalysts
in new dynamic reaction manifolds. The primary activity that this project
involves is running new kinds of chemical reactions. Using chiral guanidine
systems as organocatalysts and N,N?-dioxide complexes as transition metal
catalysts, this project will explore addition reactions into a- and b-keto
esters. The resulting a- and b-hydroxy esters have been shown to have useful
biological activity that merits their synthesis. Model nucleophiles are likely
to include azlactone and pyrazolones, which are proposed for the efficient
construction of three contiguous stereocenters. Using these substrates to study
the Dynamic Kinetic Resolution (DKR) phenomenon, new building blocks for
biologically important molecules will be generated. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.