* 1506024
* Precision Data Analysis Software for  Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Measurements
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Miguel Morales, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 252,211.00

One of the highest priority science questions in cosmology today is how hydrogen
gas was "reionized" when the Universe was young (known as the Epoch of
Reionization, or EoR). This reionization is predicted by the Big Bang theory of
the evolution of the Universe, but little is known about how this physically
happened. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will further develop his Fast
Holographic Deconvolution analysis software for the reduction of hydrogen gas
EoR observations. Such observations have the potential to measure the rise and
fall of the EoR power spectrum, placing meaningful constraints on models of
reionization and early star formation. These constraints will have impact on the
astrophysics community and could influence how James Webb Space Telescope
observations are interpreted, constrain the optical depth of cosmic microwave
background measurements, and aid our understanding of the early universe. This
award will provide funding for a postdoctoral research associate to work on
making the software available and usable by the general EoR community. The grant
will enable an advanced software pipeline for the international radio cosmology
community, and will provide sponsorship of a workshop to train the community in
its use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the work include training of a
postdoc, and the engagement of under-represented groups toward careers in
science, which has been a hallmark of Morales' group at U Washington for a
number of years.