* 1506535
* SusChEM: Atomic Structure and Dynamic Behaviors of Extended Defects in Earth-Abundant Solar-Cell Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Xiaoqing Pan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The solar-cell material CZTS is made of the low-cost,
Earth-abundant elements Cu, Zn, Sn, S, and Se. Challenges to the development of
high-efficiency CZTS solar cells include control of impurities and defects. This
project is designed to gain a fundamental understanding of the atomic structure
and local properties of defects in CZTS under electrical and optical
excitations, using state-of-the-art transmission electron microscopy (TEM) in
combination with novel in-situ TEM methods developed in the Principle
Investigator's lab. These new techniques will allow us to directly probe the
atomic structure of individual defects and the responses of those defects to an
applied electric field and/or light illumination providing for the determination
of the atomic scale structure-property relationships of individual defects. The
result will be knowledge needed for the optimization of the material's
microstructure and composition, advancing the development of low-cost and
sustainable materials with improved properties for solar energy technology. In
addition, this project provides a wide range of opportunities for the
interdisciplinary education and training of undergraduate and graduate students
needed in both industry and academic research
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This SusChEM project is to
study the structure and dynamic behaviors of Earth-abundant solar-cell materials
using a combination of advanced aberration-corrected transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and novel in-situ TEM techniques. The research primarily
focuses on thin films of kesterite Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTS), a candidate material
to replace Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS). Because of the polycrystalline nature and the
co-existence of multiple impurity phases in CZTS thin films, it is critical, but
very challenging to understand the role of defects and interfaces in controlling
the electrical properties and solar conversion efficiency. In this project, the
PI combines the state-of-the-art aberration-corrected TEM imaging, spectroscopy,
and the novel in-situ techniques recently developed in his lab to study the
atomic structure and dynamic behaviors of individual defects, grain boundaries,
and interfaces in CZTS materials. Spatially resolved cathode-luminescence and
scanning tunneling microscopy holders with optical excitation, combined with
holography and electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS), are used to identify
the active and inactive regions of defects (grain boundaries, interfaces,
secondary phase boundaries, etc.), while the atomic structure, chemical
composition and local electronic properties of the same regions are determined
by TEM imaging and spectroscopy with atomic resolution. In combination with the
optoelectronic properties measured from the same material, the role of defects
in controlling the materials properties can be understood.&lt;br/&gt;