* 1506014
* Redox Properties of Reduced Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2019
* USD 519,999.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program supports the
efforts of Professor Daniel Gamelin of the University of Washington to study the
redox properties of reduced semiconductor nanocrystals. The interconversion of
chemical, electrical, and optical energies is critical to many advanced
technologies. Nanoscale semiconductors play central roles in many of these
technologies. This research is addressing fundamental aspects of the redox and
photoredox properties of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals, focusing on
interconversion of the various forms of energy and yielding new materials and
new fundamental knowledge relevant to a wide variety of catalytic, opto-
electronic, and energy-conversion technologies. Characterization of reduced-
nanocrystal physical properties, electronic structures, and redox properties is
building important bridges connecting fields of semiconductor nanoscience,
photochemistry, electrochemistry, spectroscopy, and energy and information
sciences. This project is also providing participants with advanced
interdisciplinary education and training, and preparing them for careers in
science, engineering, and education. Integration of research and education is
being emphasized through involvement of undergraduate students in the research,
incorporation of experiments and research concepts from this project into the
University of Washington undergraduate curriculum, close collaboration with
faculty from undergraduate institutions, and outreach activities at regional
community colleges, high schools, and community events.

This project aims to explore the redox properties of colloidal semiconductor
nanocrystals including ZnO, In2O3, CdSe, CdS, CdTe and PbS, and related
compositions, focusing on the development and understanding of solution-phase
reduced nanocrystals containing excess delocalized conduction-band electrons. A
combination of advanced syntheses, sophisticated spectroscopies, and analytical
methods is being applied to develop reduced colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals
and to understand their electronic structures and redox characteristics. This
research emphasizes the development of new materials, new quantitative
methodologies, and new redox chemistries. The integration of synthesis,
spectroscopy, reactivity studies, electronic-structure studies, and quantitative
analysis is facilitating the discovery and development of advanced materials,
and elucidating fundamental structure/function relationships in these unusual
materials. This project is providing advanced interdisciplinary education and
training for participants in the areas of inorganic, physical, and materials
chemistries, preparing them for careers in science, engineering, technology
innovation, and education. These activities have a broader impact through
integration of research and education, particularly at the undergraduate level,
and through outreach activities involving regional community colleges, high
schools, and the general community.