* 1506993
* Charge Tunneling in Organic Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2018
* George Whitesides, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 12/31/2018
* USD 578,787.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor George Whitesides of
Harvard University to investigate methods to control the flow of electrical
currents through thin layers of materials that are normally electrically
insulating. When these materials are sufficiently thin (1-2 nanometers, or less
than 20 atoms in thickness), they allow electrical charge to cross by a
fundamentally different process called tunneling. In tunneling, the charge,
faced with a normally insulating barrier, simply passes through it. In
understanding tunneling of charge through normally insulating organic matter,
this project pursues three objectives: the design of new materials that either
enhance or decrease tunneling; the introduction of students on this project to a
style of science that requires integration of skills from organic synthesis and
materials science to quantum physics, and strengthening the U.S. technical
workforce; the design, construction, and demonstration of new tools for studying
tunneling that are broadly useful, and sufficiently simple for use at the
undergraduate college level in science teaching. The objective of this project
is to understand charge tunneling through thin, insulating organic films. It
will use a junction developed specifically for this purpose that has three
parts: i) an electrode of flat gold or silver; ii) a self-assembled monolayer
(SAM) of an organic or organometallic compound (or mixture of compounds as the
tunneling barrier; iii) a second electrode comprising a compliant structure
composed of a drop of liquid eutectic gallium-indium alloy, covered with a thin,
conducting film of gallium oxide. The project will measure the tunneling current
across this junction at low voltages (V ~ 0.5V), using a number of SAMs designed
to test theories relating to rates of tunneling, to the molecular and electronic
structure of the molecules across which tunneling is occurring. The project will
have two objectives: i) to validate a level of theory adequate to explain
tunneling rates; ii) to use this theory to predict new types of tunneling
mechanisms, and new phenomena involving tunneling, through organic matter. The
desired outcome of the work is a fundamental understanding of the orbital
structures particularly the highest energy occupied molecular orbitals, or HOMOs
and the electronic couplings between them, that lead to either particularly high
or particularly low charge tunneling rates. Both outcomes would be interesting,
and both, ultimately, may be useful in the design of molecular electronic and
organic electronic devices.