* 1506129
* Collaborative Research: The Access Network: Supporting Retention and Representation in Physics through an Alliance of Campus-Based Diversity Programs
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,225.00

This award supports an effort to expand and enrich the COMPASS program at UC
Berkeley, which is aimed at improving the education and retention of under-
represented students (primarily in Physics). There are five universities with
similar programs based on the COMPASS model: University of Colorado Boulder,
University of Maryland College Park, Rochester Institute of Technology, Chicago
State University, and Arizona State University. This project joins these
institutions and UC Berkeley to form the Access Network, designed to develop
best practices through shared expertise. The Access network will support the
development of programs intended to improve diversity and access in physics by
innovating strategies to build Compass-like programs in new contexts. The
network will enhance the efforts of each individual site, build knowledge of
best practices for launching new programs, and share this knowledge with the
physics community. A robust evaluation of the project will identify the impact
of the network on supporting diversity programs and how it contributes to the
dissemination of successful strategies and program
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Access network will: (a) empower students and
faculty - especially those from marginalized and/or underrepresented groups - as
agents in the design, implementation, and iterative improvement of retention
efforts, (b) facilitate communication and community among those involved in such
efforts, and (c) create and maintain a repository of materials and strategies,
all in order to (d) support local communities in adapting these materials and
program elements to their unique contexts and populations. To achieve these
goals, the project will engage in the following activities: (1) an annual
assembly of the member programs, (2) inter-program communication through regular
conference calls and inter-institutional travel, (3) documentation of local and
inter-institutional innovations, and (4) synthesis and dissemination of member
programs' educational materials.