* 1506468
* Molecular Basis of the Effects of Hydrostatic Pressure on Protein Stability
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* George Makhatadze, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2019
* USD 333,647.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor George Makhatadze of Rensselaer Polytechnic
Instiute to investigate the role of various physical-chemical interactions in
determining the pressure dependence of protein stability. Pressure is an
important environmental variable that plays an essential role in biological
adaptation for many extremophilic organisms, called barophiles. This research
project will rely upon the synergy between computer simulations and experiments.
Computer simulations will provide solid theoretical framework for the analysis
of the volume changes upon protein unfolding. Experiments will be performed to
validate the computer simulations. In particular, these workers will be testing
a hypothesis that proteins from barophilic organisms have volumetric properties
that allow them to remain folded, even at elevated hydrostatic pressure. This
project engages high school, undergraduate and graduate students in both
computational and experimental aspects of the research in the laboratory. In
recruiting trainees, there will be a particular effort to engage women and/or
members of underrepresented minorities. The PI is also actively involved in
curriculum development and serves as an undergraduate curriculum adviser for
Biochemistry and Biophysics majors at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

The proposed work will provide a significant refinement of a protein stability
model to incorporate temperature dependencies of volume changes by combining
concepts of evolutionary biology with biochemical and biophysical tools such as
nuclear magnetic resonance, differential scanning calorimetry as well as
computational tools. It is expected that the knowledge accumulated as a result
of these experiments will lay the foundation to understand the factors that
affect protein folding and stability under extreme conditions. In the longer
term, it is hoped that the lessons learned here will provide biophysical
chemists with new insights as they seek to design enzymes with that are both
active and robust. Broader scientific impacts in industrial biotechnology and in
process chemsitry are anticipated, particularly as these scientists seek to
develop robust biomaterials and replace current processes with next generation,
environmentally friendly catalytic processes.