* 1506618
* Visualizing nanoscale phenomena in layered chalcogenides with heavy elements
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Weida Wu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 507,118.00

Nontechnical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Tremendous progress has been made on
discovering various new materials with enhanced functionalities. The
technological applications of functional materials, however, demand extreme
control of composition and imperfections of functional materials. The control of
defects, especially point defects is crucial for the performance of
semiconductor devices, which are building blocks of all modern electronics such
as computers, cell phones, etc. Yet it is notoriously difficult to directly
probe and exam individual point defects in functional materials. Scanning
tunneling microscope (STM) is one of the few tools that allow scientists to
directly probe atomic scale phenomena, including point defects and responses of
local electronic properties. This project investigates the impacts of point
defects, either intentionally or unintentionally introduced to bulk materials
during synthesis, on novel electronic materials called layered chalcogenides.
Using STM to visualize interesting electronic phenomena at nanometer scale, the
principle investigator aims to obtain fundamental understandings of the driving
mechanisms and the control of point defects in these functional materials.
Education and training of graduate and undergraduate students is seamlessly
integrated to the research activities, which enable them to learn fundamental
material science, to master advanced microscopic techniques, and more
importantly, to learn independent thinking. This project also integrates
education and training of under-representative undergraduate students through
various programs such as Aresty Research Center research program and Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program at Rutgers, and of high school students
through the Partner in Science program of Liberty Science Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Layered chalcogenides have
been the active playground for various correlated phenomena in condensed matter
physics, ranging from charge density wave and superconductivity. Incorporating
heavy elements in layered chalcogenides introduces additional twists of strong
spin-orbital coupling or dimerization, leading to emergent phenomena such as
topological insulators and dimerization induced stripe modulations. This project
addresses the impact of point defects (either intrinsic or extrinsic) on these
fascinating phenomena to gain fundamental understanding of their driving
mechanisms. Topological insulators are new quantum states of matter where
insulating bulk states are surrounded by conducting surface states because of
nontrivial topology of electronic wave functions. Native defects in topological
insulators are known to induce substantial bulk conduction, which is detrimental
for the observation and technological applications of exotic phenomena related
to topological surface states. The influence of chemical inhomogeneity is
crucial for fundamental understanding of "topological phase transitions" induced
by chemical doping. The goal of this project is to identify and to control
native and/or extrinsic point defects in layered chalcogenide topological
insulators such as Bi2Se3 and Sb2Te3. In addition, this project aims to achieve
a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of emergent multiple stripe
modulations in the heavy di-chalcogenide IrTe2 which is closely related to
devil's staircase phenomena due to competing interactions. Atomic-scale defects,
electronic modulations and nanoscale inhomogeneity in these materials are
visualized and examined using state-of-the-art scanning tunneling microscopy and
spectroscopy. These research efforts are complimented by bulk probes, first-
principle calculations and theoretical modeling via domestic and international
collaborations.