* 1506140
* RUI: Analysis of TeV Gamma-Rays from AGN and Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Jodi Christiansen, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2020
* USD 158,564.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is a ground-based
observatory designed to study high energy gamma-rays. VERITAS has unique
capabilities, providing high sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic
and extragalactic sources. This award supports scientists at California Polytech
State University to carry out research with VERITAS. The group will work on
improved gamma-ray detection algorithms for VERITAS and use the improved
sensitivity to study acceleration mechanisms in active galaxies and to search
for dark matter. Undergraduates will be involved in the research. The group will
work with the Center for Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education to
communicate the physics of black holes and high energy gamma-ray emission to
students. They will also work with teachers in the Student Teacher and Research
program and develop teaching supplements that can be used in middle school
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS has embarked upon a broad program of
Galactic and extragalactic source observations, as well as studies of signatures
for new physics such as dark matter. With this award the California Polytech
State University group will work on improvements to the stereo reconstruction
algorithm, focusing on the gamma-ray shower impact position, zenith, azimuth,
shower height, and energy. Undergraduates in the group will use the improved
detection algorithms to analyze blazar data. The group will study observations
of dwarf galaxies to look for signatures of dark matter.