* 1506667
* DNA-Scaffolded Peptides as High-Affinity Reagents
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jason Locklin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Georgia is to develop a platform for
antibody mimetics by scaffolding peptides on single stranded DNA. This award is
cofunded by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular &amp;
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences. Antibodies are
essential to facilitating discoveries in biomedical research; however, they have
a variety of shortcomings that have elicited concerns over accessibility to
high-quality antibodies for biomedical research. Alterative and more robust
polymers for molecular recognition are needed to drive discovery efforts
forward. Nucleic acid polymers have demonstrated immense promise as high-
affinity reagents; however, their lack of chemical functionality limits their
ability to compete with proteins as receptors. By merging the evolvable
molecular scaffold of nucleic acid polymers with diverse protein functionality,
the PI aims to evolve a new class of antibody mimetics for biomedical research,
which may address the critical deficit of available antibodies for molecular
targets. These research efforts will be coupled with educational and training
outreach at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels in order to
assist in the development of a future generation of scientists that are properly
equipped to tackle interdisciplinary research
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This proposal describes
research to develop an in vitro selection platform for antibody mimetics by
scaffolding peptides on DNA. Nucleic acid aptamers have provided numerous
advantages over traditional antibodies; however, their functional group deficit
limits their potential to match the performance of proteinogenic affinity
reagents. By merging the evolvable molecular scaffold of nucleic acid polymers
with protein functionality, this investigator will use this class of polymers to
mimic the hetero- and multivalent approach nature uses at protein-protein
interfaces. The investigator will use an enzymatic strategy to sequence-
specifically incorporate unique peptide fragments along a DNA template. This
approach will enable the concomitant evolution of the ssDNA scaffold and the
identity of the displayed peptides to achieve molecular recognition of protein
targets. If successful, this new class of biomimetic polymers could aid in
addressing the deficit of high-affinity reagents for biomedical research. These
research efforts will be coupled with educational and training outreach at the
high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels.