* 1506046
* SYNTHESIS, ASSEMBLY, AND ELECTROCHROMIC BEHAVIOR OF NANOSTRUCTURED CONJUGATED POLYMER/METAL INTERFACES
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

In this project, Professors Vladimir Tsukruk and John Reynolds of Georgia
Institute of Technology are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the NSF to make new materials consisting of
polymers combined with gold and silver nanometer-sized particles. Currently,
novel color-changing materials made of plastic or polymers can be designed so
that their colors can be tuned from purple to red and their transparency from
absolutely clear to completely opaque. Flexible filters made from these polymers
can block or deflect harmful short wavelengths (like those that cause sunburn)
and transmit long wavelengths useful for sun-illuminated heating. Most of the
filters known today are fixed for a particular function and cannot be changed
after fabrication. It is possible to change the color and transparency of these
filters using light, the chemical environment, or small applied electric fields.
The potential uses of these novel structures are to facilitate intelligent light
harvesting for flexible solar cells at dusk or dawn and to create wearable
electronics that allow the continuous monitoring of the wearer's health.
Further, this work has an impact in regard to chemistry education and teaching
through the development of select in-house tutorials defining the fundamental
aspects of conjugated polymer synthesis and electrochemistry that are required
in order for one to be conversant in these technologies. A broader impact of
this project is the enhanced training of graduate and undergraduate students
with an emphasis on their early involvement in interdisciplinary, fundamental
research with active recruitment of underrepresented groups. To broaden the
scope of these efforts, webinar tutorials are developed and made available
through a website that uses WIKI software for release to the general scientific
community. This work impacts energy sciences, polymer and materials chemistry,
electrochemistry, and organic electronics.

The merit of this cross-disciplinary study is the development of a fundamental
understanding of the behavior and driving molecular mechanisms of
electrochemically-driven transformations of macromolecules. These
transformations affect the supramolecular organization, redox state, and the
balance of electronic and ionic conductivities of macromolecules in proximity to
inorganic interfaces. The various processes associated with electrochromic
behavior are investigated utilizing a series of newly synthesized polymers
deposited on metal interfaces. The work includes synthesis of novel water-
soluble and processable conjugated polyelectrolytes with variations in band gap,
color, and oxidation potential. The assembly of interfacial polymer layers
around noble metal nanostructures balances local and global polymer chain
conformation, charge, and redox potential distribution. These factors are
critical for controlling the optical properties of the polymers including
absorbance, refractive index, and plasmonic interactions during electrochemical
oxidation. The broader impacts of this project include the involvement of
students into cross-disciplinary, fundamental research and the dissemination of
new skills and knowledge to the broader educational community through tutorial
webinars.