* 1506883
* RAPID: Effectively Communicating EBOLA Information to Vulnerable Populations
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Karina Meiri, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

CBET 1506883 Meiri, Karina F.

RAPID: Effectively Communicating EBOLA Information to Vulnerable Populations

This proposal is a RAPID response to improve education and communication about
preventive measures related to Ebola. It targets 7th-12th grade middle and high
school students and their teachers. Concerns about how the response to a
disseminated outbreak of Ebola in the US would be managed are legitimate given
that even a cursory examination of the Internet reveals the extent that
misinformation is driving public awareness. Much of the US population is
inadequately equipped to evaluate information provided by the media: More than
half has difficulty in understanding and using health information, another
segment is inherently suspicious of "official" information and a final segment
has limited English language skills. We clearly need alternative routes to
communicate critical information that: (a) are managed by scientists and
clinicians who understand the nuances of infection and public health and who are
able to explain clearly why information and directions can evolve over time, and
that (b) occur in interactive settings where misinformation can be directly
addressed. The high school classroom is the last place where entire cohorts of
the US population gather to learn at the same time without regard to their
health literacy, ideology or English language status, providing an ideal venue.
This project will be developed by an established curriculum design team of
biomedical scientists and Boston Public School teachers who have created a
successful curriculum "The Great Diseases" that provides 10th-12th grade
students with opportunities to acquire and apply problem-solving skills through
collaborative inquiry. We will leverage this experience to generate a stand-
alone suite of lessons (1 for middle school and 3 for high school) to address
key scientific and public health questions related to Ebola. The project has two
key elements: first to provide teachers with a complete platform of educative
materials and interactive online support to enable them to implement the lessons
in the classroom. Second, to involve families in the learning process so that
students can act as a conduit for legitimate information. The resources
developed will be freely available and accessible online.

The intellectual merit of the project relates to both students and teachers: 1)
It provides students will a curated range of up-to-date information within a
structure that enables them use active inquiry and problem solving to understand
key issues, while teaching them the characteristics of reliable information and
how to seek it out. Importantly, we will leverage our previous work with the
Great Diseases curriculum that demonstrated how students that are engaged in the
material communicate more with their families about the topics they are learning
to structure the lessons to include family participation, asking families to
evaluate an informational brochure students have created in the language spoken
at home. 2) It provides teachers with resources and support in a familiar
format, enabling them to effectively transfer this complex, dynamic information
to their classrooms. The impact of the project relates to its significant
potential for national and international impact. We have actively worked with
over 150 teachers and about 12,000 students throughout the US and our approach
to teaching and learning has successfully fostered student engagement in
disease-related topics, knowledge of the health science underlying disease and
healthy behaviors and critical thinking abilities and the improved self-efficacy
that is important for continued independent learning. The largest gains were
seen in inner city urban public schools and were independent of gender,
ethnicity or English language learner status. We have also reached many more:
Since 2013 people in 42 US states and 41 countries have accessed our freely
available resources. More than 45,000 of these views lasted > 2 minutes, an
indication of interest. We will leverage the breadth of this impact by providing
an interactive blog for FAQs and by asking teachers to upload representative
public health brochures to create a freely accessible, vetted, multilingual
repository