* 1506375
* Chemistry of Nickel(III/II)-Thiolate Complexes: Insight into the Structure and Mechanism of Ni-Containing SOD
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Todd Harrop, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 09/30/2019
* USD 471,542.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Todd C. Harrop at the University of Georgia to
study model nickel-thiolate complexes that mimic the imporant enzyme superoxide
dismutase. Nickel-containing superoxide dismutase (NiSOD) is the only redox-
active nickel-enzyme that is present in aerobes despite the presence of ROS
(reactive oxygen species)-sensitive cysteine-S-ligands at its active site. This
project involves the preparation and investigation of synthetic models of the
nickel-containing active site of NiSOD that are capable of aerobic function. In
particular, the project will examine the role of the entities that are bound to
nickel, in dictating the catalytic properties of the active site. Plans are in
place to provide hands-on research opportunities in the fundamental chemical
sciences to groups traditionally underrepresented in the STEM disciplines. One
such plan, with which there was prior success, is to provide a summer research
internship and lifelong career mentorship to undergraduate chemistry majors from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in the southeast region.
The PI and his group will also participate in the University of Georgia Young
Dawgs program where high school students from the Clarke County public school
system are provided STEM research internships.

The objective of this research is to prepare synthetic model complexes of the
nickel center found at the active site of NiSOD, and to investigate the
mechanistic role that the coordinated peptide-N and cysteinate-S ligands play in
the redox mechanism of this enzyme. Nickel-cysteine sites in biology are central
catalysts that participate in reactions of global impact including the
detoxification of reactive oxygen species (ROS), fixation of cellular carbon,
and the generation of alternative energy supplies, i.e., hydrogen
evolution/consumption. Nickel enzymes and their corresponding synthetic models
are thus ideal systems to promote chemical transformations of high economic and
environmental importance. However, the majority of these nickel-enzymes are
found in strict anaerobic organisms. Despite the sensitive nature of cysteine-S
with ROS, these donor atoms appear inert to ROS during turnover in the enzyme.
Advanced synthetic techniques will be employed to construct N/S-containing
ligand frames and their corresponding Ni(III/II) complexes that accurately
reproduce the NiSOD active site. Key factors in the design of these constructs
are the incorporation of an axial N-donor and the ability to fine-tune the
nucleophilicity of the S-ligands in order to promote Ni-based versus S-based
redox chemistry. Spectroscopic, structural and computational techniques will be
utilized. The project aims to determine the geometric and electronic structural
properties of these Ni(III/II)-N/S complexes and investigate their reactivity
with ROS and other reactive small molecules, such as NO, to shed light on the
redox mechanism taking place at this unique nickel site.