* 1506995
* Non Toxic InP Quantum Dots for Luminescence Cellular Imaging and Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Zeev Rosenzweig, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2020
* USD 613,545.00

AWARD ABSTRACTS CHE-1506995&lt;br/&gt;Zeev Rosenzweig, Non Toxic InP Quantum
Dots for Luminescence Cellular Imaging and Sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PUBLIC
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Luminescent semiconductor nanoparticles are materials with an
extremely small diameter, about 10,000 times smaller than the diameter of a
single human hair. Their small size gives them unique optical properties. When
irradiated, they emit intense visible light in a color that depends on their
size, shape and composition, making it possible to generate a rainbow of visible
emission colors from a single semiconductor material. Luminescent semiconductor
nanoparticles have found use in recent years in biomedical imaging and sensing
applications, in light emitting devices including cell phone screens and flat
screen TVs, and in energy converting photovoltaic devices. Their distribution
across a wide range of economic sectors has raised serious health and
environmental concerns since these nanomaterials often contain cadmium, a highly
toxic substance. Zeev Rosenzweig, at UMBC is developing novel synthesis, and
surface modification methods to prepare a new generation of cadmium-free, and
therefore non-toxic luminescent semiconductor nanoparticles made of indium
phosphide (InP). Rosenzweig and his students also demonstrate the utility of InP
nanoparticles as cellular imaging agents to study how enzymes work in living
cells. Dr. Rosenzweig is active in the recruitment of underrepresented
minorities into STEM fields by partnering with the Interdisciplinary Consortium
for Research and Educational Access in Science and Engineering (INCREASE). He
also works with veterans to give them research experience and to contribute to
their professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Zeev
Rosenzweig, of the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, to develop InP/ZnS core-shell semiconductor
nanoparticles as an alternative to cadmium-containing quantum dots presently
used for cellular fluorescence imaging. InP quantum dots, while non-toxic,
currently have inferior photophysical properties and low chemical stability
compared to cadmium-containing quantum dots. The objectives of these studies are
to control the reaction conditions for InP (core) and InP/ZnS (core-shell)
quantum dots formation using fluorescence lifetime spectroscopy measurements, to
modify the surface of InP/ZnS in order to increase their chemical stability in
the complex biological solutions, and to utilize them for quantitative imaging
and sensing studies of key metabolic enzymes, phosphatases and protein kinases
in living cells. The proposed multidisciplinary study impacts a number of
scientific disciplines including chemistry, biochemistry, materials chemistry,
polymer chemistry and environmental science and engineering. Dr. Rosenzweig is
actively involved in student recruitment in collaboration with the national
Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research and Educational Access in Science and
Engineering (INCREASE) which focuses on bringing underrepresented groups into
the STEM fields. In partnership with the UMBC Office of Student Veterans, he
also serves as a mentor to UMBC student veterans to prepare them for
professional careers in STEM and provide them with the opportunity to engage in
this nanotechnology research project.