* 1506740
* Protein displayed spores and spore ghosts platforms for detection and biotransformation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Sylvia Daunert, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, the multidisciplinary team of Dr. Sylvia Daunert and Dr.
Sapna Deo at the Miller School of Medicine of the University of Miami will
design and prepare sensors and bioremediation systems that take advantage of the
natural hardiness and ruggedness of bacterial spores to develop platforms in
which biosensing-biotransformation protein reagents are displayed on the spore
surface. These surface-displayed proteins are employed for sensing,
biotransformation, and immobilization purposes and employed to develop paper-
based detection platforms. This strategy provides with portable, easy-to-use,
rapid, cost-effective, and stable biosensing and biotransformation systems with
a wide range of potential applications in the environmental field. The broader
impacts are addressed not only through the scientific impact of the work but
also through educational and outreach activities. Students are trained to be
effective communicators by classical methods and by learning to make short films
and videos featuring their own research. Academic and industrial collaborations
expose the students to global science. Further, a new generation of physician
scientists are trained in critical analytical thinking, problem solving and in
research through a 'Molecular Medicine' Pathway whereby medical students perform
laboratory work and participate in research group activities. The goal is that
medical graduates gain the necessary skills to become successful researchers in
academic medicine or clinicians who can tackle medical problems from their root
at the molecular level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the field of
bioanalytical chemistry by creating powerful biosensing tools that are stable in
various extreme environmental conditions for prolonged periods of time and can
be integrated into easy-to-use analytical devices with a rapid response. Natural
ruggedness and successful genetic manipulation allows for spores to provide more
stable biosensing systems with a wide range of applications in environmental and
biomedical sciences by facilitating the transport and expanding on-site use,
service lives, and storage of biosensors. The project is interdisciplinary in
nature with elements of bioanalytical chemistry, molecular biology, sensor
development and miniaturization, and biomedical/environmental science.