* 1506609
* Charge transport and trap-healing effect at semiconductor/polymer heterointerfaces.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Vitaly Podzorov, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2018
* USD 340,535.00

Non-technical abstract. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research project
is an experimental study of artificially synthesized heterostructures based on
novel semiconducting materials combined in a single device. When certain
materials are brought together in physical contact, the contact can exhibit new
interesting properties, different from the properties of the original materials,
including, for instance, high electrical conductivity, with electrons flowing
freely, without being captured by defects. Such properties can be advantageous
for future electronic and photonic devices, such as transistors, light-emitting
diodes and solar cells. These heterostructures can also be used to study the
fundamental intrinsic properties of semiconductors, not masked by defects. The
types of materials that can be combined in functional van der Waals
heterostructures are organic semiconductors, inorganic layered materials with
inert (van der Waals) surfaces and organic polymers. Research on emergent
electronic materials, where fundamental physics and applied studies overlap,
represents an excellent opportunity for students to learn about current
developments in semiconductor physics and technology, acquire modern research
skills and become prepared for a successful career in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
physics of charge carrier transport at van der Waals heterointerfaces, in
particular interfaces between non-conjugated fluoropolymers with incorporated
polar functional groups and novel semiconductors, including organic molecular
crystals and layered inorganic nanomaterials (monolayer materials), is the focus
of this project. Understanding the mechanisms of induced surface conductivity
and "trap healing" effect, recently observed at such interfaces, is the main
thrust of the activity. Several interesting transport phenomena emerging at this
kind of interfaces, including suppressed carrier trapping and low-noise
conduction, leading to the observation of a high-resolution Hall effect, enable
the research team to experimentally access the intrinsic (trap-free) charge
transport regime in a variety of organic semiconductors and novel layered
inorganic nanomaterials. Low-temperature transport and Hall effect measurements,
combined with a photo-current excitation spectroscopy, are used to study these
interfaces. Implementation of the project is expected to result in the
development of novel semiconductor heterostructures, stimulate synthesis and
applications of novel functional polymers, lead to new methodologies of high-
precision Hall effect measurements, especially important for emergent solution-
processed semiconductors, and more broadly contribute to a better understanding
of electronic and optical properties of novel materials. The interdisciplinary
nature of this project provides excellent educational, human resource and
outreach opportunities, including training of students and postdocs.