* 1506613
* Spatial Control of Cell Behavior via Interfacial Bioorthogonal Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joseph Fox, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Spatial Control of Stem Cell Behavior via Interfacial Bioorthogonal
Chemistry&lt;br/&gt; (NSF DMR, Biomaterials Program #
DMR-1506613)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;Tissue engineering
holds promise for creating off-the-shelf, implantable tissues or organs for the
betterment of human health. Successful engineering of functional tissues
requires the environment in which the cells originally reside in vivo be
recreated ex vivo. In this project, a biomimetic scaffold will be created by
combining a gelatinous material exhibiting desired spatial gradients with
synthetic fibers displaying biochemical signals in a repetitive fashion. The
individual components and the integrated scaffold will be produced using a novel
process that takes advantage of an ultrafast, highly efficient coupling
reaction. Such a process permits the spatial control of scaffold properties
without having to rely on external, potentially toxic triggers or templates,
thereby enabling facile incorporation of the patient's cells in the scaffold in
3D. The cell-populated scaffold will be mechanically stimulated to enhance
tissue growth. The ultimate goal is to create tissues with the correct
organization and proper functions. This work will enable the production of
sophisticated materials to improve the quality of life for patients suffering
from various diseases, thus justifying the public support. The PIs outreach and
education efforts will help maintain the United States' global competitiveness.
In addition to course development, student training, effort will be dedicated to
the engaging and empowering of pre-service, early childhood teachers who will
inspire the next generation scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;This award to the University of Delaware (UD) aims to develop
synthetic matrices with anisotropic features and spatial gradients to control
the behavior of 3D encapsulated mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) for the
engineering of mechanically active soft tissues. The PIs will accomplish this
goal by integrating a hyaluronic acid (HA)-based hydrogel with synthetic fibers
produced de novo using designed monomers. The HA hydrogel will exhibit spatial
variations of matrix stiffness and ligand density while the synthetic fibers
will mimic the structure and the function of fibrous proteins found in the
native extracellular matrix. Both the gel and the fiber components will be
produced via a novel interfacial polymerization process that takes advantage of
the rapid, bioorthogonal and highly efficient cycloaddition reaction between
s-tetrazine (Tz) and trans-cyclooctene (TCO). The PIs will evaluate the
potential of the synthetic matrix, combined with a dynamic culture device, in
guiding the spatial differentiation of MSCs. The ultimate goal is to produce a
multilayered construct with anisotropic features that reflect the microstructure
of the targeted tissue. The proposed research program will provide a fertile
training ground for undergraduate and graduate students, thus contributing to
the continued growth of the biomedical engineering program at UD. The research
project will also provide a platform for engaging and empowering early childhood
teachers.