* 1506886
* Multiscale Modeling of Chiral Self-assemblies of Superparamagnetic Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Petr Kral, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 266,865.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research and education aimed at understanding cooperative mechanisms
by which magnetic materials self-assemble from nanoscale colloidal components
with multiple complex interactions and in the presence of magnetic, electric,
and optical fields. Concise characterization and description of conditions
underlying the stabilization of a rich spectrum of self-assembled materials will
provide information necessary for their reproducible preparation. Dramatic
progress in the area of materials formed by self-assembled nanoscale components
can proceed only through a solid understanding of all underlying principles and
microscopic phenomena. The research involves developing and applying
computational tools for modeling of self-assembled materials, which will be
shared with the broader computational materials science community.
&lt;br/&gt;Activities associated with this research will provide rich
educational experiences for graduate and undergraduate students in advanced
materials theory and modeling techniques. Through collaboration with
experimentalists, this research will iteratively proceed towards a deep
understanding of materials properties. In this integrated experimental and
computational approach, the students will gain the necessary skills to design
materials and technologies aiming at development of novel devices based on these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
computational and theoretical research and education of magnetic materials
formed by self-assembled superparamagnetic nanoparticles. The research
necessitates development of multiscale modeling tools in the PI's group, in
particular, efficient Monte Carlo codes able to describe large scale systems of
interacting nanoparticles, where cooperative forces acting between the
constituents will be parametrized by analytical calculations using known laws,
atomistic molecular dynamics simulations, and estimates of coupling strengths
present in the studied systems under dynamical conditions formed during the
self-assembly. These studies will focus on clarifying the roles played during
the self-assembly by forces acting between the nanoparticles at different length
scales, the effects of choosing different materials, sizes and shapes of the
nanoparticles, their ligands and solvents, overall charging, and external
magnetic, electric, and optical fields. This modeling approach should reveal the
spatial and magnetic structures of nanoparticle chains, ribbons, stripes,
clusters, and helices, and the origins of their arrangements observed in
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;Through development of novel modeling methods, the
project will advance the knowledge of experimentally prepared materials based on
self-assembled nanoscale components with complex interactions leading to
numerous possible final structures tunable by external fields. These materials
will form a rich platform for future generations of devices with numerous
applications. Activities associated with this research will provide rich
educational experiences for graduate and undergraduate students in advanced
materials theory and modeling techniques. Through collaboration with
experimentalists, this research will iteratively proceed towards a deep
understanding of materials properties.