* 1506820
* UNS: Microbial detoxification of cellulosic biomass hydrolysates by anaerobic removal and recovery of aromatic compounds
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Noguera, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,506.00

PI: Daniel R. Noguera Proposal Number: 1506820

A major challenge facing the production of biofuels from plant biomass is the
presence of unwanted byproducts resulting from the conversion of the cellulosic
portions of the biomass to fermentable sugars. These byproducts, primarily from
the water soluble lignin fraction of the biomass, are toxic to the fermentation
process, and reduce biofuel production yield. This project will investigate the
use of bacteria to convert these byproducts into a single aromatic compound
which can be recovered as a valued co-product in an engineered biological
process without consuming the valuable sugars. The course of this research will
also advance fundamental understanding on how related anaerobic microbial
processes affect the natural carbon cycle. Other impacts of the project include
educational activities related to mentoring high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students on topics related to the research.

The overall goal of this proposed research is to study the potential of
anaerobic bacteria to convert plant-derived aromatic compounds found in
cellulosic biomass hydrolysates into a single phenolic compound that can be
recovered as a valued co-product in a cellulosic biorefinery. The proposed
approach takes advantage of anaerobic microbial degradation of aromatic
compounds, and in particular, the metabolism of cultured members of the
Rhodopseudomonas genus that are effective at consuming a large variety of
aromatic compounds without utilizing the sugars needed for biofuel production.
It is hypothesized that the aromatics present in the hydrolysates are degraded
R. palustris through the benzoyl-CoA pathway. The proposed research will
genetically engineer this organism to transform the large diversity of aromatics
typically present in biomass hydrolysates to either benzoic acid or
p-hydroxybenzoic acid, depending on the location of the mutation. The metabolic
diversity of an existing Rhodopseudomonas collection will be tested to identify
the best strains for detoxification of cellulosic hydrolysates. Experiments will
be carried out with a mixture of the Rhodopseudomonas strains under phototrophic
and denitrifying conditions, using both corn stover hydrolysates prepared with
industrially relevant biomass loadings as well as variations of a synthetic
medium that simulates the hydrolysate. The genetic and regulatory networks of
anaerobic aromatic degradation in the best performing Rhodopseudomonas strains
will be reconstructed, using RNA-Seq and genome re-sequencing. Once the strain
has been engineered to promote the biotransformation of aromatics as benzoic
acid, the rate processes for removal of aromatic compounds from cellulosic
hydrolysates and the recovery of the benzoic acid co-product will be studied in
bioreactor systems. Research outcomes will be used to enhance content for three
courses in the Environmental Engineering program at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison.