* 1506912
* Explorations in Early Universe Cosmology and Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Daniel Boyanovsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Daniel Boyanovsky at the
Department of Physics, University of Pittsburgh. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
understanding of the early and present Universe has been revolutionized by
observations of the Cosmic Microwave Background and galaxies, supporting the
main paradigm of inflationary cosmology: quantum-mechanical fluctuations of
primordial origin seed the formation of galaxies. These observations, along with
the discovery of the Higgs Boson and the experimental confirmation of the theory
of strong and electroweak interactions, confirm the Standard Models of Cosmology
and Particle Physics. Along with these discoveries new challenging aspects
emerge: 95% of the energy density in the Universe is in the form of Dark Matter
and Dark Energy. Furthermore, neutrinos, the most elusive particles in nature,
are found to be massive and undergo mixing and oscillations among the different
types --- a phenomenon beyond the Standard Model. These discoveries bring an
unprecedented convergence of particle physics, astrophysics, and cosmology in
which observations of galaxies along with accelerator and reactor experiments
will yield insights beyond the Standard Models, with the tantalizing possibility
that a new species of neutrinos may explain Dark Matter. Professor Boyanovsky's
research program seeks a fundamental understanding on two fronts: (i) the
production and properties of a new species of neutrinos as possible Dark-Matter
candidates, and (ii) a firmer assessment of the quantum fluctuations generated
in the primordial Universe that ultimately seed the formation of galaxies. The
program is at the forefront of particle astrophysics and cosmology, complements
robust experimental and observational efforts, and is truly interdisciplinary as
it implements methods from other fields in physics. Research in these areas thus
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of
the most fundamental and stimulating endeavors of deep intellectual merit: the
discovery of novel phenomena and the understanding of the evolution of our
Universe and the origin of galaxies beginning from the smallest constituents.
Through this cross-fertilization of concepts and methods, this research program
also provides students with a broader perspective and unique opportunity to
acquire a truly interdisciplinary educational experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Professor Boyanovsky will study mechanisms
for production, evolution, and gravitational clustering of new species of
neutrinos during the early stages of the Early Universe by implementing methods
from out-of-equilibrium quantum field theory and from quantum kinetics. These
powerful methods will allow a systematic assessment of the new species of
neutrinos as a Dark-Matter candidate. In cosmology, the program will focus on a
deeper understanding of quantum processes and correlations during the
inflationary stage in the early Universe. In particular, Professor Boyanovsky
will study modifications of the spectrum of fluctuations from interactions and
pre- and post-inflationary dynamics and their potential for detection with
forthcoming observations. The study of processes during the period of rapid
inflationary expansion requires novel tools. New methods based on concepts
borrowed from quantum optics, such as quantum master equations, and out-of-
equilibrium effective field theory, will provide a deeper and more fundamental
assessment of possible observational consequences.