* 1506019
* Strongly Interacting Fermi Gases of Ultracold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Martin Zwierlein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

Our modern world is run by electrons--they flow through our smart phones,
computers, and machines to carry out a myriad of tasks from data storage and
calculations to heavy lifting when employed in electromagnets. It is surprising
that we do not better understand how electrons work together. This award
supports studies of a novel substance, an ultracold gas of strongly interacting
atoms, which behaves in many ways like electrons. For example, just like a metal
becomes "superconducting" at low temperatures and starts to conduct electricity
without resistance, the atomic gas becomes "superfluid" and atoms flow without
friction. However, scaled to the density of electrons in metals, superfluidity
would occur in the atomic gas already far above room temperature, thanks to the
strong interatomic interactions. Just like electrons, but also protons and
neutrons, the atoms belong to the class of particles called fermions, which
cannot share one and the same state. This requirement makes computations
extremely difficult and experiments indispensable to learn about the behavior of
fermions. Confined in an artificial "box" of light, the atomic Fermi gas will be
a pristine platform to learn about the equation of state of strongly interacting
fermions, as they occur in modern materials, for example high-temperature
superconductors, but also in neutron stars and nuclear matter. With the help of
these and other studies, we might be led to an understanding on how to realize
room temperature superconductivity. The project also holds the potential for
observing new states of fermionic matter such as a supersolid--a superfluid that
is also ordered like a crystal. The research will present a stimulating learning
experience for graduate students.

Ultracold Fermi gases of atoms represent a paradigmatic form of fermionic
matter, where all details of the interparticle interaction, the external
confinement, and the spin composition are precisely known and under the control
of the experimenter. This project employs a Fermi gas of Lithium-6 atoms to try
to answer long-standing questions about 1) the thermodynamics of two- and three-
dimensional systems, 2) the fate of fermionic superfluidity in the presence of
spin imbalance and 3) non-equilibrium dynamics in fermionic superfluids. The
Fermi gas will be confined in tailored potentials, in particular a homogeneous
box potential and a hybrid harmonic-box potential. Creating a homogeneous Fermi
gas will take away many of the existing experimental limitations in obtaining
accurate thermodynamic information. The box potential allows accessing new
phases of fermionic matter that have not been observed before. The Berezinskii-
Kosterlitz-Thouless superfluid in two dimensions features algebraic order that
would be masked in an inhomogeneous trap. A homogeneous 3D Fermi superfluid in
the presence of spin imbalance should spontaneously break translational symmetry
by forming a train of solitons, where excess fermions reside in the nodes of the
order parameter. This describes the famous Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) state, a
supersolid phase of matter that has not been conclusively observed despite five
decades of research. In the present work, soliton trains will be directly
created in the presence of spin imbalance, thereby engineering the LO state.