* 1506623
* SusChEM: BPA Replacement with Non-Toxic Biobased Monomers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Christopher Kloxin, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 480,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many chemicals used in the plastics industry
today are known to be toxic with adverse effects on human health and the
environment. The objective of this SusChEM research project is to replace a
well-known endocrine disrupting (ED) chemical used extensively in some plastics,
coatings and adhesives called Bisphenol-A (BPA). BPA will be replaced with new
biobased substitutes that will have the following important attributes: (a)
Renewable Resources: Be synthesized using chemicals derived from renewable
resources such as lignin, which is the world's most abundant renewable resource
from trees and plants; (b) Properties: Have similar high performance properties
to petroleum-based chemicals when used in such high volume applications as food
containers, polycarbonates, composite resins and epoxy adhesives; (c) Toxicity:
Have minimal impact on human health and the environment and have a low carbon-
footprint; (d) Cost: Be produced in high volumes at low cost for the coatings,
composites, automotive and renewable energy fields. This grand intellectual
challenge will be tackled in a unique manner using a multidisciplinary approach
which optimally integrates green chemistry, polymer science, structure-property
relations, toxicity and renewable resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this SusChEM research project is to replace a well-known endocrine disrupting
(ED) monomer, Bisphenol-A (BPA), with a library of biobased substitutes such as
Bisguaiacol-F (BGF) that will have the following important attributes: (a) Be
synthesized using monomers from renewable resources such as guaiacol and
vanillin from lignin; (b) Have similar thermal and mechanical properties to
petroleum-based chemicals when used with co-monomers in high-performance
polycarbonates, composite resins and adhesives; (c) Have low ED and
environmental toxicity and (d) Be produced in high volumes at low cost for the
coatings, composites, automotive food packaging and renewable energy fields. The
project involves synthesis, polymer characterization, materials structure-
properties, and computational and experimental toxicity studies. The greatest
sustainability impact of this research will come from providing a non-toxic
alternative to BPA from renewable resources that will both ensure future
supplies of high-performance plastics and composites while bolstering the high
volumes needed for the food packaging industry, renewable energy development in
the wind turbine industry and the next generation of composite-based, fuel
efficient, light-weight automobiles.