* 1506728
* Conference: Albany 2015:  The 19th Conversation to be held on June 9-13, 2015 at the State University of New York, Albany, NY
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Ramaswamy Sarma, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

The Albany 2015 19th Conversation will be held on June 9 - 13, 2015 at the State
University of New York at Albany. This yearly meeting is an important forum for
exchange of new research and ideas among scientists studying DNA and RNA - the
main two kinds of genetic material encoding the information about all living
organisms. This conference series pays particular attention to inclusion of
women and young, beginning scientists as speakers. Notably, the Young Scientist
Speaker Program intersperses these presentations with lectures by senior
researchers, including Nobel laureates (Nobel laureates Philip A. Sharp and
Martin Karplus are slated to be speakers at the 19th Conversation).

The Albany 2015 19th Conversation subjects include RNA
localization/structure/catalysis, DNA-protein interactions, DNA damage/repair,
DNA nanotechnology, protein folding/design/engineering, optogenetics, among
others. A defining feature of this meeting is the emphasis on biophysical and
computational approaches to these problems. The format of the meeting involves
talks from invited speakers who are leaders in the field, speakers chosen from
submitted abstracts, and poster sessions. The organizers have paid attention to
diversity, which has been of particular concern in the biophysics arena: over
40% of the speakers will be women, 35% will be junior researchers, and
participants are expected from across the US (~50%) and approximately 20
nations. The requested funds will be used to support 12-15 students and post-
docs for travel and participation costs (total costs, including registration,
housing and meals are $826 and $976 for graduate students and post-docs,
respectively). There is a well-established, transparent procedure for selecting
speakers and travel award recipients. Common housing and meals on the university
campus for all participants foster diverse and open exchanges among the
participants.