* 1506363
* Investigations in Intermediate Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Samuel Danagoulian, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 215,000.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons, protons and neutrons, are made
up of more elementary particles called quarks. The measurements that will be
carried out within this project will lead to a better understanding of nucleon
structure and a better understanding of the effects of bound quarks moving at
relativistic velocities. In particular, the proposed measurements will be used
to extract detailed radial charge distributions of the proton and neutron, and
will lead to a better understanding of how to interpret data from electron
scattering experiments on nuclei. This project will train and support both
undergraduate and graduate students, most of whom are minority students. The
program is highly interdisciplinary. It includes work with both hardware and
software i.e., electronics, nuclear detector systems, optics, computer
simulation, and data analysis. Students engaged in the program will work in a
state-of-the-art facility and interact with scientists from other nationally
recognized universities. These research activities will significantly impact the
training of the students, preparing them for entering the STEM workforce of the
21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to support research activities
at North Carolina A&amp;T State University on two programs. The first is the
nucleon Form Factors (FF) program in Hall A at Jefferson Lab which is dedicated
to the measurement of the neutron electromagnetic form factor ratio in double
polarized, quasi-elastic scattering on 3He, and separately the neutron magnetic
form factor in quasi-elastic scattering off the deuteron, both at high momentum
transfer. The second is to measure the neutron Electric Form Factor at high
momentum transfer from a deuterium target via recoil polarimetry in Hall C at
Jefferson Lab. Elastic electromagnetic Form factors of the nucleon (proton or
neutron) provide key information on the structure and the composition nature, of
the nucleon, and the dynamics of quarks and gluons. For the FF program the group
will build a photon detector array for the Gas Ring Imaging Cherenkov counter.
For the experiment of Hall C, the group is building the polarimeter veto
counters and the Delta-E detector arrays that identify the recoil proton from
the neutron scattering events in the polarimeter analyzer.