* 1506558
* Understanding the Roles of Intra- and Interchain Order on Spin-Dependent Electronic Processes in Self-Assembled Conjugated Polymer Aggregates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2019
* John Grey, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jong-In Hahm
* 10/31/2019
* USD 435,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division is supporting Professor John Grey of the University of
New Mexico to study spin-dependent processes in self-assembled polymeric
systems. Conjugated polymers are large chains consisting of a basic molecular
repeat unit that absorb light and conduct charges making them excellent
candidates for next-generation optoelectronic applications. For example, these
so-called 'plastic' semi-conductors are used in solar cells and light emitting
displays, which may eventually replace existing technologies owing to their ever
increasing efficiencies over the last 10 years and relatively low cost. The ways
in which the polymer chains fold and pack in thin films has a significant impact
on the overall performance of organic solar cells and light-emitting devices
(OLEDs). The proposed research will use new strategies to fabricate ordered
polymer structures and study how electrical charges are formed and how
electrical current can be generated more efficiently in the resulting films. In
addition, the PI and his NSF-sponsored graduate students actively participate in
ongoing educational and research infrastructure development programs at the
University of New Mexico. These activities include coordinating with the local
Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies (CINT) to increase the participation of
undergraduate and graduate researchers through collaboration with CINT staff
scientists. Students take part by writing user proposals that undergo peer
review thus providing valuable experience in designing and executing an
independent research project. Lastly, student participants gain valuable and
diverse skill sets in academic fields essential for national interests.

The interactions between and inter-conversion of electrically neutral (exciton)
and charged (polaron) states of different spin in conjugated polymer materials
has significant bearing on their overall performance in cutting-edge
optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells. Although the outcomes of these
processes are strongly dependent on polymer structure, detailed molecular level
structure-function relationships have proven difficult to obtain from
conventional polymer functional forms (i.e., bulk thin films). This difficulty
originates from morphological heterogeneity due to intrinsic molecular weight
poly-dispersity of polymers. The proposed research seeks to overcome
heterogeneity effects to understand how molecular structure regulates
interactions and inter-conversion of excitonic and polaronic spin states. Self-
assembly approaches are used to fabricate well-defined polymer aggregate
supramolecular nanostructures that can be exploited to selectively control
conformational and packing (intra- and interchain) order and electronic
coupling. The Grey group at the University of New Mexico has pioneered this
approach to direct exciton coupling and polaron interactions in polymer
aggregates that are leveraged in the proposed research to address longstanding
fundamental questions involving spin state exchange interactions and crossover
in polymeric semiconductors. This research also takes new directions for
interrogating the fates and interactions of different spin states in individual
polymer nanostructures by introducing sensitive and selective electric- and
magnetic-field dependent molecular spectroscopic and imaging techniques. The
research aims to establish design rules for reliably tuning subtle polymer chain
packing and order within supramolecular assemblies to understand and control
exchange interactions and spin state inter-conversion for improved material
performance.