* 1506321
* RUI, OP: Space-Variant Polarization States of Light
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Enrique Galvez, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,238.00

The use of beams of light, like laser beams, has been transformative in the
development of modern technologies, from telephone communications where
information is encoded in the light traveling through fibers, to laser surgery
where high light intensity is delivered to small areas of tissue. These
technologies exploit light's color or energy. Yet another property of light is
its polarization, which is invisible to the unaided eye, but seen indirectly,
for example, through the visual effects of some types of 3D movies or in
polarizing sunglasses. This research will involve preparing light beams with
polarization that varies from point to point across the beam, like in an image.
This polarization will be encoded onto individual photons (the "particles" of
light). Photons can carry a lot of information while at the same time being
quantum, or whole. Technologies that harness the quantum aspects of light and
matter have the potential to upgrade current communication technologies to ones
with substantially increased speed and capacity. Polarization also holds promise
as a tool to manipulate molecules that are chiral, or corkscrew-like. This
encompasses most organic molecules, including DNA (the double helix). This
research will test recent theories which predict that the polarization of light
can be used to segregate chiral molecules into those that spiral clockwise or
counterclockwise when viewed from a particular end (DNA always spirals one way
but not the other, for example). This is an important step in the synthesis of
medicines because molecules that spiral one way could cure while those that
spiral the other way could cause harm. This research will involve
undergraduates, introducing them to the scientific process while training them
in modern photonic technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;States of light that have
spatially variable polarization are similar to entangled quantum states in that
both are non-separable. Thus, space-variant-polarization states are well suited
for use in quantum information. They add higher dimensions to the quantum states
of photons in the following ways: they entail non-separable superpositions of
polarization (in two dimensions) and transverse spatial modes of light (in
principle, adding an infinite number of additional dimensions). Thus, spatial
modes add a higher dimensionality to the space in which to encode quantum
information onto single photons. We have developed techniques that encode and
decode these states, which due to their space-variant polarization can be
diagnosed by imaging techniques. This research will investigate the space of
photon pairs entangled in polarization and spatial modes and the nonlocal space-
variant polarization images that those states will encode. In parallel, intense
beams carrying space-variant polarization will be used to investigate a
predicted but yet unconfirmed new light force, which affects chiral molecules in
such a way that it segregates the molecules by their handedness. That is, the
light creates a field gradient that applies a force that is of opposite sign for
right and left handed chiralities. This new force, fundamentally related to
optical activity, could be of importance in the chemical synthesis of complex
organic molecules, where it is desirable to separate one chirality from the
other.