* 1506084
* RUI: Precision Weak Interaction Studies in Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Elizabeth George, Wittenberg University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

The research supported by this award will probe the limits of our understanding
of the weak interaction, one of the four fundamental forces of nature. Among
other things, the weak interaction is responsible for the type of radioactive
decay called beta decay in which a nucleus is transformed into a different
nucleus with the emission of an electron and a neutrino. The award will allow
the two scientists to carry out experiments in which they precisely measure the
energy of electrons emitted in four different nuclear beta decays. Three of
these experiments will test key aspects of the Standard Model of the electroweak
interaction, which is the theory that describes the unification of two of the
fundamental forces, the weak interaction and the electromagnetic interaction.
These precision beta decay measurements are complementary to particle collider
experiments in the search for new physics. A fourth proposed experiment aims to
resolve uncertainties in the beta decay of potassium-40, an important tool in
geochronology. The research program has the further goal and benefit of training
highly talented undergraduate physics students. Students involved will gain
experience with state-of-the-art software and experimental techniques, and will
learn to think independently and gain a variety of practical problem solving
skills. The broader impact is felt when these students enter the workforce in
STEM fields or in teaching.

The research program consists of several experiments involving the high
precision measurement of the shapes of beta spectra. In two of the proposed
experiments the goal is to provide a strong test of the Conserved Vector Current
hypothesis in the electroweak sector of the Standard Model of particle physics.
In a third experiment, the goal is to improve limits on non-Standard-Model
contributions (Fierz terms) to the description of the weak interaction. A fourth
experiment has the goal of resolving an uncertainty in the potassium-40 beta
spectrum, which is relevant to applications in geochronology. Specifically, the
carbon-14 beta spectrum will be measured using a new magnetic spectrometer at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison. This spectrometer will be nearly identical
in form to the superconducting spectrometer used to make the same measurement in
oxygen-14, enabling reduced uncertainties arising from higher order matrix
element contributions. Measurements in fluorine-20 and helium-6 will be carried
out at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory using implantation into
a scintillator detector, which will have significantly different systematic
effects from the magnetic spectrometer measurements and will be important in
achieving low thresholds. A fourth experiment has the goal of measuring the
shape of the potassium-40 beta spectrum. Knowledge of this spectrum shape is
important for a standard technique in radioactive dating of geologic samples,
but a recent report suggests the shape may not be as well understood as had been
thought. An important aspect of all these measurements is in assessing and
correcting for systematic effects through measurement and computational
modeling.