* 1506860
* Designing New Superhard Metal Borides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Richard Kaner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 920,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract The creation of, and mastery over, ever-harder materials
is an endeavor at least as old as chemistry itself. The importance of hard
materials to tools, technology, and the societies they sustain is so self-
evident that it is common archaeological practice to name pre-historic human
eras by the tooling resources employed, i.e. Stone Age, Bronze Age, etc. In the
modern age, superhard materials are needed for high-performance cutting tools,
especially for preventing tool damage when cutting advanced ceramics and
superalloys. Considering the contributions of the machining industries to the
global economy, it is clear that a new generation of cutting tools could have a
significant impact worldwide; the world market for superhard materials is
projected to reach over $20 billion within the next 5 years. Unfortunately, very
few superhard materials exist and those that do (such as diamond) need to be
synthesized under extreme pressure and heat, thus making them too expensive for
many applications. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the research team is developing
the next generation of superhard materials than can be produced at ambient
pressure - superhard metal borides. Training the next generation of materials
chemists and bringing the excitement of this project to the general public will
provide broader impact. The Principal Investigator serves as the faculty advisor
to the Student Members of the American Chemical Society at UCLA. This position
has been successfully used to reach many middle and high school students through
visits to their schools, fostering a love for chemistry for both undergraduates
and K-12 students. The co-Principal Investigator is actively developing new ways
to teach science with high school teachers through her position as the Director
of Outreach for the California NanoSystems Institute. Each graduate student
involved in this proposal helps with outreach projects and mentors
undergraduates. The undergraduates will assist the graduate students in
research, thereby increasing the future graduate student pool in materials
chemistry.

Technical Abstract Ten years ago, the Principal Investigators suggested that new
superhard materials that could be synthesized at atmospheric pressure (unlike
diamond or cubic BN) could be compositionally designed by incorporating covalent
bonding into high valence electron density metals. The covalent bonds prevent
shear and the electron density adds incompressibility. Transition metal borides
exemplify these parameters by providing high valence electron density, multiple
boron-boron covalent bonds, and unique crystallographic structures. This idea
was first demonstrated with osmium diboride (incompressible), and then with
rhenium diboride and tungsten tetraboride (both of which are superhard and
incompressible). With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the research team refines and
expands on these materials by focusing on structure and bonding motifs. The
superhard design toolkit can be enlarged by studying the mechanical properties
of new tungsten tetraboride solid-solutions to form dodecaboride-type
structures, increasing electron density through doping with iron, and by
examining the lower borides of tungsten, which complement the 3-D boron network
of tungsten tetraboride by containing 0-D, 1-D, and 2-D boron structures. This
family of compounds serves as a model system for understanding how the nature of
B-B and B-metal bonds affect hardness. Each composition can be studied using
high-pressure radial diffraction to obtain lattice plane specific information
about failure and slip. The eventual goal is the development of a third design
parameter to explicitly elucidate the structures and bonding motifs that should
most improve macroscopic mechanical properties based on microscopic bonding. In
this way, the Principal Investigators hope to uncover additional fundamental
design rules that can be used to rationally synthesize new members of an
increasingly complex family of ultra-hard yet easy to synthesize materials.