* 1506391
* Formation and Destruction of Molecular Ions in Collisions with Electrons in the Interstellar Medium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Viatcheslav Kokoouline, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

Molecular and atomic "anions" are microscopic particles formed when an electron
collides and attaches to a molecule or an atom. Anions play an important role in
various environments and have many applications in technology and fundamental
research. Among these applications are not only common products such as smoke
detectors, but also much more sophisticated devices, including fusion reactors
(devices that transform the mass of light atoms into into electricity and which
may be a major source of clean energy for the second half of the 21st century).
Anions play an important role in semiconductor technology and have important
implications for the space industry since they have been found in interstellar
space and the atmospheres of large planets. Despite its importance and many
uses, the formation of anions is poorly understood. This is because the process
involving collisions of electrons with molecules is difficult to describe
theoretically. In some situations, it is possible to overcome the lack of
theoretical understanding by doing the appropriate experiments. However,
experiments are expensive, especially if no theoretical guidance is available.
An example is the use of anions in plasmas, where experiments are expensive
because of the extreme temperatures needed for fusion to occur. The aim of this
research is to understand and model the process of molecular anion formation in
relation to the interstellar medium, planetary atmospheres, and technology
development. The proposed research program is a cross disciplinary effort
involving astrophysics, planetary science, and plasma physics. The project will
answer the question of how observed molecular anions are formed in cold plasmas
(such as in the interstellar medium or upper atmosphere of planets) and also how
fast they are formed and destroyed. The project will develop theoretical methods
that could be used by the scientific community to study other similar processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a number of atomic and molecular
physics problems related to elementary processes in molecular plasmas. Molecular
plasma evolution and decay are governed by collisions between electrons and
molecules (or molecular ions). Understanding such elementary processes is
important in studies of laboratory plasmas, planetary atmospheres, and the
interstellar medium (ISM). It also allows one to develop tools for modeling,
monitoring, and controlling plasmas, which is crucial for technological
applications such as semiconductor etching or tokamak plasma wall protection in
the divertor region. The project is mainly devoted to the study of the formation
of negative molecular ions by radiative electron attachment (REA) and
dissociative electron attachment (DEA). The study is motivated by a recent
detection of negative ions CnH- (n=4,6,8) and CnN- (n=1,3,5) in the ISM. It was
suggested that these ions (except, maybe, CN-) are formed in the ISM by REA.
Recently, a fully-quantum method to calculate the REA rate coefficients was
developed in the group and applied to study REA in CN-. A very low rate
coefficient for REA formation of CN- was found. For larger molecular ions, the
fully-quantum method will likely give rate coefficients that are also small,
which would mean that the observed ISM abundance of the ions cannot be explained
by REA. One goal of the project is to adapt the developed fully-quantum method
to other observed molecular ions: The REA mechanism of negative ion formation
will be studied using first principles. It is likely that results of this study
will lead to a revision of the accepted mechanisms of anion formation in the
ISM. Later, the developed methods will be applied to study several problems in
the chemistry of anions and cations in the interstellar medium, planetary
atmospheres, and laboratory plasmas. In particular, the question of whether the
dissociative or radiative mechanism of anion formation in the ISM is more
efficient will be addressed. The project will contribute to the development of
plasma-related databases, in particular, those used for modeling magnetic fusion
devices, planetary atmospheres, spacecraft re-entry, and interstellar medium.