* 1506036
* Undoped NaI/CsI Directly Coupled to PMTs at 77 K for Rare-Event Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Chao Zhang, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,480.00

Dark matter and neutrino properties are among the most compelling problems to be
studied in modern physics. Dark matter particles may be detected through the
observation of nuclear recoils produced when they scatter with nuclei in a
target. Nuclear recoils can also be created when neutrinos coherently scatter
with nuclei. This process, if ever observed, would help in probing non-standard
neutrino interactions, searching for sterile neutrinos, and understanding the
explosion mechanism of core-collapse supernovae. Both scattering rates increase
dramatically as the energies of nuclear recoils go down. The lower the energy
threshold of a detector, the more events can be detected.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent activity in the SURF underground laboratory
stimulated support from the South Dakota state to the expansion of PhD programs
at state universities. The activity planned with this award provides an
opportunity for a PhD student to take part in research related to underground
science. The activity may also pave the way for practical applications of
undoped NaI/CsI at 77 K in civil uses. For example, un-doped NaI at 77 K has a
much faster scintillation signal than NaI/CsI(Tl) at room temperature. It can be
used to improve the time and position resolution of PET, resulting in more
precise imaging of the concerned tissue of a patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
straight forward way to lower the energy threshold of a scintillation detector
is to increase its light yield. This award is focused on optimizing the light
readout from un-doped NaI/CsI at 77 K. Both sodium iodide and cesium iodide
doped with thallium, NaI/CsI(Tl), are excellent scintillators at room
temperature. The PI plans to couple un-doped NaI/CsI directly to the
photomultiplier tubes (PMTs), cool them down to 77 K to maximize the light
readout. Low temperature properties of the PMTs will be compared; dimensions and
various surface treatments of un-doped NaI/CsI crystals will be examined to
optimize the light collection efficiency. The goal is to verify whether it is
possible to lower the energy threshold by a factor of two by increasing the
light yield by a factor of two, compared to existing experiments utilizing
NaI/CsI(Tl) at room temperature. The decay times of scintillation light from un-
doped NaI/CsI at 77 K are quite different from those of NaI/CsI(Tl) at room
temperature. Their effect on signal and background discrimination will also be
examined.