* 1506460
* Realizing and Manipulating Magnetism and Transport in Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Herbert Fertig, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The atomically thin transition metal
dichalcogenides have recently emerged as a novel class of two-dimensional
semiconductors that possess remarkable physical properties and promising
opportunities for electronic and optoelectronic applications. While significant
progress has been made, including the fabrication of high performance devices,
most studies so far have mainly focused on the charge property of electrons.
Adding electron's spin and valley properties to charge-based electronic systems
could add substantially more exotic physical phenomena and enhanced capability
in devices. This research project aims to produce two-dimensional ferromagnetic
semiconductors using transition metal dichalcogenides and study their spin and
valley transport properties. Such ferromagnetic semiconductors host the key
ingredients for both information storage (magnetism) and information processing
(semiconductors). This research could facilitate the discovery of new physics
associated with the electron's spin and valley properties, and may create
opportunities for practical applications of novel two-dimensional materials in
the area of modern information technology. The project involves considerable
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students, including those
from the underrepresented groups. It is also integrated with a unique
educational project that aims to help improve the K-12 education in local
schools in rural areas near Indiana University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to realize and manipulate
magnetism and spin &amp; valley transport in a new class of two-dimensional
crystals, i.e. atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides. The
experimental activities include the realization of ferromagnetism by chemical
doping and defect creation, electrical probing of spin Hall effect and valley
Hall effect, and manipulation of both magnetic and transport properties through
electric field effect and elastic strain engineering. Theoretical studies are
strongly correlated with the experimental activities. The project encompasses
nanomaterial synthesis, device fabrication, magnetic characterization, Hall
effect measurement, strain engineering and theoretical modeling, and is a
collaborative effort between two Indiana University faculty. It could provide
significant insight into the roles that the charge carriers, spin-orbit
coupling, and electronic band structure play in determining the magnetic and
transport properties of these novel two-dimensional materials. The project also
involves considerable education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students, including those from the underrepresented groups, to help them develop
various skills and techniques necessary for their future careers in the broad
area of material science and nanotechnology. It is also integrated with a unique
educational project that aims to help improve the K-12 education in local
schools in rural areas near Indiana University.