* 1506412
* RUI: Studies of Heavy Quarkonium Spectroscopy with Belle and Belle II
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Todd Pedlar, Luther College
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 150,561.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland.
However, the Standard Model as it currently exists leaves open many questions
about the universe, including such fundamental questions as to why the mass of
the Higgs boson has the value it has. To answer these questions it is necessary
to go beyond the present picture of the Universe described by the Standard Model
to the next phase of development, Beyond the Standard Model (BSM).
Investigations in BSM physics probe such questions as why matter dominates over
anti-matter in the Universe, the values of the masses of the fundamental
constituents of matter, the quarks and the leptons, the size of the mixings
among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the properties of dark
matter. This project will focus on the study of the properties of special types
of particles, mesons, whose nature can reveal information about fundamental
physics beyond the Standard Model.

The work in this award will use data collected at the Belle experiment at the
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK) laboratory in Japan. Belle
is built around the interaction region of an asymmetric electron-positron
collider. The main goal of Belle is to detect particles made of a quark-anti-
quark pair, so called mesons. In particular those mesons made of charm quarks
(charmonium) and bottom quarks (bottomonium). These mesons are described in the
SM by the theory of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). By studying these mesons, one
can probe for BSM fundamental physics processes such as Charge Parity (CP)
violation, rare meson decays and possible exotic particles which could indicate
the presence of Dark Matter.

The Belle Experiment at KEK in Japan has the world's largest data samples
recorded at the bottomonium resonances in the mass range of 10 GeV, the so-
called Upsilon resonances. At these resonant energies the electron positron beam
particles have a much higher probability of producing B mesons, allowing
experimenters to acquire large statistics and observe rare phenomena . The
central aim of this RUI program of research by the Luther College group is to
study the spectroscopy of bottomonium and related states, with a focus on
resonant states that probe the limits of our understanding of Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) and improving the theoretical understanding in lattice QCD
(the techniques used to make computer predictions of QCD calculations). The
Luther College program provides an unusual opportunity for undergraduate
students to become meaningfully involved in a world-leading experiment, taking
part in every aspect of Belle data analysis, and in the development of software
tools for the upgraded experiment, Belle II.