* 1506159
* Development of Ga2O3 Based Structures for High Power Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* John Muth, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical Description: In the past decade, wide-bandgap semiconductor
materials such as GaN have enabled a variety of optoelectronic and electronic
technologies by providing new capabilities at elevated temperatures and high
voltages. This research project focuses on investigating the growth and
fundamental properties of gallium oxide (Ga2O3), a material that has not been
extensively explored for electronics. The knowledge gained in this study leads
to high-quality gallium oxide materials with a low defect density and
controllable electronic properties for high-power devices. The project topic
increases public awareness of the importance of novel materials for energy-
efficient power electronics, essential to our future quality of life. In
addition, graduate and undergraduate students are trained in materials science
research, with a special emphasis on involving underrepresented groups. The
project also fosters interdisciplinary collaborations at local, national and
international levels and transforms fundamental materials research findings to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The scientific objective
of this project is to establish the relationship between the thin-film growth
and the structural and physical properties of Ga2O3. The Ga2O3 thin films are
deposited using three complimentary growth techniques including pulsed laser
deposition, pulsed electron deposition and metalorganic vapor phase deposition
with the ultimate goal to explore its potential for power electronics. The
research explores: (i) the optimum growth conditions of beta-Ga2O3 through
homoepitaxy and heteroepitaxy; (ii) interface strategies for defect reduction;
(iii) doping options (e.g., Si, Sn and Mg) for high incorporation efficiency and
enhanced conductivities; (iv) annealing procedures for improving the structural
and electrical properties; and (v) in-plane anisotropy and its effects on
electrical and thermal transport properties. The study provides a fundamental
understanding of the roles of defects and dopants on the overall structural and
electrical properties in this wide bandgap material.