* 1506420
* Chemical and Structural Tools to Study Membrane Transport Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Nathaniel Traaseth, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 07/31/2019
* USD 576,916.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemical Measurements and Imaging Program
in the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are biomolecules used by the cell to
carry out a wide range of essential functions. The two major protein classes are
often differentiated by their water solubility. While extensive methods exist to
study the structure and dynamics of water-soluble proteins, water-insoluble
proteins that are found within the cell membrane (membrane proteins) offer
unique challenges related to their native location within lipid bilayers. In
this project investigators will develop a toolbox of experiments to characterize
the structure and motions of membrane proteins on the atomic level. The results
of these experiments will enable for a more fundamental understanding of this
class of proteins and their essential roles in biology. The broader impacts
include the participation of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students,
which will disseminate knowledge in research at the interface of chemistry,
biology, and physics. The principal investigator of the project will also co-
develop a new laboratory approach to teach historically important experiments in
biochemistry with the goal of increasing knowledge retention and achievement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the importance of membrane proteins have been
well documented in signal transduction, molecular transport, and regulation of
intracellular ion concentrations, less than 2% of known protein structures
consist of these hydrophobic biomolecules. This research project will develop
novel solid-state NMR techniques aimed at overcoming the major hurdles plaguing
the characterization of membrane protein structure and dynamics. Specifically,
the intellectual merits of this research include: (a) spectroscopic innovation
aimed at improving the sensitivity and resolution of membrane protein spectra
under native-like conditions in lipid bilayers, (b) new approaches to
characterize the orientation of membrane proteins relative to the lipid bilayer,
and (c) methods to study the mechanism of ion-coupled transport. The
developments of this research will improve the feasibility of characterizing
large, polytopic helical membrane proteins in lipid bilayers. The broader
impacts of these research activities will be to (a) increase and disseminate
knowledge in the interdisciplinary field of biophysical chemistry, (b) give
research opportunities to and mentorship of high school and undergraduate
students, and (c) emphasize the importance of clear and concise communication to
promote science and technology. The PI's activities include the participation of
undergraduate and high school students (e.g., ACS Project SEED, GSTEM, and
School of the Future) from underrepresented groups in science and technology,
including minorities, women, and those with disabilities. The involvement of
young science-minded students in research is aimed at increasing retention and
improving graduate rates in STEM fields. From an educational perspective, the PI
will also take an active role in co-developing a Historical Experiments in
Biochemistry lab course at Spelman College with Prof. Kimberly Jackson that will
emphasize important experiments in the history of biochemistry. The outcomes of
the project will be disseminated to the Faculty Resource Network at New York
University with the goal of bolstering achievement in undergraduate teaching and
biochemistry curricula across the 50+ member institutions.