* 1506839
* Chemically-functionalized nanoscale materials: tailored polymer platforms for nanomaterials surfaces and interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2019
* USD 603,567.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Todd Emrick of the University
of Massachusetts Amherst to combine state-of-the-art elements of chemistry and
nanoscale science to produce advanced structures, such as electronic devices,
that aim to to be smaller, faster, more sensitive, more efficient, and more
reliable than those on the market today. For example, polymers and inorganic
nanoparticles, once considered separate topics, are blended in this work to make
"hybrid structures", each component interacting with the other to produce
striking effects. Professor Emrick's group synthesizes polymers ("soft
materials") that markedly influence the surface electronic properties of metals
(i.e., "hard materials") onto which they are coated. This ability of soft
materials to dramatically change the properties of the materials they contact
has profound implications for improving the efficiency of numerous devices,
including solar cells that collect charge and generate power more efficiently
than conventional structures. This project additionally seeks to understand how
polymers interact with structures emerging from the latest developments in two-
dimensional materials, including those composed of ultrathin layers of carbon,
metals, and other elements. The project includes the participation of
undergraduate researchers seeking to gain their first laboratory experience, and
involves the development of "NanoDays" discussions for middle school and high
school students, intended to convey the excitement of nanoscale chemistry to the
next generation of researchers.

More specifically, the project is engaged in the synthesis of new functional
polymer platforms for integration into nanoscale assemblies and hybrid materials
structures. The polymers of interest are prepared and used for surface
functionalization of metals and 2-D materials, including: 1) polymers with
pendent dipoles, and 2) functional polymers tailored for interactions with 2-D
nanoscale structures. The dipole-inducing groups fixed pendent to the polymer
chains include zwitterionic substituents (hydrophilic dipoles), with preliminary
results describing the impact of conjugated polymer zwitterions on metals,
producing polymer solar cells with high power conversion efficiency (PCE) due to
the effect of the polymers on high work function metal electrodes. These results
translate to functionalized 2-D nanostructures, such as graphene and transition
metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), ultimately seeking polymer chemistry-enabled
device enhancement. New synthetic zwitterionic polymers will delineate the
effect of the pendent zwitterionic groups on underlying substrates, as distinct
from polymer backbone characteristics, by comparing aromatic and aliphatic
polymers having zwitterionic pendent groups. Augmenting the polymer zwitterions
is a sulfur-rich polymer platform aimed to tailor electronic properties and
result in novel architectures with improved device metrics.