* 1506459
* Fundamental Studies in Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Bradley Filippone, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,190,000.00

Precise experimental tests of fundamental particle properties are now a well-
established way to search for new laws of nature beyond our current physical
knowledge. This research program centers around two experiments to make precise
measurements of physical properties of the neutron. The first experiment, called
UCNA, is being carried out at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, using
extremely slow neutrons (ultra-cold neutrons, or UCN), which have such low
energy that they can be stored in magnetic "bottles". This allows the experiment
to make a precise measurement of the direction of the electron emitted when a
neutron decays into a proton, an electron and a particle called an anti-
neutrino. This provides needed information about the theory of radioactivity
(also called the weak nuclear force). In addition, the PI and his group are
developing equipment for a future experiment to search for a possible electric
dipole moment (EDM) of the neutron. The existence of this EDM would be a signal
of new physics beyond our current knowledge and could help to explain why the
universe is dominated by matter, whereas the Standard Model of particle physics
predicts there should be nearly equal amounts of matter and antimatter.
Participation by postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, and undergraduates is
an essential part of the research program, affording young researchers
exceptional opportunities to advance their training and education in this
frontier area of nuclear physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is primarily
focused on experimental research addressing fundamental properties of the free
neutron. In particular the group will continue analyzing data from the UCNA
experiment while also constructing hardware for a new, highly sensitive
experiment to search for the neutron's EDM. The UCNA experiment will provide a
high precision measurement of the beta-asymmetry in neutron decay using Ultra-
Cold Neutrons for the first time. This quantity allows a sensitive test of the
unitarity of the weak quark-mixing matrix and has the potential to provide
evidence for new physics beyond the Standard Model of particle interactions.
With recent improvements to the apparatus the group is poised to improve the
precision on the asymmetry down to ~ 0.3% with additional data-taking and
analysis during the period of this grant. The goal of the new EDM experiment,
called nEDM, is being done at the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory and will improve the upper limit by a factor of 100 compared
to previous measurements; observation of an EDM signals violation of time-
reversal and charge-parity (CP) symmetry, and could provide important
information related to the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the
universe.