* 1506066
* Research on Gravity and Quantum Fluctuation Effects
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Lawrence Ford, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Many of the deepest problems in theoretical physics revolve around combining
Einstein's theory of general relativity with quantum theory. The resulting
theory is called "quantum gravity" and is needed to better understand the origin
of the universe, the nature of space and time on small scales, and what happens
inside black holes. The research supported by this award will use the latest
techniques and tools to try to study quantum fluctuations and their effects,
especially rare but large spontaneous fluctuations of energy density. These are
subtle effects which are not well understood. The results of this research may
have applications to other areas of science and possibly to technology. The
large fluctuations to be studied may play a role in nonlinear optics and quantum
tunneling, two areas which have broad applications. The project will also have
educational benefits. Students will participate in the research and gain
valuable experience from doing so. The project should also produce examples
which can be used to explain some of the concepts of quantum theory and
relativity to students on a variety of educational levels.

The project will investigate the probability distributions for quantum stress
tensor fluctuations and their applications to gravity theory and other areas of
physics. Particular attention will be paid to the asymptotic form of the
distribution which governs the probability for large fluctuations. One approach
to be used is the calculation of the large moments of the distribution.
Preliminary studies indicate that this asymptotic form falls rather slowly
compared to that for a thermal distribution. This indicates that quantum vacuum
effects could dominate over thermal effects for large fluctuations, and suggests
that new physical effects might be discovered in this line of research. Several
models will be examined to look for such effects. One will be the effects of
radiation pressure fluctuations on quantum tunneling of electrons and other
particles. Another model will examine the effects of electric field fluctuations
on the propagation of light in a nonlinear material. This study is of interest
both for optical physics, and as an analog model for the quantum lightcone
fluctuations expected in a quantum theory of gravity. The project will also
examine the role of quantum stress tensor fluctuations in the early universe,
especially in inflationary models.