* 1506640
* Nanostructured Electrochemical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2022
* Wenzhi Li, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 12/31/2022
* USD 650,071.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: In this project, tin oxide-coated carbon nanotubes
are being used as a model material to investigate the mechanism for lithium
storage. Tin oxide is considered one of the most promising metal-oxide anode
materials for lithium ion batteries due to its high lithium ion storage
capacity. However, the practical application of tin oxide as anode material is
restricted by its large volume change (up to 300%) during charge-discharge
cycles, which can cause its disintegration and electrical disconnection from the
current collector. To circumvent this problem, a three-dimensional carbon
nanotube-tin oxide core-shell nanowire array is being developed by growing tin
oxide shells on vertically-aligned carbon nanotubes. The carbon nanotubes serve
as the backbone of the tin oxide shell to buffer the large volume change, while
the cylindrical tin oxide shell alleviates its degradation during the lithiation
process. This project's outcomes will be beneficial to conventional lithium ion
battery research and development, as well as on-chip micropower development. A
better understanding of the electrochemical properties is making a significant
contribution to the development and rational design of three-dimensional
hierarchical electrode nanomaterials for lithium ion batteries. Each year, these
researchers provide two public lectures to convey new knowledge of material
science and technology. A diverse set of students are engaged in the research at
Florida International University, a Hispanic-Serving Institution. Each year,
graduate and undergraduate students participate in the research, and they have
the opportunity to work at Sandia National Laboratories. Annually, 60 high
school students and 10 high school teachers are invited for on-campus lab tours
and research demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Carbon
nanotube-metal oxide core-shell composite materials are promising candidates for
application as anode materials in lithium ion batteries. However, the
electrochemical lithiation-delithiation behavior and mechanism of this type of
materials remain unclear. A comprehensive understanding of the lithiation
mechanism at the nanoscale benefits the design and development of high-
performance lithium ion battery materials. This project develops a synergistic
approach for the synthesis and characterization of vertically aligned carbon
nanotube-tin oxide core-shell nanowire arrays to manipulate their
electrochemical property at the time of synthesis. The vertically-aligned carbon
nanotube arrays are synthesized directly on a current collector using plasma
enhanced chemical vapor deposition, and the tin oxide shell on the carbon
nanotubes is synthesized via chemical-solution and vapor deposition routes. The
microstructure and the electrochemical properties of the carbon nanotube-tin
oxide core-shell nanowires are being investigated by a combination of electron
microscopy, electron energy loss spectroscopy, energy dissipation spectroscopy,
X-ray diffraction (both in situ and ex situ), charge-discharge measurement,
cyclic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and in situ
transmission electron microscopy observation of the lithiation process. The
study provides a better understanding of the lithiation mechanism of the core-
shell nanowire array and the influence of their microstructure on their
electrochemical properties. The research results provide new insight into the
electrochemical process of carbon nanotube-metal oxide composite materials in
lithium ion batteries. Graduate and undergraduate students receive research
training in advanced electrochemical material synthesis, characterization and
design.