* 1506097
* Gap State Compensation in Organic Semiconductors: The Ultra-Low Doping Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Antoine Kahn, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical description: Organic semiconductors based on small molecules or
polymers are currently being researched for applications in color displays,
solar cells, chemical sensors and flexible electronics. Despite considerable
efforts to purify materials and grow high quality films, these semiconductors
generally contain a number of defects, either physical or chemical, which affect
their electrical properties. These defects often are centers where charges,
which carry the electric current in a device, get trapped. There is therefore
considerable incentive in finding ways to either eliminate these defects or
mitigate their effect on devices. In this project, the principal investigator
develops a systematic method to neutralize the defects by introducing small
amounts of selected organic molecules in the semiconductors. These molecules,
called dopants, exchange a charge with the defects, rendering them inactive as
traps and improving considerably the electrical quality of the semiconductors.
The dopant densities must be precisely controlled down to levels of one dopant
molecule per ten thousand host molecules in order to de-activate the traps
without adding an excess of free charges to the semiconductor. The project
provides multidisciplinary research training for graduate and undergraduate
students in advanced electronics materials as well as Chemistry, Chemical
Engineering and Electrical Engineering through collaboration. The students also
benefit from the international collaboration through the Princeton partnerships
with Humboldt University (Germany) and Tokyo University (Japan).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Chemical doping is considered as a
key tool to modify the electronic structure and/or improve the performance of
molecular and polymer semiconductors in organic electronic devices. This project
employs molecular n- and p-dopants to address a fundamental problem in molecular
and polymer semiconductor films, i.e., intrinsic defects as electronic gap
states/traps, and their negative impact on charge carrier transport and
interface manipulation. Specifically, these gap states/traps slow charge carrier
transport, cause Fermi level pinning in bulk and at interfaces, and act as
recombination centers. This research seeks to apply ultra-low doping
concentration to precisely compensate and de-activate trap states in organic
semiconductors, without altering the electronic structure and 'free' carrier
density in the host matrix that is typically controlled by 'standard' doping
processes. This research requires detailed understanding of the electronic
structure of the materials involved, including the ionization energy and
electron affinity of dopants and semiconductors, the distribution and density of
gap states to be de-activated (typically in the range of 10^17-18 cm^-3), as
well as the eventual impact of ionized dopants on the host electronic structure
and the transport properties of these semiconductors. Various characterization
tools including direct and inverse photoemission spectroscopy of occupied and
unoccupied states, carrier transport measurements as a function of temperature,
secondary ion mass spectrometry for dopant distribution and device fabrication
(e.g., single-heterojunction photovoltaic cells) are implemented for this work.