* 1506277
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Experimental Investigations of Inter-Molecular forces Between Environmental Pollutants and Carbon nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Saikat Talapatra, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 220,000.00

With this collaborative award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Mesfin Tsige of the University of
Akron and Professors Xingmao Ma and Saikat Talapatra of Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale to explore solutions for removing some of the most
prevalent contaminants from water using carbon-based nanomaterials. Escalating
environmental pollution problems, such as contamination of water with hazardous
chemicals, and the need for proper restoration of clean environment, is a
global/societal concern that warrants immediate attention. This project
endeavors to help elucidate the underlying mechanisms for the interactions
between carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and organic contaminants, which is a major step
forward in developing CNT-based environmental remediation method. The project
provides training to undergraduate and graduate students in nanofabrication,
characterization and computational techniques and their applications for
contamination removal from water. The collaborative research team is also
organizing an international workshop at Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia, in
order to raise the global awareness of emerging water contamination issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, state of the art experimental tools as well
as advanced modeling are utilized to understand how different chemical
contaminants interact with different architectures of CNTs, in order to identify
the most suitable carbon nanotube based materials to remove hazardous chemicals
from water efficiently. The project studies (i) the nature of the adsorption for
organic contaminants (in particular, the ionizable compounds) with varying
molecular structures and properties, (ii) the extent to which the presence of
co-contaminants as well as key environmental parameters affect the adsorption
behavior of organic contaminants, and (iii) the adsorption kinetics for CNTs
with different sizes or curvature and surface chemistry. The research team plans
to perform systematic adsorption studies of a wide array of organic contaminants
on CNTs and conduct extensive electronic structure calculations and molecular
dynamics simulations to gain insights on the intermolecular forces taking place
at the liquid-solid interface when contaminants are exposed to CNTs in water.
The collabortive team also plans to investigate how environmental conditions
such as ionic strength and pH shift the intermolecular forces and affect the
adsorption behavior of organic contaminants onto CNTs. Built on the
understanding of the intermolecular forces, it should be possible to examine how
different surface functionalization approaches affect the adsorption behavior of
organic contaminants to CNTs, setting out defining principles for the design of
functional adsorbant nanoparticles.