* 1506503
* Specific Chemical Reporters of Glycosylation Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Matthew Pratt, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2019
* USD 396,000.00

With this Award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is supporting Professor
Matthew Pratt of the University of Southern California to develop chemical
biological tools to study protein glycosylation and its impact on function, with
a particular focus on modifications of the O-GlcNAc (O-linked
N-acetylglucosamine) variety. Many proteins are modified after they are made by
the addition of carbohydrates in a process termed glycosylation. Decades of
research showed that protein glycosylation plays key roles in cell biology,
including cell-cell connections and signaling between cells. However, the
traditional biological approaches that were used to make these discoveries have
critical limitations that prevent their application towards gaining a detailed
understanding of these important associations. To overcome these roadblocks, the
Pratt lab seeks to develope and test chemical tools that will enable the
selective visualization, identification, and characterization of protein
glycosylation. These tools will be applied to the investigation of the
biochemistry of glycosylation and are to made available to other laboratories,
as well. Additionally, we are also applying one of these chemical tools to
investigate the role of a specific type of glycosylation, termed
O-GlcNAcylation, in the death of cells. There is an important element of
undergraduate research in the chemical and biological sciences in this project,
and outreach to those in inner city schools with an eye toward increasing the
participation or members of traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolic chemical reporters of protein
glycosylation are analogues of monosaccharides that bear bioorthogonal reactive
groups, such as azides or alkynes. If these analogues are similar enough to
their natural counterparts, so as to not interfere with the chemistry of native
glycosidation enzymes, they will be metabolized by cells and incorporated into
glycans. The azides or alkynes can then undergo selective reactions, such as the
copper(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition, to install visualization or
identification tags. Unfortunately, this research group and others have shown
that the majority of previously developed reporters are not selective for one
type of glycosylation, limiting their use in biological discovery. Recently, the
first reporter that is specific for one type of glycosylation, namely O-GlcNAc
modifications, was developed in these laboratories. This project is designed to
build upon this exciting result in two ways. First, the Pratt lab will create
and characterize other reporters with the goal of identifying chemical tools
that are selective for other types of glycosylation. Second, they will use their
selective O-GlcNAc reporter to investigate the role of O-GlcNAcylation on cell-
death proteins, which are key to the fundamental biology of all metazoans.