* 1506625
* Theoretical Studies of Mechanics in Active Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Andrea Liu, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2020
* USD 460,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research, outreach and education on
mechanically-excitable active solids that lie at the interface of physics and
biology. In the beating heart, cells called cardiomyocytes contract in a
coordinated fashion to generate a contractile wavefront that crosses from one
end of the heart to the other, pushing blood through the heart with each beat.
Cardiomyocytes in the adult heart excite other cells to contract using
electrical signals involving ions. In the early embryonic heart, however, the PI
and collaborators have suggested that the mechanical stress resulting from the
contraction of a cell signals other cells to contract. The embryonic heart is
therefore a mechanically-excitable solid in which active components called
cardiomyocytes exert stresses on surrounding tissue that excite contraction of
other cardiomyocytes (and therefore the generation of more stress). Like their
simpler cousins, chemically-excitable systems, mechanically-excitable active
solids can show rich behavior, such as wavefront propagation as in the
contractile wavefront of the heart, the formation of patterns such as stripes or
spots, or chaotic behavior. In this project, the PI will investigate the physics
of mechanically-excitable active solids such as the embryonic heart.

Mechanically-excitable active solids are a class of active matter--systems that
contain many small components, for example cardiomyocytes, that interact
strongly with each other and that supply energy to the system. The physics of
active matter can be fundamentally different from the physics of traditional
passive matter, in which individual microscopic components cannot supply energy.

This award supports training physics graduate students who, in the course of
their research, will bring together ideas and techniques from many subfields of
condensed matter physics and interact closely with biologists. Their work will
not only broaden the study of active matter within physics, but will bring a new
perspective to the workings of the heart and may lead to the design of new
synthetic materials as active solids.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on active matter at the
interface with biology. Active matter is a form of matter maintained out of
equilibrium by energy injected at the microscopic scale. A canonical example is
an active fluid of motile particles. This project focuses on excitable active
solids, in which constituents inject energy by generating stress. An example is
the beating heart, in which cardiomyocyte cells inject energy into the tissue by
contracting in a coordinated fashion to create a contractile wavefront that
traverses the heart with each beat to pump blood. In the adult heart, the
contractile wavefront is understood as wavefront propagation in a chemo-
electrical excitability problem. Ions from one cell trigger calcium release in
the next cell to initiate its contraction. In the embryonic heart, however, the
principal investigator and collaborators proposed that the contractile wavefront
is a mechanical excitability phenomenon: stress is generated when a cell
contracts, effectively diffuses through elastoviscous tissue, and triggers ion
release in the next cell to cause its contraction. The heart exhibits the
reverse energy cascade characteristic of active matter: energy injected at the
cellular scale by cardiomyocyte contraction is transduced, via the nonlinear
dynamics of wavefront propagation, up to the macroscopic organ scale, where it
leads to a collective function - the pumping action of the heart.

This theoretical project has three main goals: (1) to develop a theoretical
description for active solids in which energy is injected at the microscopic
level via stress generation; (2) to construct a coherent theoretical framework
for mechano-electrical reaction-diffusion in the heart that is consistent with
experimental observations, and to understand its implications for development
and evolution of the heart; (3) to understand mechanical reaction-diffusion
systems more generally, using theoretical techniques developed in the nonlinear
dynamics community for chemical reaction-diffusion systems. Here the aim is to
calculate phase diagrams for steady-state behavior and transient phenomena. Such
a phase diagram might have regions denoted, wavefront propagation, pattern
formation, temporal oscillations, or quiescent behavior.

This award will support physics graduate students to work at the interface of
soft matter physics, mechanobiology and physiology. In the course of their
research, these students will bring together ideas and techniques from many
subfields of condensed matter physics and interact closely with biologists.
Their work will not only broaden the study of active matter within soft matter
physics, but will bring a new perspective to early developing and early evolving
hearts and may lead to the design of new synthetic materials as active solids.