* 1506991
* Collaborative Research: Investigating jamming in iceberg-choked fjords with field observations, laboratory experiments, and numerical modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Dennin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2019
* USD 223,467.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Condensed Matter
Physics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Affairs in MPS and the Artic
Natural Sciences Program in GEO. The polar regions of our planet are home to
many dynamic physical processes. Although the word ?glacier? may invoke
connotations of stoic and slow-moving mountains of ice whose changes are
indistinguishable to the eye, this is not always the case. Among the most active
regions of glaciological activity are the massive coastal fjords in Greenland.
Rivers of ice which are 5-10 km wide and up to 1 km deep are rapidly flowing
towards the ocean. At the end of these glaciers, where the ice meets the sea,
icebergs are constantly breaking off or ?calving? into the ocean. Approximately
30-50% of all ice discharged into the ocean occurs through calving, as opposed
to other mechanisms such as melting. Unfortunately, the physical processes which
control calving are not well understood. One possible influence is the presence
of an ice mélange, which is a floating layer of icebergs and sea ice extending
many kilometers away from the front of the glacier. The mélange is essentially a
large-scale, quasi-two dimensional granular material, which can potentially have
a large impact on calving rates and our ability to detect iceberg calving. This
collaborative project aims to determine the correct physical description of ice
mélange mechanics, as well as its influences on iceberg calving. This is
accomplished through an interdisciplinary combination of satellite imagery,
small-scale laboratory experiments, and theoretical modeling. By bringing
together ideas in condensed matter physics to study large-scale glaciological
processes, the project sheds new light on the underlying mechanisms which shape
the polar regions of our planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is to characterize the rheology of ice mélange, a
closely-packed granular material composed of icebergs and sea ice that is found
in fjords throughout Greenland. Ice mélange is unique among granular materials
in that it contains exceptionally large clasts (10's to 100's of meters in scale
in all directions), is constrained to flow in a quasi-two-dimensional setting,
and floats in its own melt. Seasonal variations in ice mélange motion and extent
are well-correlated with seasonal variations in iceberg calving rates,
suggesting that ice mélange is an important control on outlet glacier and ice
sheet stability. The dynamics, energetics, and oceanographic consequences of ice
mélange are essentially unexplored. The research team?s aim is to study ice
mélange by combining analysis of field observations with laboratory experiments
and numerical modeling. Satellite imagery, along with previously collected time
lapse photography and terrestrial radar data, is analyzed to produce ice mélange
velocity fields and quantify iceberg-size distributions. This work provides new
insights into ice mélange kinematics and composition, and serves as a benchmark
for laboratory and numerical modeling experiments. In addition, experiments are
conducted in which synthetic icebergs in a water tank are pushed by a model
terminus. These experiments study jamming of particles that model icebergs
during and between calving events to investigate stress transmission through ice
mélange. Finally, numerical experiments are performed in which ice mélange is
simulated using discrete particle and continuum models adapted from previous
work on granular materials. The model rheology can be adjusted to find a
description of ice mélange that is consistent with field observations and
laboratory experiments.