* 1506040
* Pilot Project to Increase Applications to Ocean Science REU Programs from Underrepresented Minority Students through Representation and Participation at LSAMP Meetings
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Matthew Gilligan, Institute for Broadening Participation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 10/31/2016
* USD 29,907.00

An analysis of the graduation rates of undergraduates and graduate students with
degrees in the ocean sciences reveals that very few students of color pursue
these degrees, and the low participation rate is not improving. For example,
while the overall percentage of minority-earned doctoral degrees has increased
significantly in the past ten years, the number of doctoral degrees awarded to
minorities in Ocean Sciences has remained level. The PIs propose a pilot project
with the goal of increasing the participation of under represented students in
the field of ocean sciences.

Students who participate in a research experience, and particularly in an REU
program that has a strong mentorship component, are more likely to attend
graduate school. Threfore, the PI's will work to increase the rate at which
under represented students apply to OCE-funded Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) programs. The PI's will recruit students at a series of
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) conferences, providing
information about the REU programs, encouraging students to apply to these
programs and supporting students in the application process. The PI's will
engage students who express an interest in marine sciences in virtual workshops
and webinars via the Institute for Broadening Participation (IBP) and will help
these students connect with OCE REU program directors. They will also provide
networking opportunities to connect LSAMP faculty with OCE REU faculty to
encourage student applications to the REU programs.