* 1506212
* Controlling Valley and Spin-Orbit Coupling in Graphene and Bilayer Graphene Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jun Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 438,190.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore the physics and
applications of graphene and bilayer graphene, which consists of one or two
layers of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice. The arrangement of the
carbon atoms leads to unique electronic properties that may become the
foundation of a new generation of low-power nanoelectronics and novel types of
electronics. These new devices would utilize the electron spin, a quantum
mechanical property of electrons, rather than the electron charge, as in
conventional electronics. The research activities will prepare graduate students
and undergraduate students with advanced technical, methodological and
communication skills to contribute to the advancement of nanoscience and
nanotechnology in academic or industrial settings. The research team interacts
with high-school students (grade 10-12) through a 3-hour workshop combining
lecture, demonstration, lab tour and hands-on activities to introduce the
properties and applications of atomically thin materials. The workshop is
offered to participants through partnership with the Penn State Science U
Leadership Summer Camp and the Upward Bound (UB) and Upward Bound Migrant (UBM)
programs, which specially target students from low-achieving PA school
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Spin, valley,
layer and their intimate couplings are distinguishing characteristics of
hexagonal 2D crystals, the exploitation of which can lead to new fundamental
insights as well as potential applications. The research activities include two
thrusts that aim to control the valley degree of freedom in bilayer graphene
nanostructures and engineer local spin-orbit coupling in graphene respectively.
The first thrust employs dual split-gated devices to study the exotic properties
of a new 1D edge mode (kink state) arising at the line junction of two
oppositely biased bilayer graphene. Studies of the kink state in the presence of
a magnetic field and superconducting electrodes illuminate its interplay with
quantum Hall magnetism and proximal superconductivity. The second thrust
utilizes adatom functionalization, in particular fluorination, to engineer local
spin-orbit coupling in graphene and investigates its impact on spin transport
and spin Hall current generation. The research activities combine precision
nanolithography, assembly of high-quality 2D material stacks, and low-
temperature transport, magneto-transport and spin transport measurements.