* 1506969
* Control and Thermodynamics of Nanoscale Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Christopher Jarzynski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2019
* USD 496,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological progress has enabled
scientists and engineers to build and manipulate physical systems at the level
of individual atoms and molecules. At these small scales the laws of Nature are
often strange and counter-intuitive. This award supports theoretical research
and education aimed to elucidate how the dynamics of such systems can be
controlled, and to deepen understanding of how the laws of quantum physics and
thermodynamics combine to determine the behavior of nanoscale
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum physics governs the behavior of atoms and
molecules, while thermodynamics was developed to describe how systems exchange
energy and matter with one another. Combining the two fields, particularly for
systems that are far away from the steady state of thermal equilibrium is a
challenging area of research. The activities funded by this award will address
three aspects of this problem. One project involves developing theoretical
methods for controlling a quantum mechanical system so that it reaches a desired
final state in a fixed amount of time. This will involve theoretical tools
borrowed from quantum physics, classical mechanics and thermodynamics. The
second project is aimed to explore how thermodynamic concepts such as heat and
work apply to systems that are governed by the laws of quantum physics. In the
third project, the PI will investigate the role played by the interactions
between a small system and its surroundings, in the thermodynamic behavior of
the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These activities will involve students as well
as postdoctoral researchers, providing training in theoretical methods at the
intersection of quantum physics and
thermodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental theoretical
research and education related to the coherent quantum control and the
thermodynamics of systems at atomic and molecular length scales. The first
project addresses the new and exciting field of shortcuts to adiabaticity, where
the aim is to guide a system to evolve as if it were being manipulated very
slowly, even when the manipulation occurs rapidly. The PI will develop
strategies that apply the tools of classical and statistical physics to design
such quantum shortcuts. The second project undertakes a careful analysis of the
relationship between classical and quantal definitions of work, with an emphasis
on using semiclassical methods to identify the impact of quantum interference
between classical trajectories. The third project involves investigating how the
first and second laws of thermodynamics "scale down" to describe the behavior of
systems that are strongly coupled to their thermal surroundings. The PI will
explore microscopically precise definitions of quantities such as internal
energy, entropy and volume that preserve the structure of the first and second
laws, without needing to introduce corrections to account for strong system-
environment interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Develop a broadly applicable methodology for
using classical mechanics to design protocols for the manipulation of coherent
quantum systems. This methodology will be useful in experimental settings where
many of the current methods, based on scale-invariant driving, do not
apply.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Provide a deeper understanding of the emergence of
classical thermodynamics from quantum thermodynamics, for isolated systems
driven by the variation of external parameters. In particular, it will clarify
the role of quantum interference on the second law of thermodynamics and on
nonequilibrium fluctuation relations.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Establish a consistent,
microscopic thermodynamic framework for describing the interchange of energy
between a system and its surroundings, when the two are sufficiently strongly
coupled that the interaction energy itself cannot be ignored. This framework
will be useful in describing the thermodynamics of biomolecules, which interact
strongly with their aqueous surroundings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports graduate student and postdoctoral level training in the methods of
theoretical and computational statistical physics.