* 1506800
* Control and Design of Two Dimensional Silica Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 475,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) materials that can be
thinned down to atomically thin sheets represent the ultimate in miniaturization
while displaying unique physical and chemical properties. Varying how the atoms
are arranged will allow further control of the physical and chemical properties,
but has been difficult to achieve in a systematic way. With the recent discovery
of a 2D form of silicon dioxide (SiO2), new possibilities for single sheet
materials have arisen. The flexibility of the linkages between the SiO2 building
blocks provides a pathway to realize atomic arrangements hypothesized for 2D
materials, but thus far not realized in a controlled way. The ability to
substitute a wide range of elements for Si in SiO2 networks further offers the
opportunity to control chemical properties and induce new structures. This
project integrates theory and experiment to develop rules for controlling how
the SiO2 building blocks organize to form structures. The theory identifies
combinations of dopants and growth conditions most likely to produce unique
structures, while the experiments are directed towards realizing the materials
and characterizing their local structural and chemical properties. With the
support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, the goals are to understand how the properties of the
building blocks along with applied external stresses dictate the atomic
arrangement of 2D materials, and thus their functional properties. Applications
enabled by control of two-dimensional silicon dioxide structures include highly
efficient, atomically thin membranes for separating molecules based on their
size, controlled-thickness insulating layers for assembling electronic and
optical devices by stacking different atomic sheets, and model catalysts. The
results will be integrated into course material starting at the high school
level where the graphical nature of images of the atomic structures provide an
engaging introduction to the differences between crystals and glasses and the
interrelationships between processing, structure, and properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The recent discovery of 2D
SiO2 bilayers created new possibilities for single sheet van der Waals
materials. The open structure and high stability provides opportunities to
design the ultimate membrane for molecular separations, while the flexibility of
the network links can lead to a rich structural chemistry that may allow
structures postulated for other tri-coordinated networks to be realized. First
principles theory will be used to identify combinations of strain, dopant,
dopant concentration, and coverage that provide a large energetic push away from
the hexagonal six-membered ring structures favored for pure, unstrained 2D SiO2.
The target structures will be synthesized using molecular beam epitaxy and
characterized using scanning probe microscopy (SPM). Initial experiments will
inform the level of theory needed to accurately model the system (e.g., the
treatment of bilayer-substrate interactions), thereby providing a feedback
mechanism to improve the predictive capabilities of the modeling. Scanning probe
methods will be employed that combine tunneling and force measurements to yield
the positions of surface Si, O, and dopant atoms and force and tunneling spectra
above every atom. This extensive information together with theory will reveal
how strain due to lattice mismatch and doping is relaxed, which in turn
influences the chemical interactions of the bilayer with its surroundings. By
combining theory with state-of-the-art SPM this project will yield a fundamental
understanding of the roles played by network flexibility, strain, surface and
interfacial tensions, and dopant properties in determining the diversity of 2D
structures that can be achieved.