* 1506825
* Lattice dynamics of strong negative thermal expansion materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Jason Hancock, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 10/31/2018
* USD 381,979.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Thermal expansion is a property that all
materials possess and most commonly occurs as a volume increase in response to a
temperature increase. However, recent new materials discoveries have revealed
instances of negative thermal expansion (NTE), a peculiar phenomenon of heat-
induced volume contraction. NTE materials are not currently used in industrial
contexts, but hold strong application potential in stabilizing telecommunication
components, as elements of electronic devices benefiting from thermally
controlled stresses, and the potential to form rigid composite structural
materials with engineered thermal properties. This project uses light- and
X-ray-based spectroscopy to study excitations driving the NTE effect in a
representative set of materials with the goal of achieving an understanding
capable of leading new material discovery efforts. Training of the next
generation's high-tech workforce through both graduate and undergraduate
participants performing experimental activities at Connecticut's flagship state
university and national user facilities is an integrated component of the
project. In addition, a novel curricular effort offers junior and senior science
majors the opportunity to develop demonstrations suitable for presentation on a
document camera platform in large lecture halls for use in introductory physics
classes serving science and engineering freshmen and sophomore students.
Educational development for students and by students, guided by departmental
faculty and staff, is a central theme of the Doc-cam demos
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The past 10 years
has seen an accelerated rate of discovery of materials with robust and sizable
negative thermal expansion (NTE). The goal is to advance our understanding of
NTE associated with dynamics of tightly bound, stiff molecular units and local
atomic arrangements allowing for strong nuclear lattice fluctuations in a
direction transverse to a structural linkage defining the unit cell. Because
thermal expansion of any sign is necessarily an excited state effect and
involves anharmonic interactions, the basic science motivation surrounds the
likely possibilities that strong quantum fluctuations, rotational tunneling, and
many-body nonlinear localization play a role in this remarkable effect.
Inelastic X-ray scattering, infrared and terahertz absorption spectroscopy, and
thermal transport measurements will be performed in a select subset of recently
discovered NTE materials whose structures have related features, including
members possessing the important perovskite structure. Detailed study of
Brillouin zone boundary and zone-center modes believed to contribute will be
assessed and compared across materials classes. Educational activities involve
training a new generation of scientists through a novel project permitting
advanced science majors to exercise their creative potential by developing new
document camera demonstrations for use in large lecture settings. This
curricular effort flips the demo room in the spirit of peer instruction and
other recent science teaching innovations.