* 1506027
* Strong Gravitational and Electromagnetic Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Samuel Gralla, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

The General Theory of Relativity discovered by Einstein tells us that the
familiar, everyday force of gravity is a manifestation of something much
stranger: the bending of the geometry of space-time by matter. Many of the most
dramatic of observed astrophysical phenomena, seen through the windows of
electromagnetic radiation or gravitational effects, occur in regions of strong
gravitational and/or electromagnetic fields. Phenomena like relativistic jets
outpouring from centers of galaxies or those marking the death of a massive star
in a supernova explosion are examples of scenarios that can only be explained by
carefully describing gravity and electromagnetic fields simultaneously. The
magnetic field of the neutron star that results from a supernova explosion can
be a billion times stronger than the strongest human-made magnets. Its
gravitational field can be so strong that a spoonful of matter at the neutron
star surface can weigh as much as a mountain on Earth. This award supports
research on the strong-field environments of neutron stars and black holes,
objects for which these strong-field phenomena are especially
prominent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific systems to be studied are point
masses orbiting black holes and magnetically dominated (force-free) plasmas near
stars and black holes. The techniques are mainly analytical as opposed to
numerical. Self-force effects on a point mass orbiting near a rapidly spinning
black hole will be computed and used to inform astrophysical source modeling as
well as thought experiments testing the cosmic censorship conjecture. Equations
for the self-force will be formulated in alternative gauges and alternative
gravitational theories. New force-free solutions will be found by exploiting
spacetime methods and developing new perturbative techniques, with an overall
goal of developing a broad understanding of force-free electrodynamics and its
application to electromagnetic energy extraction from astrophysical black holes.
The project will contribute to the training of Ph.D. students, and the research
results will be disseminated to the public through research publications as well
as news articles and public lectures where appropriate.