* 1506104
* Magnetoelastic Control of Magnetization Dynamics in Nanomagnet Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Holger Schmidt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 380,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Magnetism is at the heart of numerous every-day
applications. Recently, arrays of densely packed nanomagnets have emerged as the
prototype vision for spintronic devices with applications in data storage,
memory, and sensing. It has recently been shown that the geometric design of
these arrays can impact the dynamic magnetic response because the magnetism
interacts with the physical vibrations of the nanoelements. This effect is due
to magnetoelastic coupling to optically generated, propagating surface-acoustic
waves. Such thermally induced magnetoelastic coupling can be particularly
important for emerging techniques such as heat-assisted magnetic recording and
all-optical magnetization switching. The goal of this project is to fully
understand these phenomena, maximize them, and to explore their utilization for
energy-efficient all-optical switching. This research has direct impact on our
fundamental understanding of nanomagnet materials and properties, specifically
the coupling between magnetic and elastic degrees of freedom. The project also
has multiple educational components, including graduate student training in the
fields of nanomagnetism and ultrafast optics, involvement of undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups through the UC LEADS and CAMP (California
Alliance for Minority Participation) programs, and outreach activities to high
school students and local K-6 schools.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Magnetoelastic coupling to propagating surface-acoustic waves
can strongly affect the magnetization dynamics of a nanomagnet array, even for
relatively weakly magnetoelastic materials. Periodic arrays are the prototype
layout for emerging spintronic devices, but they also act as phononic crystals
whose resonances affect the magnetization. Such effects need to be carefully
considered, especially for emerging optically assisted techniques that excite
phononic modes due to the large thermal energies involved. This project
comprises a comprehensive investigation of magnetoelastic control of nanomagnet
dynamics in dense arrays with the goal of obtaining a complete understanding of
the extent to which the geometry of the nanostructured array can determine its
magnetic properties. The transformative impact of this project will be to answer
this question and to demonstrate several scientific firsts. The project is
designed around three thrusts: The first thrust addresses parameter optimization
of magnetic materials. Nanomagnet material, shape and array geometry are
systematically varied in order to demonstrate that the frequency of the
magnetization precession can be completely determined by the array geometry,
independent of applied field. The focus is on incorporation of materials with
large magnetoelastic coefficients. The second thrust focuses on exploring and
optimizing nonlocal excitation of magnetization dynamics via optically generated
surface acoustic waves. The goal is to demonstrate selective excitation and
detection of a single nanomagnet with a surface-acoustic wave (SAW). This
represents the first observation of single nanomagnet dynamics in an array under
non-thermal, well-defined excitation with a magnetoelastically generated
external field. The focus of the final thrust is to explore a path towards
devices by demonstrating that SAW-delivered mechanical energy can assist in
magnetization switching. The goal is to show a reduction in the optical fluence
required for all-optical switching of FeTb nanomagnets. Being able to non-
thermally affect the requirements for optical switching could have significant
impact on the potential use of all-optical switching for data storage and other
applications.