* 1506311
* Gravitational Waves from Compact Objects
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Benjamin Owen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 60,000.00

The General Theory of Relativity discovered by Einstein tells us that the
familiar, everyday force of gravity is a manifestation of something much
stranger: the bending of the geometry of space-time by matter. Among the key
predictions of the theory, which includes the expanding Universe and the
existence of black holes, is the existence of gravitational waves (GW): ripples
moving at the speed of light in the geometry of space-time caused by the fast
motion of large masses. Although well tested in terms of their indirect effects
on binary systems of compact stars, the direct detection of gravitational waves
incident on Earth poses an outstanding challenge. The scientific rewards from
achieving this ability would be enormous - ranging from probing the extreme
dynamics of exploding stars to gleaning information about the state of the
Universe almost at the moment of the Big Bang itself. The effort to enable this
new window on the universe has occupied several decades of experimental and
technological developments that have pushed the boundaries across diverse fields
in the physical sciences. The year 2015 will mark a highly-anticipated watershed
moment for gravitational-wave physics: The two advanced Laser Interferomenter
Gravitational Wave Observatory (aLIGO) detectors will start their initial data
taking runs, followed by the commissioning of the advanced Virgo gravitational
wave observatory in Europe. The sensitivity of the aLIGO detector will be ramped
up to become about ten times better than that of the first-generation detectors,
opening up a spatial volume for observing GW sources that will be 1000 times
larger than before. This award supports the first searches of Advanced LIGO data
for gravitational waves from the youngest neutron stars in the galaxy. As they
spin down over the years, these stars can tell us about the properties of matter
under the most extreme conditions since the Big Bang: supernuclear densities,
relativistic speeds, superconducting and superfluid at a hundred million
degrees. One day they may also be used to test whether Einstein's general theory
of relativity is the correct description of gravity at astrophysical
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bulk of the work involves the upgrade and
implementation of a data analysis code pipeline to perform matched filtering
searches for continuous gravitational waves from young supernova remnants.
Improvements in the code and data will allow more sensitive searches than ever
before. This code will also be adapted for the purpose of detector
characterization to assist with improving the LIGO interferometers' performance
over the course of their first science run, particularly with regard to narrow-
band spectral artifacts.