* 1506854
* Catalysts and Reagents for Amide Bond Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Paramjit Arora, New York University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2018
* USD 490,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Paramjit Arora of New York University is developing new
catalysts for the synthesis of the amide bond, the linchpin bond in peptides,
which are a basic structural building block of proteins. Biological systems make
heavy use of peptides and proteins to carry out complex tasks at the molecular
level, and they are composed multiple amide bond subunits linked together in a
long chain. The use of peptides and proteins as chemical reagents and
therapeutics necessitates their production in large amounts; however, the
synthesis of these compounds remains inefficient and wasteful. This project is
building upon classical and contemporary methods for amide bond formation to
enable a more efficient and greener synthesis of proteins and other important
compounds that contain amide bonds. This research should yield valuable
strategies and reagents for studying chemical processes in biology and for
medicinal chemistry. The project also includes teaching activities to train
students at the interface of organic chemistry and chemical biology. Students
engaged in this work are gaining a broad experience in fundamental chemical and
biochemical techniques with potential future applications in biomedical
technologies. A collaboration with Professor Amy Brown of Neumann University,
Department of Chemistry is making progress on establishing a one-semester
research-oriented capstone course at that university.

Professor Arora is developing new organocatalysts for amide bond formation that
are based upon a chemoselective ligation strategy for the synthesis of native
amide bonds in proteins. Chemoselective reactions for amide bond formation have
transformed the ability to access synthetic proteins and other bioconjugates
through ligation of fragments. In these ligations, amide bond formation is
accelerated by transient enforcement of an intramolecular reaction between the
carboxyl and the amine termini of two fragments. Building on this principle,
Professor Arora is developing aldehyde capture ligation that parlays the high
chemoselective reactivity of aldehydes and amines to enforce amide bond
formation between amino acid residues and peptides that are difficult to ligate
by existing technologies. Aldehyde capture ligation utilizes an o-benzaldehyde
selenoester to enforce an intramolecular reaction between the carboxyl and the
amine partners. The key advantage of aldehyde capture ligation is that the
method is applicable, in principle, to most any N-terminal amino acid residue
for amide bond formation, because the capture step is changed from thioester
exchange, as in native chemical ligation, to aldehyde-amine condensation. The
methodologies are being applied to the synthesis of small ring, cyclic peptides.