* 1506502
* Explorations in High Energy Physics at the Large Hadron Collider with the ATLAS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Joshua Moss, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

This project is devoted to research using ATLAS, a multi-purpose particle
physics detector situated around the 27 km ring of the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) located at CERN, the European particle physics laboratory near Geneva,
Switzerland. The goal of the project is to explore the fundamental nature of the
universe in order to understand its evolution from the hot, dense soup of energy
and matter existing soon after the Big Bang to the cool, diffuse universe we see
today. The interactions and evolution of the fundamental constituents of the
universe are well described by the Standard Model (SM) of Particle Physics that
has been very successful in predicting the behavior of nature in the currently
available energy regimes. The LHC is expected to restart operations in 2015
after a two-year upgrade program that allows the proton-proton collisions to
reach an energy of 13 Tera-electron-Volt, almost twice the highest energy yet
produced in any human-made device. This energy regime will allow for further
understanding of the SM, exploration of the properties of the newly discovered
Higgs Boson and the search for undiscovered particles and phenomena not
described by the SM, yet believed to exist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research project Professor Moss and his group at California State University,
Sacramento (Sacramento State) will probe the electroweak sector of the SM using
data collected ATLAS to test the SM at the new energy regime and to search for
new phenomena. They propose to study couplings of Higgs Bosons to the electro-
weak Z Bosons. Moss and his group, along with their colleagues in ATLAS will
perform studies to optimize the performance of the ATLAS Pixel Detector and
Diamond Beam Monitor and develop software and user interfaces for the
supervisory controls and data acquisition of the ATLAS Detector.