* 1506482
* Quantum Gases in an Optical Superlattice
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 570,803.00

In recent years, various inventions and innovations have made it possible to
produce dilute gases of atoms at extremely low temperature, essentially the
coldest matter in the known Universe. By reducing the temperature of these
gases, one reduces their disorder, allowing for two exciting scientific
prospects. First, the low disorder implies that measurements made on conditions
that effect the atomic gas--such as electric and magnetic field, or acceleration
and rotation--will have very little noise, allowing for more precise
measurements. Second, the atomic gas can be manipulated in a way that the
interactions between atoms in the gas is similar to the interactions between
electrons in a solid material. Through such mimicry, one can investigate
properties that materials have been predicted to exhibit, but that have been
obscured due to the excess disorder and temperature of real materials. This
project promotes the progress of science and technology by advancing toward both
these prospects. The principal and co-investigator, along with graduate students
and postdocs, will develop techniques that allow for precise measurements with
and of atomic gases. The researchers will also investigate properties of atomic
gases that mimic the magnetic properties of complex materials, contributing in
general to the understanding of magnetism in materials and devices that underlie
so much of today's (and tomorrow's) information technology. The central
involvement of young scientists in this work, including several from groups that
have been traditionally underrepresented in the physical sciences, directly
contributions toward the training of a diverse scientific workforce in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project focuses on the
behavior of cold gases of rubidium and potassium atoms that move within the
spatially periodic intensity pattern generated at the intersection of several
coherent beams of light. The optical pattern generates a spatially periodic
potential that resembles the crystal potential in which electrons move in solid-
state materials. The optical configuration can be rapidly tuned, resulting in
various dynamics within the atomic gas. Such dynamics, which are the subject of
the present investigation, allow for coherent control of atomic motion within
the optical potential (relevant to precision measurements through matter-wave
interferometry) and also reveal properties of materials in which the crystal
structure tends to inhibit order and transport (geometric frustration, relevant
to materials science). To improve one's ability to measure such dynamics, this
project also investigates how methods of computational imaging (the improvement
of imaging through computational methods) may be imported to the study of atomic
gases. Finally, spin dynamics are used as a tool to measure how atoms diffuse
within complex optical potentials, through an adaptation of methods used in
magnetic resonance imaging, and also to isolate the effects of geometric
frustration on atomic motion.