* 1506915
* Collaborative Research: Variable Selection for Remedying the Effects of Uncontrolled Variation in Data Driven Predictions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Barry Lavine, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 01/31/2019
* USD 259,999.00

In a project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Steven Brown and Karl Booksh, both from the
University of Delaware, and Professor Barry Lavine of Oklahoma State University,
seek to improve mathematical and statistical modeling of real-time measurement
of chemical species. This research is aimed at reducing the cost-of-ownership of
calibration and classification models that have become increasingly common in
process monitoring, quality assurance and quality-by-design applications by
studying the ways in which these models fail and by searching for ways to
stabilize the modeling. The broader impacts of this project include the
improvements in efficiency and performance from improved and more reliable
chemical models for production and quality assurance, as well as the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in data analysis, a skill in very high
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative effort aimed at
investigating fundamental issues important to chemical modeling in modern
measurement science: (1) stabilizing calibration and classification
relationships in the presence of unexpected contributions, (2) making
calibrations and classifications as robust as possible to additional sources of
background, and (3) improving classification and calibration models measured
over multiple instruments. Methods for automated identification of the portions
of the chemical responses that best model the system are being investigated.