* 1506006
* Structured Epitaxial Graphene and Semiconducting Graphene  for Advanced Digital Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Walter De Heer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Graphene is a single sheet of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb structure and
it spontaneously forms on silicon carbide (the same material used for household
LED lighting). Research at the Georgia Institute of Technology has shown that
this form of graphene can be used to make transistors, which are fundamental
components of solid-state electronics. However, currently graphene transistors
are limited to non-digital applications because of a fundamental physical
property of graphene. The research proposed here overcomes this fundamental
problem using innovative modifications of graphene, thereby enabling graphene
transistors to be used in digital electronics. If the objectives of this
proposal are successfully achieved then graphene may have a significant impact
in the electronics industry by providing an alternative to the ubiquitous
silicon-based electronics. Graphene-based electronics may be faster and more
energy-efficient than silicon-based electronics, and they are therefore of
significant importance for society.

This research aims to develop digital graphene electronics on a silicon carbide
platform. The key goals are to demonstrate: (1) high on-to-off ratios in field
effect transistors (2) field effect transistor switching speeds that are
comparable to or exceed those of silicon based transistors. (3) low power
consumption. The scope of the research is presented below; For 5 decades,
digital electronics has seen a relentless exponential growth in performance, but
the growth will soon end, due to the physical limitations of silicon, on which
the electronics industry almost exclusively relies. This "end of Moores law"
scenario has been looming for some time, and no viable alternatives have been
found. As first proposed by researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology
in 2003, graphene that is epitaxially grown on electronics grade silicon carbide
is one of the most promising contenders to succeed silicon. This research aims
to provide a proof of principle, by demonstrating that high-speeds and low power
field effect transistors are feasible. The methods and approaches to be used
This research builds on a decade of work at the Georgia Institute of Technology
in the field of epitaxial graphene. In that time, high-speed transistors were
demonstrated. Due to a lack of a bandgap in graphene, however, these transistors
cannot be fully turned off and therefore they are not energy efficient. Recent
research has found two ways to overcome this problem. One relies on the
observation that a graphene layer grown on the silicon-terminated face of
hexagonal silicon carbide is actually a semiconductor. If its mobility turns out
to be sufficiently great, then it can be used for high performance digital
electronics. The second method relies on the observation that charge carriers
efficiently quantum mechanically tunnel over physical gaps in graphene ribbons.
The tunneling current can be tuned using electrostatic gates to form ultra-thin
body field effect tunneling transistors. In principle, this type of transistor
is expected to operate at very high speed with low power consumption. The
intellectual significance of the activity If this research successfully achieves
its ultimate goal, then it has the potential to revolutionize the electronics
industry and to kick-off the long awaited "age of graphene electronics." Even if
this lofty technological goal is not reached, then none-the-less, this research
will represent a significant advance in graphene science.