* 1506371
* Growth of Tensile Germanium  Nanowires Embedded in a III-V Matrix
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Minjoo Lee, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 01/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Many of the properties of electronic and
photonic materials are determined by the length of and the angle between their
chemical bonds. Stress and strain can slightly alter these bonds, but cause
profound changes in the way that materials interact with both light and
electrical charge. Germanium is particularly noteworthy in this regard. A 2%
change in bond length enables it to emit light very efficiently while in its
normal state, germanium is a poor light emitter. This project seeks to engineer
the properties of germanium nanostructures by embedding them into a matrix that
induces stress. Nanocomposites formed from Ge nanostructures embedded in a
foreign host enable new optical and electrical properties. The research project
is integrated with the education and outreach activities. Besides
interdisciplinary research training provided at the graduate and undergraduate
levels, the PI schedules regular meetings with junior faculty in engineering to
discuss how K-12 outreach can improve work-life balance, a growing concern among
academic scientists. Through these outreach activities, he uses his personal
experience to encourage junior faculty members in developing innovative outreach
activities. Another activity involves pre-college outreach to talented seniors
at Wilbur Cross High School, a racially and economically diverse public high
school in New Haven.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to demonstrate novel nanocomposite materials consisting of tensile-
strained Ge nanowires embedded in III-V matrices. Recent research has shown that
the properties of Ge nanomembranes, nanowires, microdisks, and microbridges can
be tuned using external stressors to apply large biaxial or uniaxial tensile
strains. In this project, surface-mediated phase separation during molecular
beam epitaxy growth is investigated as a new approach to grow epitaxial Ge
nanostructures embedded in a III-V matrix with high tensile strain.
Specifically, Task 1 seeks to draw connections between growth conditions,
structure, and properties of Ge/III-V nanocomposites, including basic
understanding of interfacial strain coupling; Task 2 focuses on the coupled
effects of matrix composition and lattice constant on the kinetics of Ge phase
separation and the resulting microstructures. Finally task 3 seeks to understand
the changes in structure and properties when the nanowires are modulated into
nanorods or quantum dots. The ability to design and grow Ge/III-V nanocomposites
with previously unattainable strain states may lead to a range of unprecedented
material properties for Ge, such as the indirect-gap to direct-gap conversion or
even becoming a semi-metallic material. Moreover, the fundamental understanding
of epitaxial nanocomposites could apply to a wide range of other material
systems such as complex oxides, dilute magnetic semiconductors, and highly
mismatched alloys.