* 1506431
* Measuring Gravity at the Micron Scale with Laser-Cooled Trapped Microspheres: a Continuation Proposal
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrew Geraci, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 392,342.00

Gravity is the least understood fundamental force of nature: there is a 16 order
of magnitude disparity between the energy scale of quantum gravity and that of
the electromagnetic and nuclear forces. The mystery can be cast in another way:
why is gravity so much weaker? As a number of recent theories have suggested,
important clues related to this "hierarchy problem" can be obtained by measuring
how gravity behaves at sub-millimeter distances. Such measurements could lead to
exciting new discoveries of physics beyond our current knowledge. However, the
gravitational force between massive objects becomes weak very rapidly as their
size and separation distance changes, thus making ultra-sensitive measurements a
necessity at sub-millimeter length scales. This group is developing an
experiment based on new technology which could advance our understanding of
gravity by several orders of magnitude at the micrometer length scale. In this
approach, a test mass is suspended in a "container" made of light, leading to
greatly reduced friction and enhanced sensitivity. This research program is at
the forefront of current knowledge and will enhance the scientific competency of
the state of Nevada, which is currently under-represented in terms of scientific
endeavor. The collaboration with researchers at Stanford and the NSF-sponsored
Stanford Nanofabrication facility will improve the research infrastructure for
the state, opening new pathways for future collaborations involving
nanotechnology. Students and postdoctoral researchers will be broadly trained in
experimental physics and nanofabrication and will be well positioned for entry
into the scientific workforce. The fundamental nature of this project appeals to
our sense of wonder about the natural world. The nation will benefit from an
improved understanding of high-energy physics related to gravitational physics
at the micron-length scale, at a fraction of the cost of particle-collider
experiments.

This award supports work on an experiment with the goal of using laser-cooled
trapped microspheres to test for Yukawa-type deviations from Newtonian gravity
at the micron length scale. By optically levitating the force sensor, an
exquisite decoupling from the environment is possible, potentially yielding sub-
attonewton force sensitivity. This new technique could ultimately advance our
understanding of gravity at the micron length scale by a factor of 100,000 or
more, probing deep into the parameter space for theoretically predicted
deviations from Newtonian gravity. In addition to studies of short-range
gravitational forces, the experimental technique we propose could also enable
novel investigations of Casimir forces in unexplored regimes. The project is
conceptually divided into three tasks: (1) calibration and optimization of the
force sensitivity of the trapped cooled microspheres, (2) final assembly of the
source mass and its driving mechanism, (3) investigation of systematic errors in
preliminary gravity measurements. We will also investigate novel methods for
cooling the levitated nanospheres, involving sympathetic cooling with cold
atoms. A graduate physics course "Hybrid Quantum Systems" will be developed to
complement and augment the proposed research, leading to new ideas and
opportunities for advancing science, while developing students' breadth and
expertise in STEM topics. This award is supported by the Gravitational Physics
and the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics programs.