* 1506936
* Collaborative Research: In-Situ Three-Dimensional Diffraction and High-Resolution Electron Microscopy Study of Modulated Martensites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Yu Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 273,539.00

Nontechnical Description Martensite is the product of a structural change that
occurs in many technologically important metals and ceramics. Modulated
martensite is a type of martensite composed of a sequence of atomic layers, and
it is often associated with the unusual properties of shape memory alloys used
in medical implants and consumer products. Despite the scientific and
engineering importance of modulated martensite, there are unanswered questions
about its structure. Unlike in most metallic alloys, the atomic structure of
modulated martensite varies within a single crystal or grain. The atomic
structure also changes rather easily in response to applied stress, temperature
change, or magnetic field. This project employs two complementary experimental
techniques to clarify the structure of a model modulated martensite. The
research team is using three-dimensional X-ray scattering to determine the
average atomic structure over length-scales ranging from tens of nanometers to
micrometers, and three-dimensional transmission electron microscopy to reveal
the atomic structure within regions a few nanometers across. The combination of
the two techniques provides information on the periodicity of atomic layers
across multiple length scales - data that cannot be obtained by either technique
in isolation. The approach is applicable to many kinds of materials with quasi-
periodic modulations, and it reduces the need for painstaking high-resolution
electron microscopy (currently the technique of choice for atomic-scale
characterization, but costly and time-consuming). Students involved in the
project are learning important experimental, computational, and theoretical
tools used to develop new materials.

Technical Description The structural nature of modulated martensites that
exhibit long-period layered structures and aperiodic stacking sequences is a
fundamental issue surrounded by controversy. This collaborative research sheds
light on modulated martensites with complementary experimental techniques:
three-dimensional (3D) synchrotron X-ray diffraction and high-resolution
electron microscopy. It clarifies atomic stacking on spatial scales ranging from
a few atomic planes to multiple periods of the lattice modulations. Using Ni-Mn-
Ga as a model system for modulated martensite, this project addresses some
fundamental questions: how they form, why they are stable, whether their
diffraction patterns arise from averaging over an extended volume or reflect
local atomic order, and how they evolve with temperature, stress, magnetic field
and affect pseudoelastic properties of shape memory alloys. The goals and scope
of the research are to: (1) perform 3D diffraction measurements on Ni-Mn-Ga
single crystals at the Advanced Photon Source of Argonne National Lab; (2)
analyze the 3D scattering intensity data to determine atomic-scale lattice
modulations using atomic-scale reverse Monte Carlo and nanotwin microstructure
refinement methods; (3) perform high-resolution electron microscopy, Lorentz
microscopy and nanobeam electron diffraction from small crystal volumes at a
series of orientations to correlate lattice modulations, magnetic domains and
reciprocal space maps; and (4) develop a Landau-type model to describe the
martensitic and inter-martensitic transformation behaviors by incorporating the
identified transformation mechanisms.