* 1506021
* Precision Measurements and Fundamental Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Timothy Chupp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 558,440.00

Precise experimental tests of fundamental particle properties are now a well-
established way to search for new laws of nature beyond our current physical
knowledge. The research presented in this proposal challenges precise Standard
Model predictions and could provide solid signals of new physics by measuring
the magnetic-moment anomaly of the muon, a known elementary particle that is
produced in abundance at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory. The proposed
research is also to study the detailed behavior of the radioactive decay of
neutrons. This work addresses questions at the deepest level: what is matter
made of, how did it come to be and how does it interact? At the same time, this
research addresses the technical demands of the experiments by pushing the
limits of magnetic field measurement to a higher level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
existing 3.6-sigma difference between the Standard-Model prediction and the
experimental value of g-2 of the muon provides a persistent laboratory signal of
new physics, and we have the opportunity to advance the precision and strengthen
the signal to reach discovery level. As part of the Fermilab Muon g-2
collaboration, our goal is to improve the experimental precision by a factor of
four, which would result in a 7-sigma signal if the central value does not
change, or even larger if the theory error is reduced. The University of
Michigan group has shifted its effort from fundamental neutron physics with
expertise in neutron polarization and precision neutron polarimetry to the
problem of measurement of the muon-storage ring magnetic field. This expertise
and experience in precision spin-precession and NMR-based magnetometry with
polarized 3He will be applied to the problem of absolute calibration of the
magnetic field measurement system and determining the systematic errors on the
field measurement. In particular, this research will fund: 1) development of NMR
techniques and systematics of the NMR-based magnetic-field measurement system
and 2) work towards an absolute measurement of the 3He magnetic moment in a
Penning trap. Furthermore, the proposed research will complete the development
of the SNS beam for the Nab experiment, specifically the determination of the
residual polarization of the Fundamental Neutron Physics Beamline (FNPB) beam
using a 3He spin filter.