* 1506770
* UNS:Modeling Bulk Composition Dependent Alloy Surface Properties Under Reaction Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* John Kitchin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 339,096.00

Kitchin, 1506770&lt;br/&gt;Alloy catalysts, consisting of mixtures of two or
more metals, are widely used in commercial applications to promote reactions
more effectively than possible with a single metal. However, in designing new
catalysts, it is difficult to predict which combinations of two or more metals
will be the most effective for a given reaction, especially because the active
surface sites in gas-solid catalytic reactions typically are different in
structure and composition than those of the bulk alloy. This work will develop
an improved model for predicting the catalytic reactivity of alloy catalysts
under actual working conditions, thereby enabling the discovery of new and
improved alloy catalysts without the need for costly and time-consuming
synthesis and testing of large arrays of potential metal
combinations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work addresses two major factors that
hinder direct correlation of bulk alloy composition with catalytic reactivity:
surface segregation and adsorbate-induced changes in surface composition.
Specifically, the novel aspect of the study is to combine a surface site
distribution function (where the reactivity of each site is calculated by
density functional theory) with a surface segregation model (that includes
adsorbate-induced effects) to produce a statistically weighted average property
of the alloy surface. The new approach will be applied to the design of
optimized Ag-Pd alloys for the selective hydrogenation of acetylene in the
presence of ethylene - a commercially important reaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical methods developed in this study will have
broad impact to the catalysis industry by enabling more efficient design of
catalysts than simple trial-and-error methods, and by producing catalysts that
are more active, selective, and energy-efficient than catalysts currently in
use. In addition, the researchers will make their methods openly available to
the catalysis community, both as a research tool and as an educational tool.