* 1506717
* Engineering a Pro-Vasculogenic Capillary Network Regulating Host Responses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Hak-Joon Sung, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 449,997.00

&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key hurdle in
regenerating tissues is the production of complex network of artificial blood
vessels within the damaged areas, and the ability to cause host tissue to
connect to these vessel networks. This process is necessary to ensure constant
supply of oxygen and nutrient to growing cells and tissues in the areas. The PIs
propose to develop an implantable scaffold containing artificial blood vessels,
as well as appropriate biochemicals that can induce connections between the host
tissue blood vessels and the engineered blood vessels. The success of this
project will provide critical insights into how to influence and optimize this
necessary integration between scaffold implants and host tissue, thereby
accelerating regeneration of large tissues with severely damaged vessel
networks. While conducting this project, research and education will be
integrated through activities aligned with the efforts of the School for Science
and Math at Vanderbilt U. The team will develop 1) grade-appropriate curriculum
components that introduce high school students to engineering through a module
on angiogenesis in biomaterial implants for tissue engineering and 2) a new
graduate/upper level undergraduate course co-taught by the PI and CoPI on Tissue
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most natural tissues, blood capillaries lie
within ~200 micrometers from each other to ensure a sufficient level of
transport for oxygen, nutrients and waste products. Without this essential
transport process through perfused vasculature, cells will die from ischemia,
leading to necrotic regions. Thus, to engineer a successful tissue construct
thicker than this diffusion-imposed limit, an artificial vascular network
capable of supporting perfusion is required. Although continuous progress has
been made, to date no research has demonstrated the integration of cell-laden
microfluidic hydrogels with host vasculature in vivo. This critical step is
necessary to fully exploit prevascularized constructs and enable the use of
thick implantable cell-laden engineered tissues. Therefore, the PIs propose to
engineer an immediately perfusable, implantable tissue construct that supports
rapid angiogenesis and dramatically enhances anastomosis with host vasculature
and host ingrowth by assembling hydrogels containing a high density capillary-
like 3D microfluidic network; (ii) stem cells to promote vascularization and
channel endothelialization; and (iii) short synthetic peptides to expedite host
angiogenic response to further ensure timely vascularization/perfusion of the
constructsThe results of this work will dramatically accelerate the application
and translation of tissue engineering in the clinics.