* 1506817
* RUI:  New Devices and Methods for Microscale Spectroelectrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Paul Flowers, University of North Carolina at Pembroke
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 156,951.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Paul Flowers of the Department of Chemistry &amp;
Physics at the University of North Carolina at Pembroke is developing new
devices and protocols for the chemical analysis of very small samples. This
research creates new tools and methodology for microscale chemical analysis that
offer advantages in analysis time, cost and sample size requirement relative to
comparable existing techniques. The project employs undergraduate assistants
selected from a diverse population that is 16% American Indian and 33% African
American, engaging significant numbers of students in ethnic and racial groups
that are presently underrepresented in the nation's scientific workforce.
Curricular laboratory activities directly related to the research are being
developed and integrated into existing chemistry courses at the sophomore and
senior levels, significantly broadening the educational impact of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroelectrochemistry (SEC) refers to the
simultaneous application of spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques and
typically involves making spectral measurements on samples undergoing
electrolysis. Since the first reports of SEC in the 1960s, these techniques have
become well-established tools for characterizing the redox properties of
chemical species and elucidating the mechanisms of electrode processes. A more
recent and growing effort is directed towards the use of SEC as the basis for
quantitative chemical analyses, essentially replacing the chemical reagents used
in conventional assays with an inert, nonexpendable electrode. Professor
Flowers'group has previously developed a prototype device that permits SEC
analysis of sample volumes well below one microliter, roughly two-orders of
magnitude lesser than any other reported device. In this project, the basic
design of this prototype is being adapted to permit flow analyses of microliter
and sub-microliter samples. Simple polymer casting techniques are being utilized
to fabricate these flow cells, and their performance is being evaluated using
voltammetry, coulometry, chronoabsorptometry and voltabsorptometry. In parallel
to the device fabrication work, microscale assays that exploit SEC measurement
strategies are being developed for selected compounds of biological and
biomedical relevance.