* 1506822
* Developing ipso-arylative coupling routes to conjugated molecules and macromolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Robert Grubbs, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 359,304.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Robert B. Grubbs of Stony
Brook University to investigate the development of methods for the preparation
of semiconducting polymers for new organic electronic materials and devices.
Organic electronic materials are of growing industrial importance due to their
potential as low-cost, flexible, and lightweight materials with potential uses
in a number of applications, notably those where they function as sensors,
light-emitting materials, and materials for converting solar energy to
electrical energy. These methods allow the use of stable monomers that can be
polymerized with less toxic by-products than other methods, and have the
potential to allow the preparation of a range of new polymer structures. This
work provides training for graduate students, including students from
traditionally underrepresented groups, in organic electronic materials research,
and involves regular interactions with scientists at Brookhaven National
Laboratory. As part of this project, participants plan to present their work at
local, regional, national, and international meetings, as well as at a workshop
on environmental science and sustainability for local high school teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Grubbs and co-workers are investigating the use
of palladium-catalyzed ipso-arylative coupling methods for the preparation of
conjugated polymers. The key objectives of the project are to expand and
optimize ipso-arylative polymerization methods to allow polymerization of a
broader range of monomers and apply these conditions to the preparation of new
polymer structures, including those with controlled sequences of different
monomers. Developing an understanding of the effects of monomer structure and
polymerization conditions on the preparation of model poly(3-hexylthiophene)
systems is a key goal. The design of ipso-arylative ring-opening polymerization
systems, which allows polymerization to proceed without the formation of by-
products, is also a key goal. The newly developed methods are being used in the
preparation of new conjugated polymers, including side-chain-functionalized
polymers (by ring-opening polymerization), poly(2,6-pyridyl) derivatives, and
designed sequences of conjugated oligomers. In each case, the use of ipso-
arylative coupling conditions is critical to the construction of the new
polymers. As new polymers are prepared and characterized, their electronic
properties are to be measured in collaboration with co-workers at the Center for
Functional Nanomaterials at Brookhaven National Laboratory.