* 1506661
* Synthetic Integration of Inorganic-Organic Functionality in Hybrid Semiconductors Based on Chalcogenide Clusters
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Pingyun Feng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 430,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the goal of this
research is to create a new generation of crystalline porous semiconducting
materials for energy and environmental applications. The integration between
high surface area and semiconducting properties makes these new materials
especially useful as efficient adsorbents and photocatalysts for applications
including adsorption and solar-energy-driven conversion of carbon dioxide into
fuels such as methane. The research has broad impact because it blends together
and contributes to various fields such as photocatalytic materials,
semiconducting nanoparticles, cluster chemistry, and porous materials. The PI is
actively involved in various educational and training programs for undergraduate
students. The project combines diversity in materials synthesis and various
characterization and measurement techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to develop highly
stable crystalline porous chalcogenides that integrate high-surface area and
uniform porosity with semiconductivity and optoelectronic properties and to
study various properties and applications ranging from selective gas sorption,
visible-light responsive photoelectrodes, to photocatalysis and
electrocatalysis. By integrating synthetic and structural principles from metal
chalcogenide chemistry and nanoporous solids, this research seeks to employ
templated multi-component co-assembly processes to create a new generation of
chemically and photochemically stable chalcogenide-based crystalline porous
semiconductors. Specifically, the research aims to utilize heterometallic
chalcogenide systems and structural and functional diversity of organic species
to control structures of chalcogenide clusters and frameworks and to tune their
semiconducting and optoelectronic properties. This project helps to develop and
advance a new area of cross-disciplinary research at the interface between
semiconducting materials and nanoporous solids. The project explores a new
frontier dealing with unique porous and semiconducting materials based on
chalcogenide building blocks. The activity provides the fundamental
understanding about key factors in the synthetic design and optimization of
crystalline porous semiconductors. Students in this project benefit from
excellent training opportunities in synthesis, materials characterization, and
property measurements.