* 1506209
* Controlling the synthesis and microstructure of non-linear pi-conjugated semiconducting polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Christine Luscombe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2018
* USD 368,082.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Christine Luscombe at the University
of Washington to synthesize new types of 'flexible plastic electronics' or
molecules that are electrically conductive. These materials are currently used
to produce light-emitting diodes which are incorporated into the color displays
used in cell phones and televisions. Another important application is for solar
cells to capture the sun's energy and convert it to electricity. Because they
are flexible and lightweight, conducting organic polymers may be used to create
novel 'wearable electronics'. In the future, one could envision using these
materials to assemble artificial nerves or skin. To realize these and other
applications, chemists must achieve better control over the structure of these
molecules. This proposal enables the creation of molecular structures that have
not been synthesized before and allows their properties to be explored. The
proposal also allows the knowledge about how polymers work to be shared with the
public through community outreach activities at the Pacific Science Center in
Seattle, the Science Caf√© (an evening lecture series held at a local pub), and
through research and mentoring activities for underrepresented minorities and
for women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pi-conjugated semiconducting polymers are
actively under development for use in organic light-emitting diodes and thin-
film transistors. Additionally, in the past decade, there has been an
exponential growth in the research on pi-conjugated semiconducting polymers for
applications in organic photovoltaics (OPVs). However, due to limitations in
controlling the synthesis of these polymers, the majority of studies related to
these classes of materials have focused on linear polymers with broad molecular
weight distributions. While it is widely recognized that, for traditional
insulating coiled polymers, the topology and architecture of the polymers
greatly affect their properties, a detailed structure-property relationship for
how the topology of rigid rod polymers such as pi-conjugated semiconducting
polymers affects the microstructure and thus their optoelectronic properties has
remained limited. The Luscombe group, using their synthetic methodology, is
synthesizing star and graft polymers with control over arm length and arm
number. Using these star and graft polymers, network polymers are being created.
Model polymers with exactly the same attributes but one are synthesized so that
how changing one component (eg. arm length in a star polymer) in the polymer
alters microstructure and thus optoelectronic properties can be studied. The
overarching goal of this proposal is to exploit the groups ability to perform
controlled polymerizations for the synthesis of semiconducting polymers,
synthesize pi-conjugated polymers with unique architectures that have not been
synthesized before, and build a more complete picture for structure-property
relationships in this class of materials.