* 1506295
* Chemical Transformations of Engineered Nanomaterials in the Environment: Fundamental Studies on Plant-Nanomaterial Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mary Bisson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 467,000.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Diana Aga and Professor Mary A Bisson of the
University at Buffalo to investigate the influence of plants on the surface
chemistry, fate and toxicity of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) that are
becoming widely used in many industrial, agricultural and consumer products.
Plants are among the organisms that will be directly impacted by ENMs entering
the environment, therefore an improved understanding of the uptake mechanisms
and translocation of ENMs by plants is needed to facilitate the assessment of
potential risks associated with environmental contamination by ENMs. The broader
impacts of this work include the generation of fundamental knowledge that is
critical in developing new regulations to minimize the negative impacts of ENMs,
and in promoting compatibility between environmental safety and nanotechnology.
Experiments in environmental science are being developed for a science summer
camp geared toward middle school children who are disabled and/or economically
disadvantaged. The research team is also introducing educational materials to
area high school teachers on the applications and implications of nanotechnology
that can be incorporated into the high school science
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, silver nanoparticles
(AgNPs) are used as model ENM and Arabidopsis thaliana serves as the model plant
species in the series of experiments that are being performed to elucidate the
mechanisms of internalization and transformation of AgNPs in plants. This
research identifies important interactions between AgNPs and natural organic
compounds in plant root exudates that result in surface modifications and
changes in the speciation of ENMs. The composition of root exudates from
Arabidopsis thaliana, and the changes that occur when plant is treated with
AgNPs are being characterized using Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance
mass spectrometry. Wild type and mutant species Arabidopsis are used to
determine the role of endocytosis mechanism and metal transporters in the uptake
of ENMs. The localization and speciation of Ag in the plant cells are being
determined by X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy and time of flight
secondary ion mass spectrometry.