* 1506711
* Collaborative Research: Cavity-Enhanced Exciton Emission from Carbon Nanotubes in the Intrinsic Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Stefan Strauf, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 12/31/2018
* USD 341,910.00

Nontechnical Description: This collaborative project between Stevens Institute
of Technology and Columbia University seeks to understand and control the
interaction of light with crystalline matter in nanoscale photonic structures.
The research includes material growth of crystalline wires that are only one
nanometer in diameter and several micrometers long. These so-called nanowires
are then integrated with photonic nanostructures that strongly enhance their
light emission. A particular focus is on the fundamental understanding of how
electric charges interact with heat and light in these nanoscale structures.
Ultimately, this research project enables an efficiency and performance boost
for chip-scale light sources and detectors, in particular quantum-light sources
that are needed to realize quantum-communication technologies to support, for
example, national security. The principal investigators collaborate to introduce
new research-based educational materials into the graduate curricula on both
campuses by team-teaching these subjects via video link. This project offers
research experience to graduate and undergraduate students. Outreach activities
at Stevens leverage institutional programs such as the Women in Engineering
Program. At Columbia, the co-principal investigator develops an outreach model
that builds a close partnership with teachers at the Columbia Secondary School
for Math, Science, and Engineering, a public, 6-12 school with a large
population of under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Carbon nanotubes have recently gained tremendous interest as a
nanomaterial for the next-generation optoelectronics and quantum photonic
devices. To date, the majority of experiments revealed, however, low quantum
efficiencies due to extrinsic interactions with the environment that lower the
prospects for applications. The collaborative project takes advantage of an
ultra-narrow spectral linewidth regime featuring intrinsic spontaneous light
emission rates and prolonged exciton dephasing in ultraclean carbon nanotubes,
and integrates them with optical cavities. Specifically, the research objectives
are (1) to dramatically enhance the light collection as well as the optical
emission rate of carbon nanotubes in order to demonstrate efficient on-chip
quantum light sources and (2) to uncover the intrinsic exciton dephasing
mechanism and acoustic-phonon localization effects. The technical approach
explores methods to integrate carbon nanotubes with metallo-dielectric antennas
and plasmonic nanocavities, and to further engineer the exciton dephasing via
manipulation of the acoustic-phonon density of states. The project advances the
understanding of fundamental light-matter interaction in carbon nanotubes, in
particular in the presence of localized excitons and phonons along the nanotubes
and contributes to advances in on-chip quantum photonics and cavity-
optomechanics.