* 1506273
* Multiscale Modeling and Enhanced Sampling of Protein-Protein Recognition
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Charles Brooks, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,219,413.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry, the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Computational and Data-Enabled
Science and Engineering program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Charles L. Brooks III
from the University of Michigan to develop computational methods to explore
protein-protein interactions. Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) form the basis
for most biological processes. An atomic description of the key features of
protein-protein interactions will yield tremendous benefits in both establishing
a fundamental understanding of the processes that support all living systems,
and gaining the ability to manipulate and control those processes. Experimental
approaches such as nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) and X-ray
crystallography can reveal features of interacting complexes and isolated
monomers of key protein-protein interactions, but have difficulty capturing
dynamic, flexible systems. Molecular dynamics (MD) is a useful tool to
deconvolute these experimental measurements, and offers a detailed, dynamic view
of molecular interactions. Although brute force MD approaches have made
significant progress studying the dynamics of single molecule systems, they have
fundamental difficulties with biologically relevant PPIs due to the large sizes,
long time scales and high flexibility of these systems. This project will
develop, test and apply computational approaches that enable MD studies to probe
the interactions of the viral capsid glycoprotein Hemagglutinin with putative
human antibody mimics, and the chaperone activity of the bacterial acid-shock
chaperone HdeA. Dr. Brooks will provide training for a postdoc, graduate student
and a number of undergraduates as well as mentoring them in the development of
physical theories and simulation methods to study protein-protein interactions.
Moreover, the findings, methods and techniques developed in this project will be
distributed through tutorials and case studies to be integrated into the
Multiscale Modeling Tools for Structural Biology (MMTSB) tutorials as well as
into courses taught at the University of Michigan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific outcome of the project will be computational tools and methods to i)
predict environment-dependent NMR observables from coarse-grained (CG)
simulations; ii) undertake the development of transferable CG interaction
potentials that are specially designed for reproducing observed protein-protein
interfaces; iii) undertake the development of enhanced sampling methods for
efficient determination of thermodynamic and kinetic properties of
intermolecular interactions. The work will focus on two demanding benchmark
cases: the interactions of the viral capsid glycoprotein Hemagglutinin with
putative human antibody mimics, and the chaperone activity of the bacterial
acid-shock chaperone HdeA. The former system is difficult due to the large
system size (&gt;600 amino acids total), while the interactions in the latter
system are highly dynamic, sensitive to the system pH, and involve multiple
copies of HdeA and substrate protein.