* 1506694
* Exploring the Solid-State Properties of Phosphine Coordination Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Simon Humphrey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the preparation of a new
family of crystalline porous materials that display desirable properties, which
can be exploited in a range of applications relating to energy and the
environment. Porous materials are of critical importance in many large-scale
processes, such as water purification, the separation and purification of gases,
polymer synthesis, environmental protection by trapping of toxic chemicals in
waste streams, and many others. It is important to explore the synthesis of new
porous materials that can be designed to offer enhanced properties. With support
of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, the major goals of this research activity directly relate to this
challenge, and include the synthesis and application testing of new materials
that incorporate previously unexplored chemical functionalities. This project
incorporates a new and innovative international student exchange program, which
is aimed at inspiring undergraduate students to become engaged in research-based
studies. The program also provides students a unique and invaluable opportunity
to become fully acquainted with the culture of international collaboration in
the sciences, through a period of study abroad at one of several outstanding
partner universities across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research activity involve the preparation of
a new family of metal-organic framework (MOF) materials, using a specific
synthetic strategy that provides access to materials with previously
inaccessible chemical reactivity. MOFs are crystalline, polymeric solids that
contain precise molecular architectures and exhibit inter-connected networks of
small pores (0.5-5.0 nm), which are accessible to a broad range of 'guest'
adsorbates. MOFs have already shown great promise as materials for high capacity
gas storage, and for sequestration of small molecules and other species such as
heavy metal ions. Their broad applicability is derived from extreme design
flexibility, as a function of the components used in their preparation. The
Humphrey group has established synthetic approaches to prepare MOFs based on
tailored organophosphine and metallic complexes based on phosphine ligands.
Phosphine-based complexes are important as reactive catalytic species that can
induce small molecule activation; it is therefore of timely interest to
incorporate such reactivity into MOF-type materials. In this project, phosphine
complexes with well-defined open (unsaturated) metal sites are first synthesized
and then used to construct porous MOFs. Subsequently, these materials are
studied under a range of conditions to assess the binding and selective
sequestration behavior toward guest species of direct relevance to future energy
applications, and for molecular sensing. The project is ideally suited to teach
young researchers a range of skills from molecular synthesis to solid-state
materials chemistry and characterization.