* 1506620
* Collaborative Research: Thin-Film Chalcogenide Glass Materials for High-Quality Integrated Photonics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Lan Yang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The main objectives of this collaborative research
project between MIT and Washington University are (1) to develop critical
understandings of the optical loss mechanisms in thin-film chalcogenide glass
materials through spectroscopic studies, (2) to exploit innovative processing
science to synthesize ultra-low-loss chalcogenide glass materials in the thin-
film form and (3) to fabricate optical devices with novel functionalities. Based
on these fundamental findings, the research aims to demonstrate chalcogenide
glass resonant cavity devices with high quality factors as building blocks for
photonic sensors, light emitters and nonlinear optical signal processing
systems. The research is expected to have significant impacts on many areas
including materials science, nanotechnology, nonlinear optics and integrated
photonics. The participating undergraduate and graduate researchers benefit from
the cross-disciplinary collaboration between the two research groups at MIT and
Washington University. Results obtained from the research are incorporated into
new undergraduate courses on glass materials at MIT. The project also expands
K-12 initiatives on both campuses through lab open houses and summer internship
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Chalcogenide glasses
(ChGs) are recognized as an emerging material platform for integrated photonics
given their unique properties, such as substrate-blind integration capacity,
extreme processing versatility, widely tunable optical and thermal
characteristics via composition alloying, large Kerr nonlinearity, and broadband
optical transparency. Unlike silica glass, multi-component chalcogenide glasses
contain a far more diverse group of nanoscale glass network moieties. These
properties result in complicated structural transformations and optical losses
that are highly sensitive to processing history and cannot be described using
the classical Rayleigh scattering formalism. As a consequence, traditional loss
reduction methods cannot be simply transferred to chalcogenide materials without
an in-depth understanding of the kinetics of micro-structural evolution and loss
mechanisms in chalcogenide films. The challenge of differentiating optical loss
contributions in chalcogenide films is further compounded by the small
interaction volume in thin films, which severely limits the sensitivity of most
traditional optical characterization methods. In this project, new waveguide-
and resonator-based spectroscopic characterization methods are developed to
extract critical material information such as nanoscale phase composition,
intrinsic absorption, and different scattering processes. The project advances
our understanding of the nanoscale structural transformation mechanisms
associated with material's optical characteristics as well as the structure-
processing-property relationship in ChG materials. By combining kinetic modeling
and experimental validation of novel surface-tension-assisted processing
techniques, the project also aims to develop ultra-high-quality planar ChG
structures with performance exceeding the current state-of-the-art.