* 1506059
* Integrated, Functional MOF@Polymer Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Seth Cohen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 445,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Films and membranes are a critical area of
chemical and materials research for applications including separations,
catalysis, and energy technologies. The development of new films and membranes
that possess next-generation properties will be enabling for many of these
applications. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
in the Division of Materials Research, this project will produce a general
method for preparing new membrane materials that contain small particles of a
highly porous solid imbedded within the membrane. These membranes will exhibit
new and interesting properties that cannot be achieved with existing materials.
We will also use these membranes to demonstrate proof-of-concept studies for
their use in removal of toxic molecules from water. In addition, this proposal
includes support for the Science Policy Internship Program, which supports STEM
(science, technology, engineering, math) students at the University of
California Center in Washington D.C. The program includes activities such as
coursework, seminars, tours, and science policy internships. This distinctive
program engages primarily underrepresented and women students, across the
University of California system, toward the goal of creating a generation of
scientists that better understand and value their role in society and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research
program will develop hybrid membranes prepared from both hard metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs) and soft organic polymers (termed MOF/polymer composite
membranes or MPCMs). A general, versatile, and scalable method has been
developed for preparing supported and free-standing MPCMs. Drop casting combined
with 'doctor-blading' methods will be used to create supported and free-standing
MPCMs. This program will develop MPCMs that: a) can be readily prepared and
scaled; b) employ a wide range of MOF materials; and c) can operate as membranes
for chemical separations. This proposal will greatly advance the use of MOFs by
establishing a general approach for casting uniform, hybrid films that can be
delaminated into robust membranes that can be manipulated, integrated into
devices or systems, such that the physical properties of MOFs can be exploited
in otherwise inaccessible applications. The utility of these materials will be
demonstrated in separations and water purification.