* 1506497
* Paving the Way for the First Direct Gravitational-Wave Discovery through Improved Noise Budgeting and Detector Characterization
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Fred Raab, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 60,000.00

The General Theory of Relativity discovered by Einstein tells us that the
familiar, everyday force of gravity is a manifestation of something much
stranger: the bending of the geometry of space-time by matter. Among the key
predictions of the theory, which includes the expanding Universe and the
existence of black holes, is the existence of gravitational waves (GW): ripples
moving at the speed of light in the geometry of space-time caused by the fast
motion of large masses. Although well tested in terms of their indirect effects
on binary systems of compact stars, the direct detection of gravitational waves
incident on Earth poses an outstanding challenge. The scientific rewards from
achieving this ability would be enormous - ranging from probing the extreme
dynamics of exploding stars to gleaning information about the state of the
Universe almost at the moment of the Big Bang itself. The effort to enable this
new window on the universe has occupied several decades of experimental and
technological developments that have pushed the boundaries across diverse fields
in the physical sciences. The year 2015 will mark a highly-anticipated watershed
moment for gravitational-wave physics: The two advanced Laser Interferomenter
Gravitational Wave Observatory (aLIGO) detectors will start their initial data
taking runs, followed by the commissioning of the advanced Virgo gravitational
wave observatory in Europe. The sensitivity of the aLIGO detector will be ramped
up to become about ten times better than that of the first-generation detectors,
opening up a spatial volume for observing GW sources that will be 1000 times
larger than before. This award supports research that helps aLIGO to achieve
design sensitivity in the coming years by contributing to a more complete
accounting of sources of noise and characterization of the detectors. This will
eventually lead to the publishing of GW data to the public with robust data
quality flags. Supporting scientific discoveries by empowering the community at
large is a primary goal of this project. Additionally, the researchers will
continue to engage the faculty of the WSU campuses in Pullman and Tri-Cities to
teach undergraduate students about GW science both through lectures and lab
exercises. The latter campus caters to a large percentage of Hispanic and
Native-American populations, both of which are under-represented, and offers a
rare setting for integrating university education with cutting-edge research in
gravitation being carried out at a nearby lab.

The aLIGO detectors are being commissioned as we speak. These broadband
detectors will also target the detection of GWs from multiple sources, such as
binary black holes, spinning non-axisymmetric neutron stars, core collapse
supernovae, and stochastic GW background of astrophysical or cosmological
origins. They will accomplish this by resolving changes in the 4-km separations
of its interferometric test mass optics that are a billionth the size of an
atom. The WSU team will integrate the multiple new sensors that have been
installed in aLIGO into the model of the interferometer noise budget and work on
reducing any gap between its prediction and the observed noise floor.