* 1506868
* Chiral Molecular Beams, Quantum Tunneling and Improved Microwave Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John Doyle, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professor John Doyle of Harvard University to study
molecular chirality through advances in molecular beam techniques and
interrogation with microwave spectroscopy. Atoms and molecules are the basic
building blocks of all substances. Understanding their essential behavior is
necessary for a full understanding of chemical processes, including those
underlying living systems. In living cells, many molecules have a fundamental
'twist', very similar to the direction of spiral ridges on a screw. Just like a
screw, the direction of the molecular spiral, known as 'chirality', determines
function. For normal screws ('right handed' ones), if you turn them clockwise
they tighten; a 'left handed' screw would loosen. This is a very pronounced
effect in molecules also. For example, many new drugs have a single handedness
(i.e. chirality). In order to understand the basic behavior of molecules, their
chirality must be detectable. In this project researchers will use their newly
discovered tool for measuring chirality to study fundamental quantum behavior of
chirality in molecules. In particular, they will look for the slow
transformation of a molecule with a spiral in one direction to a molecule with a
spiral in the opposite direction. This effect can only be described by the
fundamental theory of the microscopic realm, quantum mechanics. Researchers in
the Doyle group will test these predictions and in carrying out these studies
gain valuable experience in modern physical and analytical chemistry research.

In order to study chirality of molecules, the Doyle group will use molecular
beams and interrogate these with microwave radiation. The molecular seams will
be generated by injecting them through a small hole into a nearly perfect
vacuum. This will form a stream of molecules that have no interactions 'a nearly
pristine physical setup' except with the applied electromagnetic radiation. The
molecules that will be studied have electric dipoles (similar to a bar magnet,
except with electric charge on the North and South poles). These dipoles will
absorb and emit radiation in the microwave regime. By creating a screw-type
pattern of microwave radiation, the molecule can be caused to emit radiation
that depends on the direction of the spiral (chirality) of the molecules. This
is similar to testing if a screw is left or right handed by trying to insert it
in a right-handed screw hole. The researchers will initially prepare molecules
of one chirality (e.g. right handed) and then use microwaves to see if they
transform into the other chirality (left-handed). Comparison with theory will be
done to test our understanding of this fundamental phenomenon.