* 1506726
* Precise Copolymers and Ionomers: Conductivity in Layered and Percolated Morphologies and Mechanical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Karen Winey, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 580,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Polyethylene is ubiquitous in modern life from plastic bags to milk jugs to gas
pipes. Modifying polyethylene by attaching acid and ionic groups to the molecule
transforms polyethylene into a substantially tougher and more abrasion resistant
material with better chemical resistance. These improved properties stem from
the presence of nanoscale aggregates that contain the acid group and metal ions.
These ionic aggregates have long been thought to be spherical, and polymer
scientists know how to manipulate this structure to tune mechanical properties.

In this research, the PI plans to engineer these nanoscale aggregates to promote
ion or proton transport. New plastics with fast and highly selective ion or
proton transport will contribute to breakthroughs in water treatment, energy
storage, and energy conversion. Prof. Karen Winey along with her graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Pennsylvania have been studying
precise polyethylenes where the acid or ionic groups are evenly spaced along the
molecular chains. They found that these precise copolymers exhibit new, and as
yet untested, types of ionic aggregates. By selecting different polymers and
ions, the ionic aggregates can be transformed from spherical nanoscale
aggregates to aggregates in the shape of sheets and percolated networks. Both of
these new structures are particularly promising for ion transport, because the
aggregates are more extensive than discreet spherical aggregates. This award
will explore the properties afforded by these new types of ionic aggregates with
the intent of identifying polymers with substantially improved ion or proton
transport. Polymer synthesis and quasi-elastic neutron scattering experiments
will use national facilities.



PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Poly(ethylene-co-acrylic acid) precise copolymers are model polymers with a
linear backbone and pendant carboxylic acid groups separated by exactly 9, 15 or
21 carbons. Previous morphology studies of these precise acid copolymers and
their neutralized ionomers have identified a variety of aggregate shapes of
which two morphologies are particularly interesting with respect to
conductivity. The layered morphologies consist of functional groups assembled
into planar aggregates and the percolated morphologies have stringy, branched
aggregates that span the sample to make a co-continuous structure. Relative to
single-ion conductors with spherical aggregates, the layered and percolated
aggregates possess greater connectivity that is expected to provide faster ion
transport. Ion conductivity will be studied in precise acid copolymers
neutralized with Li, Na, or Cs. Proton conductivity will be studied in hydrated
precise acid copolymers and precise acid copolymers mixed with various
imidazoles. These precise copolymers and ionomers provide unprecedented
molecular control that produces well-defined morphologies and thereby facilitate
the improved understanding of structure-property relationships pertaining to ion
and proton transport. By comparing conductivities for different morphology
types, the proposed project will provide design rules for making specific
morphology types with improved conductivity.

An array of experimental methods will be applied to probe the structure,
dynamics and conductivity of these materials including electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy, quasielastic neutron scattering (QENS), dielectric relaxation
spectroscopy, X-ray scattering, DSC, FTIR, NMR and mechanical properties. Direct
comparison of the QENS results with atomistic molecular dynamics simulations
will elucidate the mechanism of conduction within the percolated aggregates and
explore whether or not the ion motion is decoupled from the chain dynamics.