* 1506397
* SABRE R&amp;D: Investigating radio-pure Sodium Iodide
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Frank Calaprice, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2017
* USD 191,558.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised
of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments
after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our
galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located
deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic rays. DAMA at the Gran
Sasso underground laboratory in Italy is the only experiment claiming a
discovery of dark matter interactions from their observation of a predicted
annual modulation of the signal rate. Recent results from some experiments
(CoGeNT, CRESST, and CDMS-Si) may support the light WIMP (Weakly Interacting
Massive Particle) interpretation, while others do not (KIMS-CsI, LUX, and
XENON-100, among others). Only an experiment using NaI(Tl) can perform a model-
independent test. The SABRE (Sodium-iodide with Active Background REjection)
experiment would shed light on this debate and thus direct future direct-
detection searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SABRE project provides ample
opportunities for students and postdoctoral researchers to gain experience and
training for careers in the scientific community. SABRE is consulting with the
Princeton Teacher Preparation Program office to discuss potential ways to
provide additional educational and professional development opportunities for
local high-school students and teachers. The SABRE project engenders strong
relationships between industry and academia. Their partnerships with industry
enable the development of new technologies, products, and measurement techniques
that will be made available to the research and industrial market at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SABRE R&amp;D effort, funded by this award, aims to
provide a proof-of-principle for such a detector by developing NaI(Tl) detectors
with lower backgrounds and a lower energy threshold than DAMA. Progress has been
made in producing highly pure NaI powders that now exhibit impurities at a
similar level to, or lower than, the final crystals in DAMA. The potential for
further purification has been demonstrated by their crystal grower with zone-
refining.