* 1506244
* Formation, Dynamics and Application of Ultracold Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Edward Eyler, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 460,000.00

The essence of modern Physics is quantum mechanics. In particular, the structure
of the atomic nucleus and the surrounding electrons, and the corresponding
structure of molecules and materials is inherently quantum mechanical.
Understanding the quantum structure of atoms, molecules, and materials at room
temperature and higher, where thousands or millions or more quantum states are
populated, is possible using the selectivity of lasers. However, at ultracold
temperatures of less than 0.001 K, only a few quantum states are populated and
exotic phenomena such as superfluidity and Bose-Einstein condensation of many
particles, each in a single unique quantum state are possible. This research
involves understanding the quantum states of simple molecules composed of two
atoms at ultracold temperatures, including how the molecules are formed in
particular selectable states and how the molecules change when they are exposed
to light of specific wavelengths or collide with other molecules or atoms. In
response, they may emit light, emit an electron, or split into two atoms. There
are a number of interesting possible applications of this behavior such as
quantum cryptography, quantum computing and quantum simulation of more complex
systems. This area of frontier research provides an uncharted and challenging
education for students in Physics and related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
our project, we will work with two carefully selected diatomic molecules, Rb2
and KRb. One fascinating electronic quantum state in both molecules is the
triplet state. This state can in principle decay, but calculations for Rb2
predict it has a very long lifetime of up to 200 seconds in its lowest
rovibrational level, during which it can be studied. Our experiments will define
the limits of this "metastability" at ultracold temperatures due to spontaneous
emission of light or to collisions with ultracold atoms or molecules. We will
also study another fascinating type of electronic quantum state in these
molecules: the so-called "trilobite-like" or "butterfly" electronic quantum
states, where a completely new kind of chemical bonding takes place at
internuclear distances at least ten times larger than ordinary chemical bonds.
Their name comes from the complex spatial structures of the square of the
electronic wavefunction, which can resemble ancient trilobites or modern
butterflies. This novel bonding involves the attraction between the electron of
a highly excited "Rydberg" atom with a second ground state atom imbedded within
the large Rydberg electronic wavefunction. Spectroscopy will determine the
predicted and unusual "interatomic roller coaster" potential energy curves with
numerous maxima and minima, as well as the multiple decay processes that
determine lifetimes of these states. In particular, the mechanisms of the
puzzlingly rapid rates of decay of these states to (Rb2) cation and the negative
electron will be determined. We will also investigate the long-range electronic
states arising from the ion-pair (Rb cation and Rb anion), some in the same
region of energy and internuclear distance as the "butterfly" states. These are
"Heavy Rydberg" states, bound by the Coulomb attraction in the same way as in
the H atom. The ion pair experiments will yield valuable information on the
coupling of shorter range covalent states, where the bonding electrons are
shared, to the longer range ionic states, where the two valence electrons
clearly reside on one of the atoms.