* 1506750
* Structure and dynamics of flexible and active packings
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Narayanan Menon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2019
* USD 419,511.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of a material
typically depend on how a fixed set of constituents are arranged and interact
via intermolecular forces. In this research we study two types of materials that
do not fit this paradigm. This first type of material is fibrous matter, made up
of long, flexible filaments. The constraints of packing or weaving together can
cause individual filaments to bend and twist thus modifying the way in which an
individual filament interacts with other filaments. Fibrous materials are the
main constituent of plant matter, as well as human products ranging from paper
to fabrics and insulants, so a basic understanding of this ubiquitous class of
materials is important. The second type of material is composed of assemblies of
so-called active particles, which when energized have a tendency to move in some
direction along their body. At one level, this is intended to illuminate
behaviors seen in living systems such as flocking, swarming and group
locomotion. On the other hand, we hope to use some of these behaviors to create
materials with new functionalities. The proposed work gives graduate and
undergraduate students exposure to a variety of techniques and the opportunity
to work in emerging areas of physics. The PI is an organizer of an annual summer
school hosted at UMass Amherst for early-career graduate students in soft matter
and statistical physics. During the project, the PI will also create and
disseminate lesson plans for introductory physics courses taught in a team-based
format. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonequilibrium systems made up of macroscopic
entities that do not undergo thermal fluctuations are an important part of our
technological, physical and biological world. The experiments proposed here
study two broad classes of model nonthermal systems. (i) Systems of flexible
filaments, where in addition to the rich physics of rigid nonthermal packing, we
gain new geometrical elements, such as the possibility of entanglements between
filaments. A particular focus will be the roles of friction and elasticity in
determining the strength of a mat of fibres. (ii) Systems of active particles,
driven by external noise that provide propulsion at the level of individual
particles. The central scientific question will be to identify the separate
roles of the symmetry of the particle mobility and interaction, which in
previous studies have been chosen to coincide. The PI will study bulk packings,
assembled either spontaneously, or templated. These will be studied in 2D by
imaging directly and in 3D, by laser-sheet or x-ray imaging. The proposed work
gives graduate and undergraduate students exposure to a variety of techniques
and the opportunity to work in newly-emerging areas of physics. The PI is also
an organizer of an annual summer school hosted at UMass Amherst for early-career
graduate students in soft matter physics. During the project, the PI will also
create and disseminate lesson plans for introductory physics courses taught in a
team-based format.