* 1506979
* Collaborative Research: Controlled Disorder and Topological Defects in Magnetically Frustrated Thin Film Metamaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Lance De Long, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 384,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern techniques for nanoscale
patterning of thin films yield metamaterials that behave differently from those
fabricated via traditional chemical techniques; and their fundamental properties
can be markedly altered from bulk behavior, which involves the emergence of
collective behavior from single-particle interactions in finite-size systems.
The reduction of film dimensions into the nanometer range traverses natural
length scales such as ferromagnetic domain wall widths (7-100 nm), and crosses a
mesoscopic regime characterized by strong fluctuations that destabilize ordered
ground states and must be controlled in modern devices. Alternatively,
frustration imposed by geometrical constraints or competing interactions also
prevents systems from reaching equilibrium. Artificial spin ices are exemplary
metamaterials formed from thin "wires" whose large length-to-width ratio makes
them behave as classical Ising spins that resist equilibration into magnetic
order due to frustration and energy barriers. Understanding athermal dynamics in
systems far from equilibrium is poorly understood, and relatively little work
has addressed effects of disorder on spin ice dynamics. Artificial spin ices
offer the advantage that their spatial order and topology can be carefully
controlled, and their fluctuations engineered to cover a range of time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;Our program investigates how control of periodic translational and
point symmetries of wire networks results in strong changes in magnetic reversal
and spin wave dynamics. Whereas random disorder can yield "spin glass" states
with only short-range order, frustrated systems may "order out of disorder" that
breaks periodic symmetry and reduces low-energy degeneracies. Bulk magnetic
quasicrystals exhibit striking physical properties and frustration due to their
signature long-range orientational order without periodic translational
symmetry, placing them in a unique niche between periodic crystals and amorphous
materials. Known bulk quasicrystals undergo spin-glass, rather than long-range
magnetic order, and are difficult to grow and characterize in the laboratory.
Our advances in nanofabrication have produced "artificial quasicrystals" whose
relaxation dynamics, reversal, magnetic correlations and attainment of an
equilibrium groundstate are systematically controlled via pattern design, in
order to reveal what magnetic behaviors are inherent consequences of
periodicity, quasiperiodicity or random disorder. &lt;br/&gt;Our students
receive in-house instruction in thin film deposition and patterning, advanced
numerical simulations, ferromagnetic resonance, static magnetization, X-ray
reflectometry and atomic force microscopy. Very few laboratories can provide
such a broad program of research tools and training. Thin films are patterned at
the nanoscale for use in coherent soft X-ray scattering, scanning electron
microscopy with polarization analysis, magnetic force microscopy and other
experiments performed at Argonne, Lawrence Berkeley National Labs, and NIST,
Gaithersburg. Senior investigators and graduate research assistants conduct
workshops to provide elementary school teachers in Fayette County, Kentucky with
instructional aids, curriculum and professional development needed to meet new
STEM education goals promulgated by the U.S. and Kentucky Departments of
Education. High school students from school districts neighboring Northwestern
U. learn how to carry out advanced microwave measurements and data analyses of
thin-film materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of disorder and reduced symmetry on the
equilibrium and dynamic magnetic properties of patterned magnetic thin-film
metamaterials that exhibit frustration and spin ice behavior are studied.
Attention is focused on artificial quasicrystals whose aperiodic, long-range
positional order places them in a unique niche between periodic Bravais lattices
and randomly disordered glasses. A related set of aperiodic, long-range-ordered
lattices based on Fibonacci distortions of periodic Bravais lattices reveal the
effects of continuously variable aperiodicity on magnetic reversal, dynamics and
spin ice behavior. Various types of random disorder can be patterned into all
classes of metamaterials under study to systematically study effects of
aperiodicity and variable point symmetry. Searches are underway for spin wave
localization due to controlled lattice disorder, as well as for finite-size
scaling behavior of physical observables in patterns having variable topology,
size and disorder. &lt;br/&gt;Ferromagnetic resonance, static magnetization,
nanoscale imaging techniques and numerical simulations are used to characterize
magnetic textures, topological defects, spin waves, spin ice behavior and
possible phase transitions in artificial frustrated lattices. Our Team intends
to verify and expand on initial results of scanning electron microscopy with
polarization analysis and numerical simulations that indicate as-grown samples
of artificial quasicrystalline spin ice have magnetic textures that are very
close to a long-sought ferromagnetic ground state. The equilibration and
athermal dynamics of spin ices are investigated using the unique temporal
coherence and phase sensitivity of X-ray photon coherent scattering as a
function of temperature and magnetic field. Initial X-ray scattering results
show a modest applied magnetic field can be used to control the transfer of
orbital angular momentum to a soft X-ray "vortex beam" resonantly scattered from
topological phase singularities generated in the magnetic texture of square
artificial spin ice. Follow-up experiments seek to identify the exact
topological features of spin ice textures that control vortex beam
characteristics.