* 1506772
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of Microgrid Controllers
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2014,04/30/2016
* David Wenzhong Gao, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Microgrid technology (an emerging technology to enhance power system
reliability) is essential to manage the transition to tomorrow's energy supply
model. The United States power grid is evolving into a network of new
technologies with increased reliance on a diversity of energy resources -
resources that are sustainable, renewable and abundant to power homes,
businesses, military installations and industry. Yet, the resources are at the
same time fluctuating and inconsistent. The proposed technology aims to reduce
dependence on the utility grid, and the possibility of major blackouts reduces
to infinitesimal for customers. The successful implementation of the proposed
technology will pave way for more advanced research and development in this
field and contribute to transforming the current energy infrastructure to
becoming more resilient. The benefits of the proposed technology can and will be
felt throughout the spectrum of generators and consumers: generators will
deliver their energy in an optimal and efficient way; and consumers will receive
uninterruptible power supply. With lesser wastage of power, higher power
quality, good storage management at reasonable costs, the proposed technology
resonates with the current demands of the energy market target customers.

This technology is based on novel control strategies for various elements of the
microgrid system (such as different energy resources, energy storage systems,
and customer loads, etc.). This I-Corps team has developed a unique smart
microgrid controller that will enable resource optimization as well as increase
stability of renewable microgrid. With the advent of this technology, the
microgrid will become more robust and efficient. In addition, the goal is to
minimize the total operation cost so that microgrids can be widely adopted in
the energy market. The controller has the ability to effectively synchronize
among different energy resources such as diesel, solar, wind, hydro, etc. under
different operating conditions. The possibility of major blackouts is thereby
reduced to infinitesimal. Thus, the proposed controller equips the microgrid
with higher stability, efficiency, better power quality, reliability and
resiliency. Some distinct features of this smart microgrid controller include:
user-friendliness; increased penetration of renewable energy sources; better co-
ordination and optimal utilization of different energy sources such as wind,
solar, diesel, hydro, etc.; enhanced stability and power quality; effective
battery storage management. The controller works as an intelligent unit and
supports the entire microgrid system thereby enabling customers to save energy
and money.