* 1506345
* Collaborative Research: Attosecond Charge Dynamics in Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Zenghu Chang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

In the late 1800s, flash photography enabled the motion of macroscopic objects
to be slowed to the point where the true order of events could be extracted.
Nearly a century later, femtosecond pulses (1 femtosecond is one millionth of
one billionth of a second) enabled the motions of atoms to be frozen during the
formation and breakup of molecules, resulting in an improved microscopic picture
of chemistry. The advent of attosecond pulses, a million times shorter, allows
the motion of the tiniest building block of matter, the electron, to be stopped
in its tracks. Professors Chang, of the University of Central Florida, and Hill,
of the University of Maryland, together with their students, use attosecond
laser pulses to study electronic charge dynamics on timescales commensurate with
its indigenous motion in atomic and molecular systems. Charge migration, as it
is known, is central to a variety of important processes such as photosynthesis,
radiation damage in biomolecules and photovoltaics used in solar panels. This
collaborative project is providing insight into the collective and interactive
motion of electrons that are ubiquitous in atoms, molecules and solids. An
improved understanding of charge migration will have broad application from
controlling the flow of energy within a molecule to tailoring the performance of
materials to specific needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoinduced charge separation
in molecules is the first step in many chemical processes and central to our
understanding of electron correlation and the energy exchange between electronic
and nuclear motion responsible for catalysis, photosynthesis, photovoltaics and
radiation damage in biomolecules. Comprehensive numerical simulations of complex
molecules predict that when an electron is 'suddenly' removed from one end of a
chain molecule, such as a small peptide, the hole can move to the other end of
the molecule in less than 10 fs, before the electron-nuclear coupling takes
place. Intense, isolated attosecond pulses are required to study this naturally-
occurring charge migration. Professors Chang and Hill, in a collaborative
project between the University of Central Florida (UCF) and the University of
Maryland (UMD), exploit the attosecond source at UCF to investigate charge
migration in multi-electron atoms (He) and multi-atom molecules (SO2) via
attosecond pump - attosecond probe experiments. The pump pulse initiates rapid
excitation (in the absence of nuclear motion in the molecular case) while the
probe pulse monitors the ensuing charge migration. Two probe techniques are used
to 'watch' the charge migration: transient absorption and photoelectron angular
distribution. In distinction with previous attosecond studies, where charge
migration was investigated in the presence of a strong external infrared field,
the UCF-UMD study is probing charge migration subsequent to excitation but in
the absence of any external perturbation. As a consequence, this project is
providing a clearer understanding of charge separation, energy flow and
electron-nuclear charge coupling, which, as stated above, are relevant to a
variety of processes associated with chemical reactions, dynamics in condensed
matter systems and biological phenomena. A secondary goal of this project is the
development of general experimental tools that can be transferred to more
complicated systems, such as ABCU (1-azabicyclo [3.3.3] undecane), for which
theoretical predictions exist and the excitation spectra fall near those of the
model systems of this study.