* 1506901
* The Nineteenth International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB 2015)
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Bonnie Berger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2016
* USD 12,000.00

RECOMB 2015 is the nineteenth in a series of international conferences in
computational molecular biology that will be held in Warsaw, Poland, April
12-15, 2015. The objective of this proposal is to support students and young
researchers to attend this meeting, thus exposing them to exceptional training
opportunities and the latest research in their own areas as well as areas that
may be new to them. Computational biology has become one of the essential tools
of modern biological research and RECOMB is one of the oldest and most
prestigious conferences in the field. The conference series brings together
graduate students, young and senior scientists of many different nationalities,
all of whom perform research in all areas of computational biology, including
work on analyzing genomes and other molecular sequences, understanding the
interaction of complicated systems that underlie biological function, working
with molecular structures that make up these systems, making sense of biological
image data, and advancing the computer models and algorithms needed for all of
these tasks. The RECOMB conference is one of the major international forums for
research in computational molecular biology, particularly the innovative
computer science component of that work. It provides a unique opportunity for
students and top researchers in the field to meet their colleagues, interact in
person, discuss one another's work, and share ideas for future projects.
Students and young researchers will particularly benefit from increased access
to principal role models within the filed. The proposed funding will
specifically extend this opportunity to U.S.-based students who might otherwise
lack the opportunity to participate in the meeting. Overall, students will be
educated on cutting-edge developments that will further drive the research
methods and results of the field of computational biology. Students and
scientists are able to return to their labs to apply what they have learned as
they advance their own research efforts or begin investigating new areas they
were exposed to as a result of attending RECOMB.

The meeting and proposed travel fellowships will have particular value for
educational purposes, creating a unique training opportunity for U.S.-based
students of computational biology. Awarded travel fellowships will cover
registration, hotel, and travel costs for a selected group of student
presenters. Preference will be given to students with proceedings papers that
are accepted for oral presentation at the conference and secondarily to those
making poster presentations of accepted abstracts. Selection will be made by the
conference chairs based on letters of application submitted via the conference
website and reviewers' evaluations of the work to be presented. Women,
minorities and persons with disabilities will be especially encouraged to apply
with the goal of achieving diversity at the meeting and directly benefitting
diverse groups. As much as possible, participant support cost requested in this
grant will be used specifically to fund the travel expenses of students from
these three underrepresented groups in order to increase their access to
training opportunities. By attending the RECOMB meeting, students will gain the
latest skills in computational biology, the field that has the potential to
unlock the secrets for understanding life. The field comprises a vibrant,
growing industry, with skilled computational scientists in high demand at
pharmaceutical, agricultural, environmental, consumer products, biotech,
software, hardware, and service companies. NSF investment in this proposal will
help further students' careers and our nation's competiveness in an expanding,
global industry, and will benefit the public through new discoveries made by
highly trained scientists.