* 1506884
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of Rotation-Time and Inversion-Time Symmetries in Photonic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Liang Feng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 05/31/2018
* USD 209,968.00

Non-Technical Description: The objective of this collaborative research project
is to strategically utilize optical losses to demonstrate novel photonic
materials with unconventional optical properties. The study may lay a solid
foundation for a new generation of sophisticated photonic devices with unique
and highly tunable optical properties, as well as provide a better understanding
of their connection to quantum mechanics, mathematical physics, and materials
science. From the practical point-of-view, the demonstrated novel optical
functionalities in the state-of-the-art photonics technology can significantly
impact the fast-growing areas of optical communications and computing, including
lasers, amplifiers, modulators and detectors. The research is well integrated
with the educational activities at both institutions, such as cutting-edge
science and technology research experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students, and educational outreach activities to promote the interests and
participations of K-12 students and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The primary focus of this
research project is to investigate a quantum-mechanism inspired approach to
realize novel non-Hermitian photonic materials by employing a variety of
symmetry paradigms, including rotation-time, inversion-time, and parity-time
symmetries as well as their combinations. Specifically, this collaborative
research project is to explore rotation-time and inversion-time symmetries in
higher dimensional photonic materials, which completes the anti-linear symmetry
families that involve time reversal and a point group (e.g., rotation and
inversion). The project utilizes the principal investigators' complementary
expertise in optics theory and advanced nanofabrication to design and fabricate
novel chip-scale integrated photonic materials of different symmetries. The
corresponding optical properties in reflection, transmission and scattering are
investigated to characterize different quantum phases and the associated phase
transition. A unified group theory is studied to describe the entire non-
Hermitian symmetry families. The novel photonic materials in this study are
expected to offer unique optical functionalities in the control of light
transport and optical resonant modes, thus enabling a new generation of photonic
devices.