* 1506453
* Theoretical Research on LIGO Noise Reduction and Advanced Interferometer Configurations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Yanbei Chen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports theoretical research related to the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO), with the aim of improving the sensitivity
of LIGO detectors. Research carried out during this project explores the
fundamental quantum and gravitational physics that underlie gravitational-wave
detectors, and the results will be widely relevant to the more general community
of quantum optomechanics. This project will be carried out at professor Yanbei
Chen's research group at the California Institute of Technology; it will serve
as a training ground for young gravitational-wave scientists --- by exposing
them to a variety of research topics, ranging from quantum measurement theory to
classical statistical physics. Members of Chen's research group will interact
closely with members of the LIGO Lab, and the rest of the LIGO Scientific
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically: (A) New techniques of
reducing LIGO's quantum noise will be explored, including the use of active
quantum optomechanical devices, the employment of optical rigidity generated by
multiple optical modes, and the possible application of active medium. The
domain of applicability of the so-called Energetic Quantum Limit for quantum
measurements will be critically studied. (B) Research on advanced interferometer
configurations will be carried out; in particular, the feasibility and merit of
switching interferometer configurations during signal arrival will be
investigated; the effect of optical-mode imperfection on calibration will be
evaluated; a framework for evaluating upgrade strategies for Advanced LIGO
interferometers will be established. (C) Theoretical investigations on thermal
fluctuations of anistoropic coating materials and non-equilibrium cryogenic
suspension systems will be carried out. (D) Strategies of testing fundamental
quantum and gravitational physics using macroscopic test masses and quantum-
limited measurements will be formulated.