* 1506340
* Non-Equilibrium Dynamics in Closed Interacting Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Anatoli Polkovnikov, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 348,754.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education aimed to advance understanding of robust properties of
quantum mechanical systems far from the steady state of equilibrium. The study
of nonequilibrium systems lies at the forefront of experimental and theoretical
research, and will likely play an important role in future technology. However,
current understanding of nonequilibrium systems is limited. In particular, there
are no systematic theoretical approaches like the ones that exist for systems
that are in equilibrium. This project will address fundamental questions
regarding the relationship between the evolution of nonequilibrium systems and
the geometry of their states, and contribute to understanding the nature of
steady states, phases, and phase transitions in systems that receive periodic
external stimuli. In addition, the PI aims to develop new computational methods
for simulating the dynamics of quantum systems. The predictions of this project
will be compared with current state-of-the-art experiments, and could stimulate
new experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funds will fully support one graduate
student, and in addition will contribute to the training of students and
postdocs both from Boston University and other institutions through discussions
and collaborations. It is anticipated that the results of this work will be
published in scientific journals, and will be reported at various conferences,
seminars, schools, and colloquia aimed at a broader audience. The PI will write
pedagogical reviews and lecture notes aimed at both graduate and undergraduate
student audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education focused on addressing fundamental questions about the nature of non-
equilibrium interacting systems, and the practical applications of conceptual
advances to specific experimental setups. The PI aims to address the relation
between quantum dynamics and geometry, investigate emergent equations of motion
of slow macroscopic degrees of freedom coupled to interacting correlated
systems, understand the nature of non-equilibrium steady states in driven
systems, and find systematic ways of interpolating between quantum and classical
dynamics. Specific problems, which will be addressed, include microscopic
derivation of dynamics of slow degrees of freedom, like positions and shapes of
macroscopic objects, coupled to fast interacting quantum systems; finding
general relations among kinematic coefficients like mass tensor, response
functions and the quantum geometric tensor; and finding leading corrections to
conventional Hamiltonian dynamics. The PI will also carry out the theoretical
analysis of steady states and transient dynamics in periodically driven systems
both isolated and coupled to the environment. This work will aim at
understanding energy localization and ergodicity, emergent conservation laws,
phases and phase transitions and others. The third topic will focus on
developing new numerical methods for simulating quantum dynamics. The key idea
is to extend semiclassical methods to higher dimensional phase space by
introducing extra degrees of freedom representing correlation functions. The PI
aims to apply these ideas to specific experimentally relevant setups. The
proposal will also involve close collaboration with experimental groups that
focus on explaining existing results and the implementation of theoretical ideas
in new experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funds will fully support one
graduate student, and in addition will contribute to the training of students
and postdocs both from Boston University and other institutions through
discussions and collaborations. It is anticipated that the results of this work
will be published in scientific journals, and will be reported at various
conferences, seminars, schools, and colloquia aimed at a broader audience. The
PI will write pedagogical reviews and lecture notes aimed at both graduate and
undergraduate student audiences.