* 1506297
* Collaborative Research: Pervasive Spectrum Sharing for Public Safety  Communications
* MPS,AST
* 08/14/2014,08/31/2018
* Walid Saad, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2018
* USD 178,502.00

Next-generation public safety communication (PSC) systems must deliver high-
capacity wireless services to public safety personnel and users in disaster-
affected areas, with little reliance on infrastructure. Remarkably, modern-day
PSC systems have yet to catch up with the past decade's wireless revolution, as
they still rely on technologies of yesteryears that fall short on delivering
high-speed wireless access. Indeed, coping with the foreseen stringent service
requirements in future PSC systems mandates major innovations that can increase
spectral efficiency. This, in turn, requires tackling multidisciplinary
challenges: 1) developing incentive mechanisms for government agencies,
providers, and users to share their precious spectrum resources; 2) dynamically
managing interdependent spectrum markets; and 3) efficiently modeling and
operating sustainable communication protocols that can function with little
infrastructure support. This project brings together researchers in wireless
communications and networking, game theory, mathematics, and public safety
administration to address these challenges and boost the efficiency of PSC by
introducing a novel framework that provides the necessary analytical tools for
modeling, designing, analyzing, and operating large-scale spectrum sharing in
disaster and emergency situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
scientific merit of this research is to initiate the much-needed leap towards a
more open, highly participatory, and pervasive sharing of the wireless spectrum
for PSC. This project offers an array of spectrum sharing innovations: 1) new
economic approaches and PSC mechanisms that provide incentives for government
agencies, providers, and end-users, to effectively subsidize the scarce radio
spectrum and facilitate novel public safety and spectrum allocation policies; 2)
a foundational framework that tightly integrates tools from game theory and
auction theory for enabling a dynamic operation of co-existing spectrum sharing
markets with multi-hop capabilities; 3) novel realistic models for
characterizing wireless channels, traffic, topology, user behavior, and mobility
in PSC; and 4) effective and accelerated transition of theoretical results to
practice via a new PSC testbed for extensive validation and close collaboration
with several major industry partners and local public safety agencies. In a
nutshell, the project provides a new generation of PSC systems and protocols
that expedite the response to disasters, save lives, and reduce economic costs.