* 1506968
* SusChEM:  Cellulose Nanomaterials Modified with Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Kenneth Carter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2020
* USD 558,490.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The goal of this project is to prepare cellulose nanomaterials that perform as
advanced functional materials. Sustainable feedstocks of nanocellulose such as
nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) and nanocrystalline cellulose (NC) will be the
platform for the development of a new class of advanced functional
nanomaterials. These nanomaterials represent an appealing platform for the
attachment of specially designed polymer chains that will allow for the
transformation of simple, renewable, and abundant cellulose into materials that
can be used for technological applications. The advanced properties of these new
materials will be demonstrated in selected sensor applications. Cellulose is the
primary component in the cell wall of most green plants, and therefore the most
abundant organic material on the planet. Because of its useful materials
properties it is one humankind's most widely used natural resources. The
development of advanced products based on abundant cellulose nanomaterials as a
feedstock could reduce our reliance on petroleum-based polymers and contribute
also to ecological sustainability. The project will provide research training
and education to students who will be taught new techniques and advanced
characterization methods, as well as implementation of nanomaterials into
industrially relevant fabrication processes. The project also will serve to
attract undergraduate students to the program and to enhance diversity of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. The research and education in this
project is designed to help maintain US competitiveness in new areas of
sustainable nanotechnology.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The primary scientific goal of this project is to prepare cellulose
nanomaterials that perform as advanced functional materials. In this project,
sustainable feedstocks of nanocellulose such as nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC)
and nanocrystalline cellulose (NC) will be the platform for the development of a
new class of advanced functional nanomaterials. These nanomaterials represent an
appealing platform for the attachment of semiconducting polymer moieties to
enable the utilization of simple, renewable, and abundant natural materials for
advanced optical and electrical applications. This goal will be accomplished
through a carefully crafted project where (a) new grafting chemistries will be
explored, (b) new semiconducting polymer/cellulose nanomaterial composites will
be characterized, (c) an understanding on how semiconducting polymer properties
are affected by attachment to cellulose scaffolds will be realized, and (d) the
advanced properties of these new materials will be demonstrated in selected
sensor applications. An understanding of methods and limitations to fabrication
will be developed and selected applications will be explored as a demonstration
of the material's potential technological value. Numerous applications may be
enabled by these materials -- e.g., sensors, functional papers, batteries &
capacitors, displays, electrochromic devices, photovoltaic devices, etc. The
project will provide research training and education to students who will be
taught new techniques and advanced characterization methods, as well as
implementation of nanomaterials into industrially relevant fabrication
processes. As part of this education, the students will be encouraged to attend
scientific regional and national meetings. The project will serve to attract
undergraduate students to the program and to enhance diversity of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. The research and education in this
project is designed to help maintain US competitiveness in new areas of
sustainable nanotechnology.