* 1506335
* I-Corps:  A New Multi-DOF Reduced-Gravity Simulation Technology for Aerospace and Healthcare Applications
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2014,08/31/2015
* Ou Ma, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Astronauts must go through extensive training of their space-walk tasks in a
simulated micro- or reduced-gravity environment before they can perform the
tasks in space. The currently used technologies for such training are either
extremely expensive (e.g., the neutral buoyancy and parabolic flight
technologies) or of low simulation fidelity (e.g., the cable-based suspension
technology). Therefore, new reduced-gravity technologies of low-cost, high
fidelity, and safe operation are needed in space industry to meet the future
manned space exploration missions. Additionally, millions of patients who have
lost mobility capabilities due to injury, stroke or other diseases also need
reduced-gravity simulation technology (as body-weight offloading devices) to
support their rehabilitation for restoring locomotion and mobility functions.
Currently used devices for such a purpose are either very expensive (such as the
robotics-based rehabilitation devices) or of constraining too much mobility
(e.g., cable-based suspension devices). Therefore, low-cost and dexterous body-
weight offloading devices are needed for better rehabilitation in healthcare
industry. This project aims at speeding up the process of commercializing a new,
passive and dexterous reduced-gravity physical simulation technology and its
prototype device.

Developed based on a spring-based passive balancing technique, the proposed
reduced-gravity simulation technology and device can compensate its own weight
and any desired percentile (from 0% to 100%) of the weight of a person attached
to the device, such that the person, while walking or doing some other physical
exercises, will biomechanically feel like he or she were in a microgravity or
reduced-gravity environment such as in an orbiting spacecraft or on the Moon,
Mars or another planet. The design of the mechanism takes into account of the
natural multi-directional mobility of human limbs and joints so that a person
attached to the device will feel unrestricted and comfortable. Further, since
the device is passive in operation (i.e., not powered or actuated), it is
intrinsically safe, inexpensive and easy to maintain. These are appealing
advantages for the users of the device. At the end of the proposed project, the
I-Corps team will have a clear understanding of the market-specific needs, new
design requirements for addressing the market/customer needs, and an
implementable plan of how to transit the new technology into real products.