* 1506473
* An integrated photonic device in diamond to generate quantum entanglement, a computational resource for quantum information processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Kai-Mei Fu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2018
* USD 378,000.00

Abstract title: An integrated photonic device in diamond to generate quantum
entanglement, a computational resource for quantum information processing

Abstract:

Nontechnial description:

This project seeks to demonstrate a quantum device that is an essential building
block in a quantum computing network. The device will generate entanglement, a
computational resource, between two electron spins in diamond. The main
challenge for generating entanglement between spins is performing the operation
quickly compared to the entanglement lifetime. Prior experiments in diamond
which utilized free-space optical components realized generation rates in the
10-100 millihertz regime. Here we seek to utilize integrated photonics to
realize kilohertz rates. The materials platform contains an optical waveguiding
layer built in the semiconductor gallium phosphide. This waveguiding layer
connects quantum nodes composed of nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond. A third
detetor layer, made from the superconducting material niobium nitride, is used
to detect the photons emitted from the nitrogen-vacancy centers. Kilohertz
entanglement rates in a scalable platform will enable the realization of large
quantum networks. These networks can be utilized to solve computational problems
which cannot be solved on a classical computer. Graduate and undergraduates
involved in the research will be trained in the design, fabrication, and testing
of cutting edge photonic and quantum device technologies. Additionally, a
mobile, hands-on demonstration table, which presents fundamental concepts of
materials science through diamond-based activities, will be developed and
employed at the University of Washington and Seattle-wide science outreach
events.

Technical description:

Atomic-like solid-state defects are attractive candidates for scalable quantum
information processing due to the potential to integrate these defects into
devices. However, the challenges associated with tuning the individual quantum
properties of these defects, as well as the difficulty in controlling
interactions between defects, has thus far prohibited the realization of a
scalable defect-based quantum network. This works seeks to demonstrate a quantum
device, an on-chip entanglement generation unit, that is expected to serve as an
essential building block for such a network. A novel, hybrid photonic structure
will be utilized that integrates gallium phosphide as an optical device layer
with a diamond substrate which hosts the nitrogen-vacancy quantum information
nodes. The device utilizes photon interference to generate entanglement, which
requires control of the optical properties of individual nitrogen-vacancy
centers. This control is provided by integrated electrodes compatible with the
gallium phosphide layer. The gallium phosphide device layer enables efficient
collection and routing of nitrogen-vacancy photons to waveguide-integrated
superconducting detectors to achieve kilohertz electron entanglement rates.