* 1506139
* BOOST 2015 Workshop Hosted by the Enrico Fermi Institute at the University of Chicago; Chicago, IL; August 10-14, 2015.
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* LianTao Wang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 02/29/2016
* USD 7,000.00

This award will provide participant and infrastructure support for early career
scientists and graduate students to participate in the seventh BOOST workshop
that is planned to take place August 10 - 14 at the University of Chicago, Il.
The main goal of this workshop is to bring together people with an interest in
particle physics and the eventual discovery, possibly at the LHC, of particles
whose existence is not predicted in the Standard Model (SM). This interest will
focus on patterns that can be experimentally recognized in particle jets arising
from decays of massive, beyond SM particles decaying to lighter systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the study of signatures in particle jets
for boosted decays of heavy systems, other questions that lie at the forefront
of our understanding of beyond SM physics will also be examined. The 2015
workshop is expected to draw participation from approximately 130 physicists
divided between experimental collider physics from both theoretical end
experimental aspects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The scientific
thrust is basic research that affects many areas of modern science and
technology. A better understanding of the potential connections between new
fundamental particles will lead to determining their impact on the early
universe. The program will offer a stimulating environment for interaction
between diverse groups of scientists and will contribute directly to training of
young US scientists. The LHC has become, in recent times, a scientific endeavour
of broad interest and familiarity to many citizens of the world.