* 1506683
* Molecular Plasmonics: Single Molecule and Ultrafast Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Richard Van Duyne, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

With this project, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Richard P. Van Duyne of Northwestern University to
explore two new spectroscopic techniques. One of these can detect and identify
individual molecules as they bind to surfaces and chemically react. The other
can measure molecular structure changes on ultrafast timescales similar to that
for a molecule to vibrate just once. In other words, we are aiming to take
molecular snapshots of single molecules doing chemistry. This project has
substantial promise to advance knowledge in a broad range of fields including
healthcare, communications, chemical analysis and imaging. The project will
provide interdisciplinary training for graduate student researchers on the Van
Duyne team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on advances in the
application two new spectroscopic techniques to the field of molecular
plasmonics. The first is single molecule surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
(SMSERS). At present, SMSERS is the only technique that can both detect and
identify a single molecule in ambient, gas, or liquid environments. SMSERS will
be used to probe more deeply into the fundamental interactions between molecules
and surfaces. The second technique is surface-enhanced femtosecond stimulated
Raman spectroscopy (SE-FSRS). The fundamental light-matter interaction mechanism
of SE-FSRS will be investigated through systematic studies of laser power
dependence, polarization dependence, and spectral relations between the laser
pulses and the plasmon resonance(s) of the nanoparticles used as substrates.
Ultimately the goal is to probe the reactivity of surface bound molecules at the
intrinsic femtosecond timescales of chemistry. Van Duyne's research program has
developed this subdiscipline of SERS and related plasmonic spectroscopies. These
methods are now major analytical tools in chemistry, physics, materials science
biomedical engineering, and biology. This project seeks to continue to extend
the impact of plasmonic spectroscopy on surface science, chemical measurements
at the limits of sensitivity and time scale, chemical and biological imaging,
electrochemistry, catalysis, art conservation and cultural heritage science.