* 1506850
* Revolutionary and Efficient Synthesis of Cyclic Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Adam Veige, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 323,160.00

With thia award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professors Adam Veige and Brent Sumerlin
of the University of Florida to synthesize and characterize polymers that are
cyclic and to establish the differerences between these polymers and their
linear analogs.Plastics are often comprised of long chain-like molecules called
polymers. Plastics are ubiquitous in modern life and in part are responsible for
the current high standard and quality of life enjoyed by industrialized nations.
Polymers have many different topologies (shapes), but most commonly they are
long linear chains. Accessing this new class of polymers and determining their
unique properties may create new opportunities for the development of functional
materials. Through participating in this cross-disciplinary project, graduate
and undergraduate students acquire a diverse set of advanced technical skills
for modern inorganic and polymer synthesis and for characterization.

The properties of polymers are, in part, dictated by their chain ends. Cyclic
polymers inherently do not have chain ends, and as a consequence, unique
physical properties arise. Investigating cyclic polymers remains a challenge
even after many decades. Thus, a longstanding challenge in polymer chemistry is
to synthesize cyclic polymers efficiently, with diverse compositions, high
purity, high molecular weights, and from readily available monomers. This
proposal addresses the challenge of synthesizing pure cyclic polymers by
employing new catalyst technology developed at the University of Florida. The
project involves the synthesis of the first examples of macrocyclic polyenes
with high molecular weights. Of particular interest is the synthesis of the
first example of cyclic polypropylene and to examine its tacticity. Another
important target is cyclic polyacetylene. The parent linear polyacetylene, when
doped, remains one of the highest conducting polymers known, though it has
limited use since it is unstable in air and intractable. It is one of the aims
of this project to investigate how the conductive properties, solubility, and
stability differ for the cyclic version. Facilitated access to cyclic analogs of
well-known linear polymers provides a convenient method to investigate
fundamental structure-property relationships.