* 1506328
* Gauge theory and Floer homology in low-dimensional topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Daniel Ruberman, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2019
* USD 219,573.00

The understanding of the structure of the 4-dimensional universe in which we
live is a key topic of investigation in modern mathematics and physics. Many of
the questions posed by geometers and topologists have to do with the nature of
2-dimensional surfaces sitting in a 4-dimensional space, and with the
singularities present on such surfaces. The research in this project uses modern
tools of analysis and geometry to shed light on the local nature of such
singularities, including new methods for showing that such singularities cannot
be smoothed. Related analytical techniques will be used to explore the global
topology of 4-dimensional spaces, including an investigation of their
symmetries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Ruberman will carry out research in
geometric topology, using Seiberg-Witten gauge theory, Heegaard-Floer homology,
and more traditional topological techniques. The first parts of the project,
joint with Nikolai Saveliev and Tomasz Mrowka, are concerned with the smooth
topology of 4-manifolds that homologically resemble a product of a 3-dimensional
manifold with a circle. The central questions center around the interpretation
of the classical Rohlin invariant in terms of gauge theory; solutions of the
main problems will decide the existence of manifolds predicted by high
dimensional surgery theory. The PI will work with Adam Levine and Saso Strle on
applications of new invariants from Heegaard Floer theory to torsion homology
classes in 4-manifolds, with Levine and Matthew Hedden on ends of 4-manifolds,
and with Selman Akbulut on the construction of new smooth 4-manifolds. A final
portion, joint with David Auckly, Hee Jung Kim, and Paul Melvin, is concerned
with the topology of the diffeomorphism group of a 4-dimensional manifold and
how it is affected by stabilization of the manifold.