* 1506091
* A Toolbox for Gating Enzyme Activity using Chemistry and Protein Design
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Indraneel Ghosh, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 06/30/2019
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Indraneel Ghosh from the University of Arizona to
develop new methods for controlling the activities of enzymes implicated in
posttranslational chemical modifications using a combination of protein
engineering and designed small molecules. The biological activity of proteins is
controlled by numerous posttranslational modifications, whereby small chemical
entities are added to newly synthesized proteins. Almost all enzymes that are
responsible for catalyzing posttranslational modifications belong to large
families with similar structures. This similarity precludes the design of
specific small molecule probes for the direct inhibition or activation of the
function of a specific enzyme. A few elegant chemical genetic approaches have
been developed to address this need but it remains challenging to control the
activity of more than one enzyme within the same family in order to turn-on a
desired enzyme to probe biology or engineer new and useful pathways. This
proposal seeks to establish a toolbox of enzymes that respond to unique
molecular switches. This project at the interface of chemistry and biology will
offer a rich training ground for a diverse collection of undergraduate and
graduate students. The research will also accelerate the development of
multidisciplinary undergraduate courses, with a focus on modern laboratory
research methods and cross-disciplinary colloquiums for discussing a number of
current topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, enzymes involved in
acetylation and deacetylation will be redesigned for rendering them amenable to
small molecule control. A new and general method for controlling specific
enzymes will also be developed using an engineered allosteric switch. New
knowledge obtained from the proposed approaches has the potential to provide the
community with the ability to target multiple enzymes with unprecedented
orthogonal control. These methods have the potential to better decipher the
chemical cross-talk that governs biology and aid in the reengineering of
cellular pathways with many potential applications.