* 1506657
* II-NEW: WiMi: A Reconfigurable Platform for Millimeter-Wave Wireless Networking and Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Parameswaran Ramanathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 899,279.00

Millimeter-wave (mmWave) radios will be a cornerstone of next-generation
broadband cellular networks and gigabit-per-second (Gbps) WiFi networks.
Commercialization of portable mmWave devices will also enable ubiquitous mmWave
sensing applications, which used to be available only in dedicated environment
for medical/security inspection. However, existing research of these prospects
commonly rely on simulation or analytical models, which cannot reproduce the
sophisticated characteristics of real mmWave radio environment. This proposal
aims to overcome the barrier by establishing WiMi, a software-radio testbed to
advance mmWave research and education. WiMi integrates programmable radio
components, which allow flexible prototyping and testing of mmWave systems. WiMi
will facilitate high-impact research and education in the domain of mmWave
wireless networking and sensing. Its potential impacts include: (i) accelerating
the development of the 5G broadband cellular networks and Gbps WiFi, which has
potential to meet the 1000x increase of mobile data traffic; (ii) fostering
cross-disciplinary research that involves communications theory, wireless
networking, mobile sensing and biomedical engineering; (iii) encouraging
reproducible, experimental-driven research in mmWave systems by disseminating
the hardware/software components and test results; (iv) stimulating
collaboration across multiple research institutions, and between universities
and industrial partners; and (v) modernizing communications/networking courses
with knowledge of mmWave communication and sensing systems, and promote hands-on
experiences with a reconfigurable radio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects
initiates a 3-year plan to build a full-fledged platform with novel baseband, 60
GHz &amp; 80 GHz RF front-end, reconfigurable beamforming antenna, and 2x2
mmWave Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO). The PIs will implement the plan
via three major research thrusts: (i) Reconfigurable mmWave communication
hardware, with gigabit samples per second baseband sampling/processing speed,
57-64 GHz and 81-86 GHz carrier frequencies, 2x2 MIMO and digitally steerable
phased-array antenna. (ii) Software-defined signal processing modules and real-
time MAC, running on a multi-core processor and an FPGA cluster. (iii) 60 GHz RF
sensing APIs for object/human activity sensing and mmWave imaging using
steerable beams. A combination of these elements will make WiMi a first and
unique platform to benefit the mmWave wireless research community at large.