* 1506619
* Intrinsic and Extrinsic Losses in Nanoelectromechanical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* N Aluru, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2019
* USD 362,837.00

Title: Intrinsic and Extrinsic Losses in Nanoelectromechanical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a
fundamental understanding of energy losses in nanostructures and to exploit this
knowledge for enhanced performance of
nanostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) have
attracted significant interest as they promise high frequencies and quality
factors (Q). However, many recent experimental studies have observed that the
mechanical quality factor, Q, defined as the ratio of the energy stored to the
energy lost per unit period, of NEMS is much lower than those from theoretical
predictions. This discrepancy can be attributed to the novel physics that arises
at the nanoscale and is not accounted for in the classical theory. The
attainable frequencies in NEMS are comparable to the phonon frequencies and this
can introduce new sources of intrinsic dissipation, such as Akhiezer damping,
which can significantly reduce the quality factors. In addition, as the surface
to volume ratio is higher at nanoscale, surfaces act as an additional source of
dissipation reducing the Q. To realize the full potential of NEMS, it is
important to develop a comprehensive physical understanding of all dissipation
mechanisms at nanoscale. Through this knowledge, high Q nanostructures can be
engineered. Since classical theories do not adequately describe dissipation at
nanoscale, the focus of this project is to develop atomistic and multiscale
approaches to understand dissipation in
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide interdisciplinary
research, education and training of graduate and undergraduate students and the
research results will be widely disseminated for broader
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two types
of mechanical losses, namely intrinsic and extrinsic, will be considered and
understood. Intrinsic losses or energy dissipation mechanisms are those that are
inherent to the nanostructure. Popular sources of intrinsic dissipation are
Akhiezer damping, thermo-elastic damping, surfaces, defects, etc. Most
nanostructures operate in a fluid medium, so in addition to intrinsic losses,
extrinsic losses, defined as the dissipation caused by the fluid, also needs to
be taken into account. The key objectives of this project are to (i) Develop
atomistic and multiscale computational approaches to understand intrinsic losses
in a variety of one-dimensional and two-dimensional nanostructures.
Comprehensive theories to model Akhiezer, thermo-elastic, defects, surfaces and
other sources of intrinsic dissipation will be developed. (ii) Develop atomistic
and multiscale computational approaches to understand extrinsic losses. To
determine extrinsic losses, coupled fluidic and structural analysis is
necessary. To compute fluidic forces acting on the nanostructure, a
comprehensive multiscale approach will be developed. The multiscale approach for
fluidic analysis will be coupled with a multiscale approach for nanostructural
analysis to determine extrinsic losses. (iii) Establish validation of the
computational approaches by comparing computed quality factors with experimental
data. In addition, various applications of NEMS such as high frequency
resonators, energy harvesting and mass sensing will be pursued.