* 1506268
* EAPSI:Improving Electric Power Grid Resilience through a Smart-Grid-Enabled Voltage Support Framework
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Hao Jan 'Max' Liu, Liu                     HaoJan
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Large system-wise power outages such as the 2003 Northeast blackout are among
the greatest catastrophes in the U.S. Within two days of the 2003 outage, over
50 million people lost power, and this event contributed to at least 11 deaths
and cost an estimated $6 billion. According to U.S.-Canada Power System Outage
Task Force, inadequate reactive power support is one of the primary causes of
voltage collapse leading to a system-wise blackout. The principle objective of
this research is to determine the optimal control strategy for reactive power
support from distributed power electronics inverters. It contributes to
increasing electric power grid system robustness, reliability and stability.
Most importantly, it will lay a solid foundation for future advancements with
distributed reactive power support framework. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Kyeon Hur, an expert in the field of smart-grid
technology and development, at the Yonsei University Smart Grid Research Lab,
Seoul, South Korea.

Traditionally, a centralized control scheme can be used to improve voltage
profile in a distribution feeder. However, a full knowledge of system states and
two-way communications between end-users and the control center are needed. In
addition, such scheme has high computational cost and is not prone to
communication failures. Under the realm of smart grid technologies, this
research aims to develop a voltage measurement based distributed adaptive
control scheme motived by alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM).
The proposed control scheme would be able to stabilize the grid voltages under
random disturbances such as sudden drop of renewable generations and frequent
load variations. Moreover, implementing this control would only require
communication between adjacent neighbors, which reduces communication overhead
and strengthens the system security. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.