* 1506898
* SBIR RAPID: Filovirus Ebola Simulants to help improve the effectiveness and reliability of personal protective equipment for protection from Ebola exposure.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2015
* David Schultz, Seashell Technology
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 148,650.00

The proposed research will lead to a more thorough characterization of the
effectiveness, or lack thereof, of currently utilized protective equipment for
personnel in contact with Ebola virus infected individuals. This knowledge will
have immediate benefit to medical personnel and allow for the identification of
suitable protective equipment that will protect both medical personnel and other
persons who are subject to exposure to Ebola. This work will lead to novel assay
systems that can be integrated into standard quality control assessment of
existing medical protective materials, and allow for protective performance
assessment of unique super water repellent materials, manufactured and sold by
Seashell Technology, to Ebola simulants. A significant societal benefit will be
attained by the ability to deliver a novel, inexpensive, improved barrier that
can be supplied to individuals in impacted areas. The use of these materials in
infected areas will have the potential to significantly lower Ebola transmission
rates, lead to control of the epidemic, curtail the economic consequences
associated with the current epidemic, and reduce deaths and suffering. These
same materials will have significant benefit for control of future potential
Ebola breakouts.

The objectives of this research project are to determine the protective
performance of medically relevant barriers to penetration by individually
optically trackable Ebola viral simulants. This will provide an opportunity to
increase the tools that can be used to study this deadly class of viruses. The
work proposed has significant potential to advance our knowledge of the spread
of Ebola and the types of protective equipment that will block viral
penetration. The Ebola virus has a unique rod-shaped morphology, unlike any
other strain of virus; therefore standard methods of modeling viral barrier
effectiveness cannot be accurately interpreted. Seashell Technology's ability to
manufacture the individually optically trackable Ebola viral simulants and
extensive knowledge of this type of particles dispersion properties provide a
unique opportunity to better assess the potential spread of Ebola. Additionally,
the protective performance to Ebola penetration of an inexpensive super water
repellent breathable fabric, created using a nanostructured coating material
that can be economically and rapidly manufactured by Seashell Technology, will
be assessed. Should this fabric provide excellent protection from Ebola exposure
there is an opportunity to supply this protective material to persons in the
areas impacted by the epidemic and significantly reduce the transmission of
Ebola.