* 1506330
* RUI: Low-Energy Electron Scattering From Uracil and Thymine
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Leigh Hargreaves, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 275,011.00

Since the early 2000's it has been understood that free electrons in biological
environments are able to interact with, and cause damage to, DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid). This is in spite of the generally slow speeds of these
electrons. This finding carried significant implications in various fields of
biomedicine, in particular those that employ radiation as a therapeutic measure.
This is due to the fact that such radiation creates free electrons within the
body, which effectively constitutes a secondary radiation dose. However, to this
day the effect of these electrons is largely excluded from most dosage
calculations, in part due to the paucity of fundamental data describing how free
electrons interact with molecules that make up DNA. Experimental physics
techniques to measure electron interaction "cross sections," a quantity that
describes the chemistry of a molecule by characterizing its physical size and
shape, are well established for many targets. These techniques require molecules
to be in the gas phase, however, whereas commercial samples of most biological
molecules are solids (powders) at room temperature. While changing a substance
from solid to gas is possible by simply heating it, this approach is
incompatible with other crucial aspects of most standard experimental
techniques. The research supported by this project will commission a new
apparatus that will employ new measurement techniques, compatible with heated
samples, to make measurements of electron interactions with DNA molecules.
Improving our fundamental understanding of electron interactions with biological
molecules will allow the effects of radiation on biological material to be more
accurately included into radiation dosage calculations, which may ultimately
enable the radiation to be better targeted to where it is needed
most.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will commission a new electron
scattering spectrometer for the purpose of making measurements of the total,
total elastic, and elastic differential cross sections for the nucleobases, with
a view to making measurements of uracil and thymine within the time frame of the
current project. Under this project, a beam of electrons is sent through a large
volume of a heated gas cell containing a vapor of the target under
consideration. The use of a large volume cell, rather than a traditional crossed
beam technique, allows for a sufficient number of electron-target interactions
to achieve reasonable statistics in the signal, and removes complications with
normalizing the measurements since the target volume and density are easily
characterized. However, the approach defeats using the detector location to
determine the final state momentum of the scattered particle, as the scattering
location is not well localized. Instead, this work will employ a modified
version of the "magnetic beamline" technique, pioneered at the University of
California San Diego for studies of positron interactions with atoms and
molecules, whereby a strong magnetic field guides all scattered electrons along
the spectrometer axis to a detector, and a retarding electric field is used to
determine their momentum components parallel to and perpendicular to the
spectrometer axis, thus determining their final state momentum. In addition to
making these measurements on nucleobase molecules, this project will demonstrate
improvements to the magnetic beamline technique, by demonstrating methods for
generating high energy-resolution electron beams in strong magnetic fields. In
addition, this work aims to use fast pulsing techniques to address the loss of
information that is currently inherent in the technique due to reflection of
electrons scattered in the backwards scattering direction.