* 1506499
* RUI: Coherence-Derived Light Fluctuations for Atomic Magnetometry
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Stephen Tufte, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 113,008.00

Significant advancements in 21st century physics have relied on the discovery
that properties of atoms are not fixed, but can be changed by interactions with
laser light. The ability to understand and control these sensitive interactions
is also the key to the creation of new atom-light based technologies. Some atom-
light interactions are sensitive to the surrounding magnetic field. As an
example, an atom is extremely selective about the precise colors of light it
absorbs, but when it is placed in a magnetic field, the atom's color choices
will shift depending on the strength of the field. Such interactions can be used
as the foundation of a device, called an "atomic magnetometer," that can measure
unknown magnetic fields. This investigation studies interactions between laser
light and a specially prepared gas of atoms that is sensitive to small
variations in the surrounding magnetic field. The special preparation uses two
lasers and a controlled magnetic field to temporarily but dramatically change
how laser light travels through a gas of atoms. As a result, the laser light's
brightness fluctuates, or flickers, in ways that are not yet fully understood.
These fluctuations not only carry information about the atoms, but they are also
especially sensitive to magnetic field variations. This research will further
our scientific understanding of atom-light interactions, which is of broad
interest for many technological applications. Simultaneously, the research will
produce new techniques for detecting small, unknown magnetic fields, like the
magnetic fields emitted from the human heart. The new detection methods will
potentially impact a broad range of medical and scientific fields, and because
they make use of low-cost and potentially portable laser systems, any resulting
technological applications will be widely accessible and suitable for use
outside of the laboratory environment. Undergraduate students will be involved
at all stages of this research agenda, preparing them for careers in research
science and other STEM-related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light intensity
fluctuations derived from atomic coherence can encode valuable information about
coherence dynamics in an atomic vapor. Furthermore, they provide a platform for
a new class of compact and simple atomic magnetometers. This research agenda
uses low-cost, free-running diode lasers with inherent frequency noise that is
converted into information-rich intensity noise near an atomic resonance. The
amplitude and phase of the intensity fluctuations are particularly sensitive to
small magnetic field variations near an atomic coherence between Zeeman
sublevels. Hanle effect Electromagnetically Induced Transparency will be induced
in rubidium vapor and used to prototype and optimize a novel magnetometry
technique relying on coherence-derived light fluctuations. The converted laser
intensity noise will be studied using self-correlations and spectrum analysis.
The findings will deepen our understanding of the relationship between the light
fluctuations and the underlying atomic coherence, as well as give us the tools
to build a new atomic magnetometer. Moreover, the results will provide useful
insight for mitigating noise from imperfect lasers.