* 1506930
* Real-time X-ray Scattering Studies of Oxide Epitaxial Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Randall Headrick, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
and Ceramic (CER) Programs in the Division of Materials Research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: X-rays are an enormously
powerful tool for the study of materials: they can measure structures down to
atomic dimensions using diffraction because of their short wavelength, and they
can reach inside materials because they are not strongly absorbed. Synchrotrons
are the brightest sources of X-rays available to scientists. In this project,
real-time X-ray scattering is used to study the growth of crystalline metal
oxide thin films in a special film deposition chamber customized for
installation at a synchrotron source. A movie of the X-ray scattering pattern
from the growing surface as a function of time is used to learn about the atomic
structure of the crystalline layers as they assemble from the vapor phase, which
yields important insights in the quest to create new materials with improved or
novel properties. Examples of useful properties include the ability to store an
electrical charge via a relative shift of positive and negative ions in the
crystal lattice (ferroelectric effect), or to produce an electrical voltage when
deformed (piezoelectric effect). These effects, and several other more exotic
effects can potentially be modified through growth of artificially-produced thin
films (e.g., with alternating layers of two different materials, each only a few
atoms thick). Due to their novel properties, metal oxides are significant in a
number of applications, including electronic memories, detectors, actuators and
energy harvesters. This project provides graduate student training in a highly
interdisciplinary area, and it introduces undergraduate students to X-ray
science and thin film deposition technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This project utilizes a new world-class synchrotron facility at
Brookhaven National Laboratory (NSLS II) to carry out in situ time-resolved
X-ray scattering studies of the evolution of surfaces, interfaces, and
multilayers composed of oxide materials during thin film growth by pulsed laser
deposition. Perovskite oxides exhibit an extraordinary variety of complex
structural distortions and associated functional properties, which may also be
continuously tunable through growth of non-equilibrium structures. However,
realizing synthetic structures through the growth of epitaxial thin films and
multilayers currently involves a time-consuming trial and error approach, which
greatly limits the pace of progress towards new materials and devices. In situ
synchrotron X-ray scattering provides the capability to generate reciprocal
space maps in a matter of seconds. These maps provides real time information on
the evolution of both in and out of plane lattice parameters, polar domain
structure, surface roughness and surface termination, in a single snapshot, thus
providing critical feedback on the relationship between growth process variables
and the resulting atomic structure. This project also focuses on fundamental
issues related to the role of impact-induced energetic processes in promoting
the formation of planar interfaces, and how such processes can be controlled to
produce improved materials. Specific atomic-scale mechanisms are being tested
using in situ X-ray scattering to follow the dynamics of surfaces of oxide thin
films during deposition. This project also provides an exciting possibility for
graduate students to gain expertise in both thin film growth and
characterization of materials by advanced methods, and for undergraduate
students to participate in an interdisciplinary project involving university-
national laboratory collaborations.