* 1506504
* Characterization and Control of Structure, Energetics and Electrical Properties at Interfaces between Perovskite Active Layers and Charge-Collection Electrodes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Neal Armstrong, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 403,833.00

Nontechnical Description: This project focuses on the characterization and
control of the interfaces formed between electrodes and new materials
(perovskites) that have shown great promise as active layers in new solar cell
platforms. Such platforms have potential as inexpensive, earth-abundant
alternatives for production of electricity from sunlight. One of the key
challenges in the development of new energy conversion platforms is the
understanding and optimization of the transfer of electrical charges between the
active layer material and the electrical contacts. This project develops new
measurement approaches in order to understand the structure of the active layer
near the electrical contact, and how this structure influences electrical
properties that ultimately control energy conversion efficiency. The project
also provides opportunities for training of graduate students at the University
of Arizona and for undergraduate students from the AZ Science, Engineering, and
Math Scholars (ASEMS) Program, which focuses on students from minority
populations, low-income households, and families where the student is the first
to attend college. The co-principal investigators also continue a partnership
with Yavapai Community College in Prescott, Arizona - providing "gateway"
research experiences for freshman and sophomores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: This project focuses on the nanometer-scale characterization and
control of physical, energetic and electrical property heterogeneity, across
interfaces between metal halide perovskites, as well as hybrid active layer
materials, and electrical contacts. These interfaces are model systems to
explore charge collection or injection in emerging thin-film solar energy
conversion platforms. The project includes: a) control of interface composition
in prototype electrical contacts and charge selective interlayers, using self-
assembled monolayers with terminal functional groups that "template" growth of
perovskite active layers; b) characterization of valence band energies and
energetic dispersion as a function of active layer structure via high-
sensitivity UV-photoemission spectroscopies and high-resolution, angle-resolved
X-ray photoemission; c) probing conduction band energies in the active layer and
dispersion in band edge energies arising from compositional and structural
heterogeneity, using waveguide-based spectroelectrochemical techniques; d)
characterization of the electrical properties of contact/active layer
heterojunctions at 10-100 nm length scales using conducting-tip atomic force
microscopy to map heterogeneity in electrical properties. This fundamental study
could reveal the charge transfer mechanisms and ultimately lead to efficient
energy conversion in the emerging solar cell platforms.