* 1506388
* Study of Specific Properties of Hadrons via Precision Experiments at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Ashot Gasparian, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This research project is focused on two highly rated experimental projects at
the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in Virginia. One experiment
will measure the proton radius, one of the most fundamental quantities in
physics. It is directly related to the structure of the proton, which is a basic
constituent block of visible matter. This research will continue the development
and construction of a novel hydrogen target to perform a new electron-proton
scattering experiment, directly giving the proton radius with higher precision.
The second project will measure the lifetime of a particle called the eta meson
with high precision, which will be compared with theoretical predictions from
the fundamental theory of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). This project will also
provide unique opportunities for students, both undergraduate and graduate, to
be actively engaged in many different areas of interdisciplinary research: new
hardware and cutting-edge software development; large scale data analysis and
modern computational problems. In this way the research effort contributes to
the development of a much-needed high tech workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
one of the most fundamental quantities in physics, the proton charge radius new
independent measurement will have far reaching effect in both atomic and nuclear
physics. The currently developed experimental situation with this quantity
limits the determination of the Rydberg constant, one of the basic and the most
precisely known constant in nature up to now. The experimental results may be
sensitive to new physics beyond the Standard Model. The projected 3% accuracy of
the eta-meson lifetime measurement will potentially resolve the long-standing
discrepancy between the Primakoff-type and electron-positron collider
experiments. It will also improve the light quark mass ratio in a direct and
model independent way.