* 1506634
* Ordering to two dimensional strained films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Kenneth Elder, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education devoted to the study of
ultra-thin coatings or films on metallic surfaces with emphasis on novel
materials with a particular honeycomb crystalline symmetry. Examples include
graphene and hexagonal boron nitride. These films have been shown to possess
unusual electronic and mechanical properties that many researchers are working
toward exploiting for technological applications. The award addresses the
development of new theoretical methods for predicting the growth and properties
of such films under different experimental conditions. This award supports
training graduate students in sophisticated mathematical and computational
techniques and the PI's broader educational activities through summer schools,
tutorials, and workshops. This project involves international collaborations
with researchers in Europe, South America, and Africa.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education in materials physics with
specific applications to the growth of two-dimensional or quasi two-dimensional
films on metallic substrates. The coupling between the film and substrate gives
rise to strain induced patterning and interesting commensurate/incommensurate
phase transitions. Modeling such systems is complicated by the many possible
length scales involved as the size of the patterns is inversely proportional to
the film/substrate misfit strain in the weak adhesion limit and can diverge near
the commensurate/incommensurate transition. To overcome this difficultly the PI
plans to develop a model based on the phase field crystal model that can be used
to study micron sized systems and incorporates atomistic details of the
film/substrate interaction, elasticity and dislocations. The PI will examine the
ordering of honeycomb monolayers on triangular and honeycomb substrates. The
results of this work will be applicable to materials systems such as graphene,
hexagonal boron nitride and molybdenum disulphide. The goal of this research is
to predict the nature of the patterns that form as a function of misfit strain,
adhesion strength and external conditions such as temperature. This award
supports training graduate students in sophisticated mathematical and
computational techniques and the PI's broader educational activities through
summer schools, tutorials, and workshops. This project involves international
collaborations with researchers in Europe, South America, and Africa.