* 1506047
* Vacuum Fluctuation Induced Torque on Liquid Crystal Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jeremy Munday, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 283,206.00

The goal of this project is to search for a new effect that is predicted to
rotate small objects on the micro-scale without the use of traditional forces
like gravity or electrostatics. According to quantum mechanics, i.e. the study
of how nature works on the ultra-small-scale, "empty space" is actually teeming
with activity. Even when all particles are removed from a region of space,
fluctuating electromagnetic waves are found to persist. If two uncharged metal
plates are brought near each other in "empty space," these electromagnetic waves
exert a force, which pushes the two plates together, much like two ships in
choppy water. This force that pushes the metal plates together is known as the
Casimir force, and is purely a result of quantum mechanics. Could the
fluctuating fields in empty space cause objects to rotate? According to quantum
mechanics, the answer is yes! For that, the objects need to have reflective
properties that vary with orientation so that the force would cause these
objects to rotate rather than just be pushed together. This rotation could be
used to help design more efficient and useful micro-electro-mechanical systems
(MEMS), like the ones found in airbags and cell phones. The principal
investigator aims to perform the first measurement of this rotational effect,
the so-called Casimir torque, which will be carried out on a system consisting
of liquid crystal molecules near a bulk crystal. In additional, this work will
advance our understanding of quantum mechanics and our knowledge of how it can
be used to improve small-scale devices, which have become
ubiquitous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When optically anisotropic materials are placed
in close proximity, the boundary conditions imposed by the materials on the
zero-point electromagnetic fluctuations will cause an angle dependent energy
density. In order to minimize the total energy for the system, the objects will
rotate. The principal investigator aims to measure the rotation of an optically
anisotropic liquid crystal in close proximity to a birefringent plate using an
all-optical measurement technique. Incident light will propagate through the
liquid crystal, whose orientation is twisted as a result of the Casimir torque,
and the final polarization state of the light will be measured upon exiting the
system. The light intensity will be used to determine the torque experienced by
the liquid crystal resulting from the Casimir torque at various separations from
the birefringent plate. The separation is controlled by an isotropic spacer
layer deposited between the birefringent crystal and the liquid crystal. The
measurement technique avoids the need for detection of mechanical motion, which
both simplifies the detection and improves the measurement sensitivity.