* 1506961
* High Pressure NMR Studies of Doping and Inhomogeneity in Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Nicholas Curro, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 383,369.00

Nontechnical abstract: The objective of this project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the microscopic response of strongly correlated electron
systems to doping and pressure. By their very nature, these materials are highly
sensitive to impurities, and dopants are frequently used to tune their
properties. However, little is known about the microscopic behavior in the
vicinity of dopant atoms, and how the impurities collectively modify bulk
properties. This research project employs Nuclear Magnetic Resonance to probe
high quality single crystals using a state-of-the-art diamond anvil pressure
cell. A key focus of this project is graduate education, and it incorporates
educational outreach activities to a broad range of students. Outreach efforts
to a local elementary school include science projects that actively engage
children in the scientific method and a course on condensed matter science for
adult and senior citizen students through the university extension office.

Technical abstract: Strongly correlated electron materials hold tremendous
potential for new technologies, but a fundamental understanding of their
relevant many-body physics remains one of the greatest challenges in condensed
matter physics. Chemical doping is widely used as a straightforward mechanism to
tune the ground state of these materials, often revealing rich phase diagrams
including unconventional superconductivity and non-Fermi liquid behavior. At the
microscopic level, however, dopants strongly perturb the electronic degrees of
freedom, in some cases giving rise to non-universal behaviors such as phase
segregation and inhomogeneous glassy dynamics. These strongly inhomogeneous
responses can mask intrinsic phenomena, and complicate the interpretation of
bulk measurements. This project addresses the differences between doping and
pressure as tuning parameters through Nuclear Magnetic Resonance studies of two
prototypical correlated electron systems: the iron pnictide and heavy fermion
superconductors. The research team is developing advanced new equipment to
explore the microscopic behavior using diamond anvil cells to achieve large
hydrostastic pressures, and mechanical clamps to achieve uniaxial strain in
single crystals. Both techniques enable the study of the microscopic response of
materials under conditions that have never been investigated with magnetic
resonance previously. The outcome of this research is a more complete
understanding how strong correlations in the presence of disorder influence
macroscopic properties.