* 1506099
* Analysis and geometry on non-smooth spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Mario Bonk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 375,000.00

In many natural phenomena geometric patterns arise that cannot be described by
classical mathematical tools. Often these patterns have a self-similar or
fractal nature. Examples include snowflakes and crystals, urban and plant
growth, mountain ranges and coastlines, lightning bolts, or river networks. This
project intends to contribute to the development of analytic methods that are
useful for the investigation of such geometric features and their deeper
understanding. The PI will involve his PhD students and other young researchers
in this activity. This will contribute to increasing the expertise in this area
and will help to maintain a scientific community that provides the necessary
mathematical knowledge for progress in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In mathematics fractal or non-smooth spaces often arise
from dynamical systems as limit sets of Kleinian groups or as Julia sets of
rational maps. In this project the analysis and geometry of such spaces will be
explored and new mathematical tools for their investigation be created.
Specifically, the PI intends to study the relation between certain Sobolev-type
functions on fairly general metric spaces and corresponding functions on their
hyperbolic fillings. In the second part of the project this will be applied to a
relevant model case where such non-smooth spaces appear, namely the dynamics of
Thurston maps.