* 1506320
* Precision Experiments with Cold and Ultracold Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Stefan Baessler, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

Research in Fundamental Nuclear and Particle Physics is being categorized in
three areas: At the "Energy Frontier", physicists hope to discover new physics,
e.g. new symmetries or particles, by colliding particles with increasingly high
energy. At the "Cosmic Frontier", physicists use the cosmos as a laboratory that
contains detectable information about new physics. And finally, at the
"Precision Frontier", physicists attempt to measure quantities that are believed
to be known very precisely, and to interpret deviations from the known physics
predictions as a signal for new physics. This award supports a measurement of
the third type, a precision measurement of several observables in free neutron
beta decay which serve to better understand the fundamental interactions between
elementary particles. The process of beta decay has been incorporated into the
standard model of elementary particle physics, which gives us a successful
description of elementary particle processes. A discovery of new physics would
have a critical impact on Nuclear and High Energy Physics, and on Cosmology.
Being on the forefront of scientific research and on the edge of what is
technologically feasible, the project will serve as a training ground for future
generations of scientists. Most of the research will be done by students at the
undergraduate and graduate level.

This grant supports the effort to design, construct, commission, and operate the
Nab spectrometer. The spectrometer will use the state of the art neutron
beamline (FNPB) at the new Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) in Oak Ridge, TN to
determine the two-dimensional energy distribution of decay electron and protons
in neutron beta decay. The redundancy inherent in the standard model description
of the neutron beta decay process allows uniquely sensitive checks of the
model's validity and limits, with strong implications in astrophysics. One of
the expected observables, the determination of the neutrino-electron-correlation
coefficient with a relative uncertainty of 0.1%, will allow an extraction of
Vud, the upper left element of the Cabbibo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix, in
order to test its unitarity. The current NSAC long range plan finds that "The
only realistic way to improve Vud is via neutron decay." New results from high
energy physics cast a shadow on the unitarity of the CKM matrix, and re-open the
possibility of finding hints for new exchange bosons, or a fourth quark
generation. The other observable, the determination of the Fierz term, which
parametrizes a deviation from the known shape of the spectrum of the decay
electrons, to about 0.001, allows finding new particles that mediate scalar or
tensor interactions at low energy, in a complementary way and with sensitivity
competitive to what is expected from LHC.