* 1506017
* Searching for New Phenomena with Leptons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* David Hedin, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 880,320.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland.
However, the Standard Model as it currently exists leaves open many questions
about the universe, including such fundamental questions as to why the mass of
the Higgs boson has the value it has. To answer these questions it is necessary
to go beyond the present picture of the Universe described by the Standard Model
to the next phase of development, Beyond the Standard Model (BSM).
Investigations in BSM physics probe such questions as why matter dominates over
anti-matter in the Universe, the values of the masses of the fundamental
constituents of matter, the quarks and the leptons, the size of the mixings
among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the properties of dark
matter. This project, which uses the Mu2e detector at Fermilab, will search for
BSM physics through the precision measurement of the energy of electrons
produced by the decay of muons. The broader impact of this work, in addition to
contributions to the scientific collaborations, includes student engagement at
Northern Illinois University, public outreach and service, and technology
development through generation of patents and the development of technology
usable for medical imaging. Undergraduate and graduate students from both
physics and engineering participate in all aspects of this research. Technology
developed by the R&amp;D program has expanded techniques available for
calorimetry and is currently being used for Mu2e and for a second generation
proton tomography device, and has led to two patents with a third under
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Searches for evidence for new physics beyond
the Standard Model can be addressed through direct searches at the Energy
Frontier at High Energy Colliding Beam Facilities such as the LHC and through a
complementary technique of indirect searches at the Intensity Frontier, in
experimental measurements of rare processes such the subject of this award, the
decay of a muon into an electron. In the SM such a decay is very rare, but
certain BSM physics models, such as SuperSymmetry(SUSY) , predict a higher rate
of this decay. In this award, the researchers will use the Mu2e detector at
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL). This experiment uses a very
intense beam of protons to produce a muon beam which traverses a series of
magnets and impinges on a target where the muons are stopped and are captured by
Aluminum atoms in the target. After a short period of time, the muons then decay
to electrons and if the decay is a direct decay to an electron (with no
neutrino) the electron has a unique characteristic energy. The challenge of this
experiment is to measure the electron energy very precisely. If the electron
energy distribution is correct, it will show evidence of the direct muon to
electron decay and provide evidence that there is BSM physics.