* 1506775
* OP: Enabling High-Temperature Photonic Technologies with Plasmonic Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Vladimir Shalaev, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 02/28/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Plasmonics has demonstrated a unique capability to
bridge photonics and electronics and enable nanoscale devices for applications
in imaging, sensing, data storage, and light harvesting that are efficient,
compact, and multifunctional. However most of the demonstrated plasmonic systems
fall short in meeting the unique challenges of harsh environments, particularly
high temperatures, faced by chemical and oil/gas industries, aerospace, defense,
etc. This project aims to discover and realize robust, ultra-compact, chip-
compatible, nanoscale optical devices using plasmonic ceramic materials that
operate at high temperatures and exhibit high durability. This interdisciplinary
effort is expected to have a significant impact both in the fundamental science
of optics and optical materials as well as in optical, terahertz and microwave
technologies and to generate significant industry interest and start-up
possibilities. Integrated in this project are student education, outreach
activities, and the development of materials illustrating the unique properties
of plasmonic materials and devices. Specifically, the research team develops an
online "book" on refractory ceramics that would provide temperature dependence
of the optical properties, as well as fabrication protocol and major
applications. An online "book," a learning module, simulation tools and
tutorials are created and made available to the global nanophotonics research
and educational community via nanoHUB.org. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Plasmonic structures have been historically designed in the physics
and electrical engineering communities based on room-temperature experimental
data and the corresponding phenomenological models of bulk noble metals at room
temperature. This project is designed to overcome application-specific drawbacks
associated with the use of metals as building blocks of nanoscale functional
plasmonic devices by replacing metals with robust, refractory plasmonic ceramic
materials, particularly transition metal nitrides (TiN, ZrN, and HfN). The
properties of these materials at high temperatures and their usage for plasmonic
devices for applications under extreme environments are studied experimentally
and via numerical simulations. The research subjects include investigation of
optical properties of transition metal nitrides, in both thin-film and
nanostructured forms; high-temperature stability and metal-dielectric phase
transitions; and surface/interface phenomena of composites. In addition, an
online handbook of refractory plasmonic ceramics is created to benefit the
nanophotonics research and educational community.