* 1506369
* A Program in Ultralow-Temperature Atomic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2022
* Wolfgang Ketterle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 11/30/2022
* USD 3,202,150.00

The goal of this program is to study materials at a fundamental level. The
result is a deeper understanding of important materials, and new insights into
the principles of material properties. By creating and studying models of new
materials, the researchers want to find out if speculative new materials can be
realized in Nature. The experimental program employs methods developed in atomic
physics to control the motion and orientation of atoms with unprecedented
precision. Those well controlled building blocks can now be assembled into new
materials like Lego pieces. These new materials may show behavior similar to
naturally occurring materials which are not fully understood, or even display
phenomena never seen before. Assembling new forms of matter with well separated
atoms has the advantage that the building blocks and their interactions are well
known, and therefore also the basic equations describing their behavior. This
together leads to a platform where both theoretical methods (analyzing these
equations) and experimental methods (using the precision of atomic physics) can
be combined to obtain a deeper understanding for important materials and find
new possibilities for synthesizing new materials. The major focus of the
research program is on the question how strong magnetic fields and magnetic
couplings (called spin-orbit coupling) change the properties of electrons in
semiconductors and metals. Since our Lego pieces are neutral atoms, real
magnetic fields are replaced by so-called synthetic magnetic fields created with
the help of laser beams. In addition, the researchers will study fundamental
aspects of ferromagnetism, and create ultracold molecules. The realization of
new forms of ultracold matter will advance our understanding of materials and
provide guiding principles for materials research. The proposed work is
fundamental in its immediate impact, but in the long run, it should lead to
devices and advanced materials with yet unknown properties, and open new
possibilities and applications. Besides promoting the progress of science; this
program educates students and postdocs and prepares them for a career in areas
of advanced technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the goal of this
project is to further advance the use of cold atoms as model systems for
strongly correlated matter, but also to take this approach to the next level by
creating materials with no known counterpart in Nature. In the spirit of quantum
simulations, samples will be prepared which are the simplest possible
realizations of many-body Hamiltonians representing idealized paradigmatic forms
of matter. The major foci of the proposed research in the next five years are
the themes of synthetic gauge fields and spin orbit coupling. These goals make
strong connections with current frontiers in many-body theory and in condensed
matter physics, including the quantum Hall effect, topological insulators, and
strongly correlated states. These materials are more profoundly quantum
mechanical than ordinary materials because they exploit non-trivial quantum
mechanical phases (geometric phases, Berry phase) or quantum entanglement. In
addition,it is planned to explore itinerant ferromagnetism, cooling to
picokelvin temperatures using adiabatic state preparation, and the sodium-
lithium dimer as a heteronuclear dipolar molecule.