* 1506372
* Attosecond Electron Synchrotron on a Nanoscale
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Julia Mikhailova, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 305,000.00

Intense laser light may bring some of the science and applications of large
particle accelerators down to a moderate-size laboratory, making it accessible
to a broader range of researchers and users in multiple fields of science and
technology. From the radiation physics perspective, an advantage of lasers is
their ability to generate unprecedentedly short (attosecond) pulses of
ultraviolet and x-ray radiation. Even though the spatial scales are drastically
different, the physics of emission by electrons in large-scale synchrotron
facilities (major research tools for x-ray crystallography and materials science
research) and by electrons undergoing acceleration at the surface of a solid
under the influence of extreme-intensity light fields are, in an essential way,
the same. The interaction of intense, ultrashort-pulsed light with solids
results in target ionization and the momentary formation of something akin to a
nanometer-sized "synchrotron" (the charged particles emit bursts of high-energy
radiation within time intervals much shorter than the half-cycle of the driving
light field). This process can be controlled by the details of how the incident
light field waveforms evolve with time. Taming synchrotron-type electron
trajectories in solids by specially prepared laser fields, and ensuring that the
result is the emission of intense ultraviolet and x-ray radiation is the aim of
this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will explore the chance to
enhance the intensity of coherent ultraviolet and x-ray emission from solids
under extreme light fields by sub-cycle shaping of the driving laser pulse
waveforms. The waveform shaping can be achieved through mixing the laser
fundamental frequency with its second harmonic or higher frequency components.
The effect of the energy distribution of different colors in the driving field
as well as the phase delay between them on the radiation spectra will be
studied. The program will seek the optimized solutions for driving waveforms, as
well as the physical limits on the efficiency of the process. This study may
provide new insight into the dynamics of field-controlled electron oscillations
in laser-produced solid-density plasmas. Ultimately, this approach may offer
higher attosecond pulse intensities than those currently achieved, opening a
pathway to advance ultrafast metrology toward time-resolved x-ray pump-probe
spectroscopy.