* 1506049
* RUI: Quantum Fidelity in Multimode Optical Memory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrew Dawes, Pacific University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 179,906.00

As electronic devices continue to increase their processing speeds, the demand
for high speed internet communications and data networks will require new
technologies for storing and processing large amounts of data. Electronics are
built on the use of the electron to carry and process information, and in an
analogous way the field of photonics is developing devices that use particles of
light (photons) to carry and process information. Individual photons obey the
laws of quantum mechanics, so in order to fully understand the operation of
photonic devices, quantum measurements will be performed on these new devices.
One particularly essential component is a memory or information storage device.
Many candidates for photonic memory exist but few have been characterized at the
quantum (few-photon) level. This research program will apply new techniques for
measuring the quantum properties of light to a variety of photonic memory
devices. The result will be a deeper understanding of device operation that may
lead to optimized devices for future applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic
memory devices have been demonstrated using slow and stored-light protocols
based on Electromagnetically Induced Transparency (EIT) in Rubidium. The goal of
this program is to measure the quantum state of light retrieved from several
implementations of these devices in both warm and cold Rubidium vapor samples.
The light stored and retrieved from such systems will be measured and analyzed
using a highly efficient array of low-noise photodetectors. This technique can
simultaneously measure multiple optical modes and will be used to correlate
multiple modes and determine which modes (or combinations of modes) are most
robust under different storage conditions. A full quantum-mechanical
understanding of the optical signal retrieved from memory allows complete
characterization of the device performance and will inform future work in the
development of photonic memory devices.