* 1506117
* Microhexcavity Plasma Panel Detectors for High Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Levin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

This award provides support for a group with one PI, a senior colleague, a
technician and two undergraduate students to work on a new kind of particle
detector using a technology similar to that used in flat screen "plasma"
television displays. These displays use small hermetically sealed cells
containing a gas that can hold electric charge. In this application, the charge
will be stimulated by the passage of charged particles passing through the gas
cells and can be sensed electronically. The identity of which cells have been
charged provides the spatial information on the particles. Preliminary tests
suggest that it will be possible for these devices to detect particles in a
billionth of a second and that cells can be made with a size of about one tenth
of a millimeter. Using experience from commercial providers of flat screen
televisions, it is hoped that these detectors can be larger and cheaper than the
types in use in other particle physics instruments today. These detectors may
find application in the medical or other communities interested in charged
particle tracking. These and other particle physics applications will also be
discussed in public dissemination. Basic skills in electronics and fabrication
techniques will be passed along to undergraduates from U. Michigan State who
have the opportunity to work on this project. The proposed R&amp;D plan will
allow the development, in three phases, of a prototype device performing at the
design resolution of less than 100 micron (spatial) and 1 nanosecond (in time).
This award covers the first part of this effort, the completion of the first two
phases, providing a resolution of about a factor two (spatially) larger than
this.