* 1506862
* Electron Spin Dynamics on the Surface of Superfluid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Stephen Lyon, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2018
* USD 547,242.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Electrons are a fundamental constituent of all
atoms, and it is the tremendous variety of forms their interactions can take
which is largely responsible for the wide range of material properties we see in
the world around us. In addition to having a negative electric charge, every
electron also acts like an extremely weak bar magnet. For an individual
electron, the direction that its weak magnet points is described by quantum
mechanics, which allows the electron spin ('spin' is another term for describing
the weak magnetic field of an electron) to be used as a quantum bit, or 'qubit',
for quantum information processing. When a group of electrons are started with
all their spins pointing in some direction, and a large external magnetic field
pointing in a different direction is turned on, the magnetic field of the
electrons rotates around the direction of the external field. The spin coherence
is a measure of how accurately the electrons' spins do not change their rotation
rate. Long spin coherence is desirable for quantum simulation and quantum
computing and has been predicted for electrons on the surface of liquid helium.
This experimental project is aimed at making the first measurements of the spin
coherence of these electrons, and understanding the physical processes which
limit their coherence. Measuring and understanding these processes are a key
step towards constructing a quantum computer that uses the magnetic moments of
individual electrons as its bits. Quantum computing is an important research
area for future high technology industries and national security. This project
will support the continuing education of a Postdoctoral Fellow, and partially
support a Ph.D. student, together with the participation of undergraduate
researchers, working at the boundary between fundamental physics and its
applications to new technological opportunities. The Fellow and students will
learn how to use the most advanced tools of modern nanoscience research, which
has proven to be excellent training for careers in both academia and high
technology industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) to measure the spin relaxation
and coherence of electrons on the surface of superfluid helium. Calculations and
indirect experimental evidence suggest that the spin coherence of these
electrons is long, even when they are mobile, but the relaxation and coherence
times have never been directly measured. Earlier ESR experiments were stymied by
an inability to thermalize the spins, but devices have been designed which are
expected to enable rapid spin thermalization. Mobile electrons with long
coherence will be particularly valuable quantum bits, or qubits, since the
ability to move qubits can reduce the overhead for quantum error correction by
two or more orders of magnitude in some architectures. &lt;br/&gt;This research
will be performed by a Postdoctoral Fellow with partial support of a Ph.D.
student and part-time undergraduate students. The Fellow and students will learn
nanofabrication, low-temperature techniques, high-sensitivity microwave
measurements and quantum information. These skills, requiring resourcefulness
and attention to detail have proven themselves to be excellent training for
scientific careers in academia, national labs, and high technology industries.