* 1506756
* Interplay between symmetry breaking, quasiparticles and their topology in quantum condensed matter systems.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Oskar Vafek, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,156.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on materials that can be tuned to display seemingly contradictory
properties of matter, such as electrical insulation and superconductivity, an
electronic state that can conduct electricity without dissipation. The goal of
the research is to develop a better mathematical description of the underlying
dynamical processes that cause such differentiation in the observed properties
of the same physical system. The ultimate motivation is that understanding how
the constituents of the system globally organize in different states will allow
improved material design and control that take advantage of the proximity and
interplay between these states.&lt;br/&gt;In a parallel project, the PI plans to
study the mechanisms of Hall transport of heat in a class of superconductors
with unusual properties compared to the simple, elemental superconductors. Hall
transport of heat occurs in a material in the presence of magnetic field, and
results in a temperature difference in the sample in a direction perpendicular
to the magnetic field. Analysis and interpretation of experimental measurements
of this type of heat transport in superconductors can help researchers
distinguish between the various possible mechanisms that can cause
superconductivity, and clarify the degree of competition between them. In
addition, this project will enable training and mentoring of young scientists
via participation in cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports the continuation of a Wiki textbook project which delivers freely
available textbooks written by students based on faculty lecture notes. The PI
plans to further build on this project expanding to new courses to become a
vehicle for the dissemination of scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education aimed to develop a comprehensive theoretical
description for a class of poorly understood phenomena in correlated quantum
condensed matter systems, in which spontaneous symmetry breaking,
quasiparticles, and their topology are inextricably linked. The projects
involves analytical and numerical work on theoretical models that display on
equal footing propensity towards spontaneous symmetry breaking into correlated
non-superconducting states, as well as unconventional superconducting states
that emerge in the vicinity of the latter. In addition, it explores Berry phases
as a novel mechanism for thermal Hall transport of non-Landau quasiparticles,
with the goal of developing a reliable tool for extracting valuable
spectroscopic information from experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;Among the objectives
are: determining the energy distribution of the Berry curvature of the
quasiparticle wavefunctions in the mixed state of unconventional superconductors
with different pairing symmetries; identifying the physical processes which
control the recently discovered thermal activation scale of thermal Hall
conductivity in what may otherwise be gapless systems; development of models of
the vortex core which capture strong correlations; constructing a theory which
would allow the study of the physical states both above and below the transition
temperature in model systems with a multitude of interfering ordering
tendencies; exploring the effects of charge-carrier doping of the quantum
critical point associated with the transition between the Dirac semi-metal and
the antiferromagnetic insulator on the honeycomb monolayer; further development
of a theory of two- and three-dimensional quadratic band touching in physically
motivated systems. The approach to all of these projects involves a combination
of analytical and numerical methods of quantum many-body and/or field
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the continuation of a Wiki
textbook project which delivers freely available textbooks written by students
based on faculty lecture notes. The PI plans to further build on this project
expanding to new courses to become a vehicle for the dissemination of scientific
knowledge.