* 1506587
* Enabling Next Generation Quantum Dot Emitters via Correlated Photophysics and Atomic Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* James McBride, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2019
* USD 520,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division is funding Professors Sandra Rosenthal and James McBride
at Vanderbilt University to accelerate the development of sub-microscopic
crystals of semiconductors, or quantum dots. These structures emit light and are
used in diverse applications such as solid state lighting and displays and
labeling of biological structures for analysis using microscopy. The PIs have
developed a new characterization method to determine how the efficiency of light
emission from a quantum dot is correlated to its atomic structure. The ultimate
goal is to optimize the light emission of quantum dot systems that do not
utilize toxic lead and cadmium. As a part of this effort, the growing field of
nanotechnology is being introduced to the next generation of scientists through
undergraduate research opportunities and outreach activities for rural middle-
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is to synthesize cadmium
free, colloidal core/shell nanocrystals and to characterize their ensemble
charge carrier dynamics using femtosecond fluorescence upconversion
spectroscopy. In parallel, the best performing structures will be identified by
correlating fluorescence dynamics at the single nanocrystal level with the same
particle's atomic structure and chemical composition determined using high
resolution high angle annular darkfield scanning transmission electron
microscopy (HAADF-STEM) in conjunction with energy dispersive spectroscopy
mapping (STEM-EDS) utilizing Vanderbilt's Tecnai Osiris. The information gained
through the ensemble carrier dynamics and the correlation study provides a
target to improve the current synthesis methodology.