* 1506439
* Robust Detection and Characterization of Transient Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Peter Jenke, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 198,343.00

Hardware upgrades to the Advanced LIGO observatories are complete and soon the
most sensitive gravitational wave (GW) detectors the world has ever seen will
begin collecting data. Sophisticated data analysis methods are needed to take
full advantage of the improved sensitivity and make GW astronomy a reality.
Previous analyses have used simplifying assumptions about the detector noise,
data calibration, and in some cases the GW signal itself, hindering our ability
to make confident detection claims or accurately infer the nature of a GW
signal. The research enabled by this award will advance GW data analysis by
improving our ability to detect and characterize transient astrophysical
signals. The broad theme of the work supported by this award is to build a
detailed model of LIGO data including instrument noise, calibration uncertainty,
and GW signals. The resulting data analysis methods will improve detection
efficiency and reduce systematic errors in parameter estimation. This award will
also allow the PI to continue participating in impactful education and public
outreach activities and to do so in a region of the United States which has
little exposure to gravitational physics. Outreach activities related to this
award will include interactions with area high schools, colleges, and
universities to publicize the exciting science being done by Advanced
LIGO.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research supported by this award will advance three
main topics in LIGO data analysis: (i) Un-modeled gravitational wave signals
present a challenge for detection and parameter estimation because the signals
are rare while transient noise events, or 'glitches', are common. We will
complete initial development and then continue to upgrade the BayesWave and
BayesLine data analysis pipelines, which together are the state-of-the-art
method for distinguishing between burst signals and glitches and drawing
inferences about physical properties of the GW source. (ii) The breakthrough
technology used by BayesWave and BayesLine is a realistic model for the LIGO
noise. The deployment of this model is most mature in the burst analysis;
however, all GW searches compete with the same instrument noise. We will adapt
the BayesLine algorithm to work with the parameter estimation pipeline,
LALInference, for compact binary coalescence signals. (iii) The LIGO data must
be calibrated, and there are small statistical uncertainties in amplitude and
phase as a result. Previous source characterization analyses have not
incorporated uncertainty in the calibration in their data analysis method. The
BayesLine algorithm provides the foundation for modeling calibration errors and
will be modified to account for systematic phase and amplitude uncertainty in
compact binary and burst parameter estimation. This award is supported by the
LIGO Research Program of Physics Division in collaboration with the EPSCoR
program of the Office of International and Integrative Activities.