* 1506824
* Fundamental Properties of Saloplastic Polyelectrolyte Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Joseph Schlenoff, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 453,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes are water-soluble, charged
polymers used in products ranging from shampoos to water purification
treatments. If solutions of polyelectrolytes with opposite charges are mixed
they precipitate into complexes that are biocompatible, rugged, elastic blends
of the individual polymers. These complexes have potential medical applications
in extended drug delivery and replacement for cartilage. They are also useful as
membranes for water purification and desalination. Although their synthesis is
straightforward, it has been impossible to process them into useful forms using
heat softening, as is used for the more familiar "thermoplastics". This project
will explore novel, versatile methods for softening and processing
polyelectrolyte complexes using salt water instead of heat. Softening by adding
salt, termed "saloplasticity", is a new technique that lowers energy consumption
for polymer processing. Because it is performed with no volatile organic
solvents it is also environmentally friendly. Several fundamental questions will
be explored in this project: how do blends of different polymers respond to
different salts? How is elasticity, essential for mimicking the properties of
cartilage, controlled by salt? How can additional strength be built into
saloplastics so they will last when used as replacements for intervertebral
discs? At the same time these fundamental materials properties questions are
explored, the project will support and promote international collaborations with
the University of Strasbourg, France. Among the educational aspects of this
project will also be a collaboration between the College of Business and the
Department of Chemistry at Florida State University wherein Entrepreneurship and
Chemistry students team up to write commercialization plans for technology
developed by this and other projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes are water-soluble, charged polymers used
in products ranging from shampoos to water purification treatments. If solutions
of polyelectrolytes with opposite charges are mixed they precipitate into
complexes that are biocompatible, rugged, viscoelastic blends of the individual
polymers. Unlike traditional thermoplastics, polyelectrolyte complexes, PECs,
cannot be processed when dry by heat softening. Instead, they may be plasticized
with salt water. Increasing salt concentration progressively breaks the ionic
pairing between polyelectrolytes. This "saloplasticity" is used along with
heating to control the viscoelasticity of PECs. The overarching goal of this
project is to probe the fundamental ways salt and heat are related to the
properties of saloplastics. In the first of four subtopics, the glass
transition, or softening temperature, of different pairs of polyelectrolytes
with different strengths of interaction will be probed. The second part will
look at the processing response of blends versus copolymers having the same
composition. The next subtopic will attempt to answer fundamental questions
about the role of molecular weight in saloplastic viscoelasticity. Finally,
additional chemical crosslinks will be built into bulk saloplastics to stabilize
the material for long-term use in biomedical applications such as artificial
cartilage.