* 1506206
* Noncanonical reactions catalyzed by atypical flavoenzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* John Tanner, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2019
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division are funding Dr. Pablo Sobrado from Virginia Tech and Dr.
John J. Tanner from the University of Missouri-Columbia to study a new class of
flavoenzymes in which the flavin does not play a redox role in catalysis.
Enzymes that contain riboflavin (vitamin B2) are known as flavoenzymes. In
general, flavoenzymes utilize the properties of the flavins to catalyze
oxidation/reduction chemistry. These reactions involve movement of electrons and
changes in oxidation state as one compound is converted into another. Recently,
new functionalities have been demonstrated for several flavoenzymes that do not
involve changes in oxidation state for the flavin or the compounds involved in
the reactions. For example, the flavin can act as an acid or base instead. Such
flavoenzymes are referred to as atypical. One focus of the project is to
discover the protein-flavin interactions that tune the flavin for this novel
reactivity. The second objective is the characterization of 2-haloacrylate
hydratase (2-HAH), an atypical flavoenzyme involved in bioremediation of
halogenated compounds. Preliminary data suggest that the way the 2-HAH reaction
is catalyzed may be unprecedented. Graduate and undergraduate students
participating in this project will gain interdisciplinary training in chemistry,
biochemistry, and structural biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The class of
atypical flavoenzymes has been much less studied compared to traditional flavin
oxidoreductases. The overarching goal of this proposal is to identify the
conserved three-dimensional structural features of atypical flavoenzymes that
enable the flavin to be a nucleophile, electrophile, or acid/base rather than a
traditional redox cofactor. Two atypical flavoenzymes will be studied: 1) UDP-
galactopyranose mutase (UGM) and 2) 2-haloacrylate hydratase (2-HAH). The main
goal is to formulate the biochemical and structural principles that govern the
chemical reactivity of atypical flavoenzymes. The analysis of the available
structural and mechanistic data on UGM resulted in a hypothesis about the
structural and dynamic elements that endow flavins with new chemical activities.
This hypothesis will be tested using site directed mutagenesis of UGM, X-ray
crystallography, and molecular dynamics simulations. 2-HAH is a recently
identified flavoprotein that catalyzes the formation of pyruvate from
2-haloacrylate. There is no net-redox change in this reaction; however, there is
an absolute requirement for the reduced flavin for activity. In addition, light
greatly enhances the rate of reduction of the enzyme by NAD(P)H, which is not
normally seen for atypical flavoenzymes. The role of the reduced flavin in the
2-HAH reaction and the mechanism of light activation will be investigated. X-ray
crystallography will be employed to solve the three-dimensional structure of
2-HAH.