* 1506189
* Solution Processing of Bulk Semiconductors with a Thiol-Amine Solvent Mixture
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Richard Brutchey, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; Making low-cost semiconductor thin films on a
large scale holds promise for improving a number of high-tech applications,
including solar cells. High vacuum techniques can achieve excellent quality
semiconductor thin films, but low deposition speeds, high cost, difficult
scalability, and/or high processing temperatures can be limiting depending on
the particular process and material to be deposited. A conceptually attractive
alternate route involves pre-formation of a precursor solution (or semiconductor
ink) followed by simple and inexpensive solution deposition of the ink onto a
substrate by spray coating, roll-to-roll or screen printing, or dip coating.
This provides a powerful driving force for the development of semiconductor
inks; however, most bulk inorganic semiconductors are totally insoluble in
common solvents, making ink formation by simple dissolution very difficult. This
highlights the need for new "universal solvents," or alkahests, of inorganic
semiconductors. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the principal investigator is
utilizing a novel solvent mixture discovered by his research group to readily
dissolve a broad scope of bulk inorganic materials to make solution processible
semiconductor inks. Upon solution deposition of the resulting semiconductor
inks, the research team is demonstrating that high-quality semiconductor thin
films can be achieved using mild conditions. Integrated into this research plan
is an outreach program specifically aimed at local community college students.
The community college student demographic is among the least targeted in
traditional chemistry outreach programs; however, the greater Los Angeles area
is home to the largest number of community college students in the U.S. The
principal investigator has partnered with Cerritos Community College, an
institution with a large number of underrepresented students, to provide
internships on materials research. The objective of this annual 8-week outreach
program is to provide these students with STEM research opportunities that are
not afforded to them at the community college level, and thereby increase their
transfer rate to 4-year institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; Despite over fifty years of developments in the field of
solid-state and materials chemistry, there are still only a limited number of
ways to deposit inorganic semiconductor thin films - the majority of which
require harsh and energy intensive conditions. This project addresses this
challenge with the principal investigator's discovery that a binary solvent
mixture of thiol and amine can readily dissolve a wide scope of bulk inorganic
chalcogenide semiconductors to make solution processible semiconductor inks.
This is notable because these materials are typically insoluble in common
solvents. The benefits of this solvent system are four-fold: (i) it possesses
high solvent power under ambient conditions, (ii) it is relatively nonhazardous,
(iii) dissolution is kinetically fast, and (iv) it has sufficient volatility
such that it is amenable to solution deposition. Upon solution deposition of the
semiconductor ink, high-quality crystalline thin films of the target inorganic
phases can be achieved under mild conditions. In this project, the principal
investigator is leveraging his group's expertise in inorganic material synthesis
to meet the following objectives: (i) Explore the scope of bulk materials that
can be dissolved and solution processed with the thiol-amine solvent mixture. An
emphasis is being placed on studying the mechanism of dissolution through an
examination of the molecular solutes; (ii) Assess the solution-processed films
by photoelectrochemical characterization techniques to gauge the utility of the
semiconductor films for solar energy conversion. If certain requirements are met
(e.g., strong induced photocurrent, band gap between ~1.0-1.5 eV, comprised of
earth abundant elements), then first-generation solid-state solar cells are
being fabricated and tested; and (iii) Apply the semiconductor inks toward the
synthesis and ligand exchange of inorganic nanocrystals. These objectives will
ultimately enable a "materials by design" approach to be taken, in which new
functional thin films and nanocrystals can be rationally synthesized from bulk
materials to meet specific applications.