* 1506789
* Photoactivator Chemistry in Atmospheric Aerosols
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hai-Lung Dai, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 509,999.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Faye McNeill of Columbia University who, in
collaboration with Professors Hai-Lung Dai and Yi Rao of Temple University is
investigating photochemical reactions related to atmospheric aerosols. Sunlight
is the primary driving force in gas-phase atmospheric chemistry, but the
importance of photochemistry occurring inside atmospheric aerosol particles or
at the gas-aerosol interface is not well understood. Reactions involving the
participation of light-absorbing organic aerosol components as photo-activators
have been suggested as pathways for the photochemical origin and processing of
important gas-phase species such as NO2 (nitrogen dioxide) and O3 (ozone). This
project uses a combination of theory and experiment to investigate chemistry
inside aerosols. The PIs have also developed an integrated education and
outreach program consisting of three major thrusts: (1) AIRE, a Spanish/English
bilingual blog and informational website targeted at students and educators (2)
Research and curriculum development with local K-12 science educators, and (3) a
teacher certification program designed to train midcareer and early retiree
mathematics and science professionals as middle-school
teachers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is inspired by the
hypothesis that photoactivated chemistry involving light-absorbing organic
compounds inside atmospheric aerosol particles may lead to the formation of
oxidized aerosol organic material, either via the direct oxidation of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) or via the formation of oxidizing radicals in the
aerosol phase. This hypothesis is being tested her by a combination of
experimental and modeling approaches designed to gain the necessary molecular-
level insight into photoactivated aerosol chemistry. Advanced spectroscopic
techniques, laser flash photolysis, and computational chemistry will be used to
create new knowledge of the systems of interest at the molecular level. Aerosol
flow reactor experiments are to be used to quantify the kinetics of these
processes under aerosol conditions. The impact of this chemistry in the
environmental context is to be evaluated via atmospheric chemistry modeling.
This work is expected to provide insight into atmospheric aerosol chemistry with
broader scientific impact on the impact of emitted gases upon air composition
and derivative properties.