* 1506595
* SusChEM: Synthesis and Structure-Property Elucidation of Direct-Bandgap Group IV Alloy Nanocrystals for Optoelectronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Umit Ozgur, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 05/31/2019
* USD 389,074.00

Non-technical Description: The production of high-efficiency optoelectronic
materials based solely on low-cost, non-toxic, and abundant Group IV elements
such as silicon is challenging as Group IV elements are less efficient in
electron-photon conversion process compared to the widely used optoelectronic
materials. This project utilizes the unique nanoscale size confinement effects
and alloying with tin to produce silicon-tin, germanium-tin, and silicon-
germanium-tin nanocrystals that exhibit superior light absorption and emission
properties. The collaborative team supports the synthetic efforts along with
advanced optical characterization and theoretical calculations to garner a deep
understanding of the emerging materials properties and enhance the
optoelectronic performance. The interdisciplinary research provides valuable
training to the graduate and undergraduate students in the areas from smart
material design to device testing. Other education and outreach activities
include K-12 nanoscience outreach efforts and involving the under-represented
high school students and women in summer research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Group IV semiconductor-based alloys
with a direct bandgap are a long-sought goal in the field of optoelectronic
materials. However this effort has been hindered primarily by the challenges in
material design and synthesis, as well as the limited solubility of Sn in Si and
Ge. This project utilizes both the quantum confinement effect and the Sn nano-
alloying approach to produce direct bandgap Group IV alloys in nanocrystal form.
The nanocrystals exhibit size and composition tunability that leads to wider
effective bandgaps and superior photophysical properties. For example, GeSn,
SiSn, and GeSiSn alloy nanocrystals with well controlled morphology and
composition, far beyond the miscibility limit of Sn in bulk Si or Ge, are
achieved via an innovative high-temperature colloidal synthesis method. Sn
composition and quantum confinement effects on the indirect-to-direct bandgap
transition are systematically investigated using steady-state and ultrafast
absorption and emission spectroscopy, guided by computational simulations. The
electronic structure calculations are used to establish a fundamental
understanding of confinement-induced quasi direct bandgap behavior, composition-
induced transition to true direct-gap, and surface/defect related effects on
photophysical properties. Selected alloy nanocrystals linked by molecular metal
chalcogenides are deposited on various substrates using low-cost, solution-based
processing methods to demonstrate their potential for optoelectronics.