* 1506564
* Structure and Dynamics of Metallic Glass Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Paul Voyles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 470,339.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Glasses are ubiquitous materials, including window glass
and most plastics. Glasses made up of metallic elements have exceptionally high
strength, good compatibility as implants into the human body, and are
potentially useful for catalysis and as moving parts in microscale machines.
However, atoms in glasses are disordered - jumbled up like the grains in a pile
of sand - instead of sitting in a regular ordered array like the atoms in
conventional metal alloys like steel. This disorder makes it challenging to
understand how the atoms are arranged and how they move with respect to one
another. This project investigates the atomic arrangements and atomic motions of
metallic glass alloys using a nanometer-diameter beam of high energy electrons
in an advanced scanning transmission electron microscope. How the electrons
scatter off the sample atoms in the solid state at room temperature reveals how
the atoms are arranged. How the electron scattering changes with time when the
sample is melted inside the microscope reveals how the atoms move. Understanding
atomic arrangements and movements helps materials scientists understand why
metallic glasses have such exceptional properties and helps them design new
metallic glass materials for new applications. This project also builds capacity
for advanced electron microscopy research on metals by creating and distributing
software that supports new experiments, and it supports engagement of
undergraduate students and the general public with the excitement of seeing
atoms - the fundamental building blocks of matter - live in the electron
microscope.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project supports research into the structure and atomic
dynamics of metallic glasses using coherent electron nanodiffraction in the form
of fluctuation electron microscopy and electron correlation microscopy. Studies
of static structure using fluctuation microscopy and hybrid reverse Monte Carlo
modeling are building toward a general structural model of nanometer-scale order
in metallic glass alloys. Studies of dynamics in the supercooled liquid state
using electron correlation microscopy are testing models of the glass-forming
liquid fragility based on spatially heterogeneous dynamics and may provide
fundamental insight into the glass transition in metallic alloys. Additional
techniques to extract structural information from subtle angular correlations in
electron nanodiffraction from glasses are being developed. The project also
supports research capacity building by dissemination of software for data
acquisition and analysis for fluctuation microscopy and electron correlation
microscopy, and outreach activities bringing the excitement of state-of-the-art
electron microscopy to the general public.