* 1506989
* Structure and Dynamics in Heterogeneous Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrew Bocarsly, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 555,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the research supported
in this project is to gain a fundamental understanding of the connection between
the atomic and molecular structure and composition of surfaces and interfaces,
and the chemical properties and reactivity of these interfaces. A large number
of important technologies, ranging from the use of catalysis in the production
of chemicals and fuels, to the processing of electronic components, to the
prevention of corrosion and structural deterioration, depend on an understanding
of the structure and reactivity of surfaces and interfaces. Four particular
research topics are contained in this project. The first explores the detailed
molecular dynamics of catalytic oxidation reactions important in pollution
control and chemical production. The second is concerned with mechanisms of
surface oxidation and corrosion of structural metals and strategies for its
prevention. The third explores the microscopic mechanism of the process of self-
assembly at surfaces, relevant to the production of next generation electronic
devices and the understanding of bio-films and membranes. The fourth topic seeks
to develop methods for the detailed analysis of the complex surfaces and
interfaces that are the subject of this research project. Each of these research
topics serves to train students in research methods while providing the
fundamental knowledge to support a wide array of technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on the connection
between the detailed atomic, molecular, and electronic structure of surfaces and
interfaces, and their chemical properties and reactivity. These fundamental
questions of surface structure and reactivity are addressed in four interrelated
areas. Studies of catalytic oxidation focus on the implementation of
nanoplasmonic sensors to evaluate the coverage and presence of intermediates on
the catalyst surface during heterogeneous catalytic oxidation reactions.
Mechanistic information obtained from these measurements will be coupled with
product internal state distribution information obtained by diode laser
absorption spectroscopy, to provide a more complete picture of the catalytic
oxidation reaction dynamics. The second area addresses structural alloy
oxidation in extreme environments, and synergistic effects in mixed molecular
corrosion inhibitors, using photoelectron spectroscopy and electrochemical
analysis of the surfaces. The third area concerns the mechanisms of self-
assembly of large organic molecules at the liquid-solid interface, with a focus
on the synthesis of fundamentally interesting chemisorbed self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs), and the quantitative evaluation of the energetics of
formation of physisorbed SAMs on graphite. Work in the fourth area develops
methods to use both static and dynamic differential charging in X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy to enable the chemical and electronic property
analysis of complex composite surface materials that are the focus of the
previous research topics.