* 1506547
* Spins and Knots: The Rise of Topology in F-Orbital Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Maxim Dzero, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 302,796.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and educational activities aimed at
achieving a fundamental understanding of how strong electron-electron
interactions can bring about novel states of matter, such as topological
insulators and topological superconductors. Topological insulators are
insulating materials that do not conduct electricity in the bulk but are
surrounded by metallic states that cover the surfaces, edges, and interfaces.
Similarly, topological superconductors are thought to be like ordinary
superconductors in the bulk in that they conduct electricity without loss, but
their surfaces and edges are enveloped in a fundamentally new quantum state of
electrons with unusual properties. These exotic surface and edge states are not
only fundamentally interesting in their own right, but they can also be
potentially manipulated for a variety of applications ranging from high-speed
quantum computing to ultra-sensitive magnetic devices. This project aims to
identify new materials with topological properties in a family of materials
where the strong electron-electron interactions give rise to heavy carriers
whose masses can be several hundred times the mass of a bare electron. This
project aims at formulating the basic principles which will help
experimentalists design novel materials and will be performed in close
collaboration with several experimental groups.

Active learning approach will be the touchstone of the educational component of
the project. The PI will redesign an existing freshman course, "Seven Ideas That
Shook the Universe", around peer discussions to improve student understanding,
involvement and performance. The PI will also create a continuation of this
course, "Seven Ideas That Are Shaping the Future", by focusing on current
developments in physics. The interactive activities developed for both courses
will be made available online. In order to attract more physics majors and
graduate students to condensed matter physics, the PI will prepare engaging
research plans for students. The plans will help the students grasp deeper
conceptual issues underlying the problem at hand, get first-hand experience in
cutting-edge research, and develop their problem-solving skills.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and educational activities aimed at
achieving a fundamental understanding of how strong electron-electron
interactions can bring about novel states of matter, such as topological
insulators and topological superfluids. The main objectives are to study novel
electronic phases in newly discovered topological Kondo insulators, to discover
candidates for topological superconductors, and to promote their eventual
technological application by examining non-equilibrium dynamics of topological
superfluids. The main part of this project will focus on materials which contain
elements with f-electronic orbitals. The coupling between magnetic and
electronic degrees of freedom, which operates in the background of strong spin-
orbit interaction and strong electronic correlations, plays a defining role in
these materials and provides a unique insight into the properties of f-electron
topological insulators and superconductors. This project aims at formulating the
basic principles which will help experimentalists design novel materials and
will be performed in close collaboration with several experimental groups.

Active learning approach will be the touchstone of the educational component of
the project. The PI will redesign an existing freshman course, "Seven Ideas That
Shook the Universe", around peer discussions to improve student understanding,
involvement and performance. The PI will also create a continuation of this
course, "Seven Ideas That Are Shaping the Future", by focusing on current
developments in physics. The interactive activities developed for both courses
will be made available online. In order to attract more physics majors and
graduate students to condensed matter physics, the PI will prepare engaging
research plans for students. The plans will help the students grasp deeper
conceptual issues underlying the problem at hand, get first-hand experience in
cutting-edge research, and develop their problem-solving skills.