* 1506882
* Nonlinear and Nonstationary Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* David Stoffer, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 337,449.00

This project focuses on two problems in analyzing complex data collected over
time such as daily stock market returns. Such irregular time series data occur
in many diverse fields such as biology and medicine, ecology, genetics,
geoscience, speech recognition, econometrics and finance, and computer vision to
mention a few. Because the data are irregular, problems such as predicting
highly volatile periods are difficult. In general, rather than using explicit
mathematical formulas, one must rely on numerical or computer-based
optimization. However, for such data, existing methods have poor properties. The
goal of this project is to vastly improve on the existing computational methods.
The second project focuses on the fast detection of genes in long DNA sequences.
While many methods have been developed for a thorough micro-analysis of short
sequences, there is a shortage of powerful procedures for the macro-analysis of
long DNA sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on two problems in
nonlinear and nonstationary time series analysis. First, there has been an
intense focus on the analysis of nonlinear and non-Gaussian time series models
via numerical methods. Particle samplers are a promising approach for classical
and Bayesian estimation, but they are plagued by particle degeneration and by
poor mixing. However, there is no need to abandon particle methods; they can be
improved, and this is the goal of this project. For example, particle Gibbs
methods can be fashioned to be fast and efficient while improving the mixing
property of the sampler. The basic idea is to build a particle-filter-like
procedure that avoids path degeneracy by conditioning on particles. This
conditioning implies an invariance property, which is key to its applicability
as a particle sampler. The invariance property is also key to providing the
asymptotic accuracy of the sampler. It is not enough to be asymptotically
accurate because of the curse of dimensionality, which we try to avoid.
Moreover, while the technique is not perfect, the methodology can be used as a
basis from which to explore faster methods while avoiding poor mixing. The
method can also be used in classical inference to perform derivative free
maximum likelihood estimation (e.g., EM algorithm) when the likelihood can only
be evaluated numerically. The main interest of the second project is on the
detection of coding (genes) and other interesting features in very long DNA
sequences. In particular, the focus is on fast detection of change points in
long DNA sequences based on the concept of spectral envelope using a wavelet
basis. Rapid accumulation of genomic sequences has increased demand for methods
to decipher the genetic information gathered in data banks. Combining
statistical analysis with modern computer power makes it feasible to search, at
high speeds, for diagnostic patterns within long sequences. This combination
provides an automated approach to evaluating similarities and differences among
patterns in very long sequences and aids in the discovery of the biochemical
information hidden in these organic molecules.