* 1506567
* Development of Glycosynthase Enzymes to Construct Septanosyl Glycosides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mark Peczuh, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Mark Peczuh at the University of Connecticut to
transform a beta-glucosyl hydrolase from Streptomyces that normally cleaves the
beta-1,4-linkage between glucose residues in cellobiose into a glycosynthase
that attaches a seven-membered ring septanose onto a glucose residue.
Carbohydrates are biological polymers essential to numerous functions of plant
and animal life. They are built up through the sequential addition of monomers
by one type of enzyme or broken down by another, completely different type of
enzyme; natural carbohydrates are composed primarily of monomers with a six-atom
ring. This project will develop a new type of enzyme for attaching unique,
seven-atom ring monomers to carbohydrates. Moreover, the new enzyme will be
derived from a degradative enzyme that has been engineered to work in reverse.
That is, through genetic engineering, a degradative enzyme will be converted to
a synthetic enzyme. Efforts to achieve this goal will be through an
international collaborative team of graduate student chemists and bioengineers.
The new enzyme plus the method used to design and create it will be a training
ground for a number of interdisciplinary techniques and ideas. The researchers
will directly engage non-scientists to amplify the impact of the results and
their enthusiasm for the research process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glycosynthases
are mutant enzymes, derived from natural glycosyl hydrolases that form rather
than cleave glycosidic linkages. The project links the expertise in septanose
carbohydrate synthesis and characterization in the Peczuh research group with
the group of Dr. Antoni Planas at IQS in the University of Ramon Lllull in
Barcelona Spain. The development process will provide information about
septanose conformations, protein-septanose interactions and enzyme dynamics.
Only a few glycosynthases that couple unnatural sugars to another molecule have
been successfully developed which makes this investigation particularly
challenging. Individual aims within the proposal represent a step-wise approach
toward the overall goal of a functional glycosynthase; the development strategy
is to optimize activity for the hydrolysis reaction for the new substrate and
then convert the glycosidase into a glycosynthase.