* 1506093
* Spectroscopy of Rydberg Atoms in Optical Lattices and Laser Traps
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Georg Raithel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 510,000.00

Physicists at the University of Michigan are useing "ponderomotive
spectroscopy," an advanced form of a technique that traces back at least to the
17th century when Isaac Newton first showed that white light sent through a
prism breaks into a rainbow. The new high-resolution spectroscopy allows the
researchers to peer more deeply into the structure of atoms and direct their
behavior at a much finer scale. The measurements made possible by ponderomotive
spectroscopy could thus lead to advances in fundamental physics and promote the
progress of science. In their research, the scientists use Rydberg atoms--giant
atoms that exhibit not only greater size, but also stronger interactions than
usual atoms. Rydberg atoms enable the new method of ponderomotive spectroscopy.
In addition, they allow for the detection of small electromagnetic fields, which
may improve our ability to measure natural or human activity, as well as
investigate how systems of quantum-mechanical matter (matter that behaves like
waves) interact with each other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In detail, the researchers
employ a spectroscopic method in which highly excited Rydberg atoms are prepared
in a modulated optical-lattice laser trap. Laser-cooled ground-state atoms are
excited into Rydberg levels within the optical lattice. The lattice field holds
on to the tenuously bound Rydberg electron via the ponderomotive light-electron
interaction, which in turn results in a trapping force for the entire atom.
Time-dependent microwave modulation of the trapping field then drives
transitions between Rydberg-atom levels whose energies are separated by odd
harmonics of the modulation frequency. The frequency-resolution and accuracy
limits of lattice modulation spectroscopy are explored. The method is employed
to measure atomic quantities, such as quantum defects, ionic polarizabilities
and the Rydberg constant. Using a cavity-generated, very deep implementation of
the Rydberg-atom lattice, the energies of strongly mixed Rydberg adiabatic
states are measured. Other measurement objectives are the polarizabilities of
low-lying atomic levels and light propagation in the densely filled cold-atom
channels present in the cavity-generated optical lattice. In a second research
component, the trajectories of Rydberg-atom pairs are measured using a direct
atom imaging technique, which is based on Rydberg-atom field ionization, ion
extraction and spatial imaging. The trajectory measurements reveal interatomic
forces and their anisotropy. The Rydberg-atom interactions are controlled via
adiabatic passage in Landau-Zener crossings in the Rydberg-atom Stark map, which
allows the preparation of dense, highly dipolar quantum matter.