* 1506079
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Testing the paradigms of the colloidal glass: Novel concentration jump experiments and large scale computer modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Roseanna Zia, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2017
* USD 174,864.00

CBET - 1506072 McKenna, Gregory B. CBET - 1506079 Zia, Roseanna N.

Colloids are dispersions of particles in a liquid, such as water, and the
particles are so small that they do not separate for very long times. The
materials are widely used in commercial products such as paints and inks. They
are also believed to be a good model materials for glasses. The present work is
a collaborative study that combines experiment and large scale computer
simulations that will provide novel scientific understanding of the behavior of
colloidal glasses and comparisons will be made with knowledge from the
literature concerning molecular glasses in similar conditions. Graduate and high
school students will participate in the research activities at both PIs'
institutions.

Understanding dynamical arrest in complex matter is a great challenge in soft
matter science. Most study of colloidal systems near jamming assumes parity with
corresponding behavior in molecular glasses. Yet, recent studies reveal non-
equilibrium responses in colloids that differ qualitatively from glassy dynamics
as monitored via the Kovacs signatures, viz., the intrinsic isotherm, the
asymmetry of approach, and the memory effect. The proposed study will illuminate
the structural underpinnings of such differences through a novel combination of
experiment and dynamic simulation. The structure and dynamics will be determined
in experiments analogous to the Kovacs experiments for molecular glass-forming
systems. Here stimulus-responsive particles will change diameter at constant
number density to create concentration-jump conditions to mimic the temperature-
jumps of the Kovacs signature experiments. Concurrent simulations will effect
similar conditions in silico. Experiment and simulation will inform and validate
each other and the joint interrogation of the colloid dynamics near to the
jamming transition will potentially create a transformative understanding of
arrested states in soft matter. In a broader sense, this is a collaboration of
two very different PIs. One is an expert in the experimental physics of
molecular glasses, especially aging. The other is an expert in large scale
computer simulation, with emphasis on colloidal systems. The result provides
unique cross-disciplinary training to graduate students in both computational
and experimental physics, deepening their knowledge of the fundamentals of
dynamics and aging of molecular and colloidal glasses. Further, women and under-
represented minorities will play a central role as undergraduate and graduate
researchers.