* 1506294
* Quantum Control and Entanglement in a Strongly Interacting Spin Ensemble
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Chapman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 512,102.00

This research will investigate quantum phase transitions using ultracold atomic
gases cooled close to absolute zero temperature. Phase transitions play
important roles in many areas of physics including cosmology, particle physics
and condensed matter. The freezing of water to ice provides a familiar example:
the motion of water molecules undergo a phase transition upon crystallization as
the temperature falls below the freezing point. In cosmology, it is conjectured
that the large scale structure of the universe is a vestige of defects (e.g.
"cosmic strings") formed as the Universe cooled through a phase transition (via
the so-called "Higgs mechanism") shortly after the Big Bang. This research will
explore quantum phase transitions and associated phenomena in an unexplored
regime at the opposite end of the temperature scale, close to absolute zero on
the Kelvin temperature scale (or nearly 460 degrees below zero on the Fahrenheit
temperature scale). The experiments will use ultracold atomic Bose-Einstein
condensates (a quantum state of matter that forms at extremely low temperatures)
to explore phase transitions in which the behavior of the transition is
determined by quantum effects rather than thermal effects. In addition to
providing new insight to the fundamental quantum science of many-particle
systems, these experiments have potential applications to quantum information
science and to the development of new quantum sensors for inertial guidance and
measurement of gravity and magnetic fields.

This experimental research will study strongly interacting ensembles of spin-1
atoms in a Bose-Einstein condensate to explore the nature of quantum phase
transitions in the neighborhood of the critical point and to investigate
creation, control and characterization of non-classical highly entangled states
of the ensembles. The investigations use small rubidium-87 atomic Bose-Einstein
condensates containing just a single spin domain, such that the dynamic
evolution occurs only in the internal spin degrees of freedom. These condensates
feature a well-characterized Hamiltonian with a tunable quantum phase transition
that allow exploration of both ferromagnetic and polar (nematic) ground states
of the spins. The combination of an exactly solvable Hamiltonian with a quantum
phase transition together with demonstrated dynamics in the quantum regime
provide a unique combination of tools to explore important topics including high
precision studies of a second order quantum phase transitions, exploration of
excitations across a quantum critical point, and the generation of massively
entangled states. A common theme in all of these studies is the role of finite
size effects that manifest in the quantum fluctuations of the system. This
research will provide insight into fundamental principles of many-particle
quantum mechanics that are important to many areas of physics and will point the
way to future explorations of quantum many-body spin systems including
thermalization and ergodicity crossing a quantum phase transition,
investigations of Hamiltonian quantum chaos and other non-linear phenomena, and
finite temperature effects.