* 1506403
* RUI:CMMT:Multiscale Theory of Nano-Porous Electronic Materials: Case Study of Structure-leakage Relationships in Silicon Carbide Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Blair Tuttle, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 167,759.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education aimed
at understanding the electronic transport properties of nano-porous electronic
materials, which are solid materials that have many tiny holes distributed
throughout their interior so that their density is greatly reduced. Similar to
the function of the air gap in a double paned window in improving its insulating
properties, these pores improve the insulating properties of the material for
electron transport. In this project, the PI and his team will develop a theory,
valid across many orders of length scales, for investigating the electronic
properties of nano-porous silicon carbide, a material which is being developed
by the electronics industry as an insulator for high performance electronic
devices, such as the processing chips used in laptops, cell phones and
supercomputers. The goal is to determine the influence of impurities and
microscopic defects naturally occurring in these systems on the macroscopic
device operation. The approach will be to use very accurate quantum mechanical
methods to study defects in small model systems and to develop larger models,
based on information from these small model calculations, to predict the
electronic transport properties of actual devices. The team will work in close
collaboration with leading experimentalists to allow a feedback loop between
theory and experiment.

This project will involve educating undergraduate and graduate students through
research and related activities. Two undergraduates will visit research
institutions to be trained by scientists from collaborating groups. Research
results will be presented at meetings and work will be shared with industry
representatives. The results from this project will be placed in context of
related work and presented in a day-long workshop accessible to a wide audience
including high school teachers, college students and faculty.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education aimed
at understanding the microstructural point defects that cause leakage in
hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbide (a-SiC) alloys, which are important
materials employed in nano-electronics and electro-mechanics applications.
Specifically, in highly integrated circuits, such alloys serve as a back-end-of-
the-line dielectric material. The PI and his team will use state-of-the-art
density functional calculations and other computational methods in combination
with experimental data to elucidate the properties of defects in device quality
samples.

Based on recent experimental studies that have led to a wealth of new
information on leakage currents in devices incorporating hydrogenated a-SiC, new
microscopic models will be developed to match the range of experimental
densities. Monte Carlo modeling methods will be used to explore the variable
chemical arrangements found experimentally. Using the new microscopic models,
the PI and his team will explore candidate point defects, characterize their
properties, and find a match to the experimental leakage data. The results of
the defect calculations will be incorporated into macroscopic leakage models
with length scales matching the experimental systems and help in the development
of a density of states thermodynamic model for hydrogen bonding in hydrogenated
a-SiC. The computational work will be performed in close collaboration with
leading experimentalists to allow a feedback loop between theory and experiment.
The results will be valuable for developing new low-density hydrogenated a-SiC
for nano-electronics applications, and for designing new amorphous
nanomaterials.

This project will involve educating undergraduate and graduate students through
research and related activities. Two undergraduates will visit research
institutions to be trained by scientists from collaborating groups. Research
results will be presented at meetings and work will be shared with industry
representatives. The results from this project will be placed in context of
related work and presented in a day-long workshop accessible to a wide audience
including high school teachers, college students and faculty.