* 1506173
* Search for New Phenomena at the Energy Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Dhiman Chakraborty, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 07/31/2019
* USD 510,000.00

The objective of this project is to search for physics that does not have an
explanation in the Standard Model (SM), the theory that describes the properties
of the elementary particles making up the known matter in the universe. The work
will be done using the ATLAS multi-particle detector at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at CERN, the European particle physics laboratory in Switzerland.
In 2012 the Higgs boson (H) was discovered at the LHC by both ATLAS and CMS,
another large detector at LHC. The Higgs boson was the last particle predicted
to exist by the SM. In this project the PI and his group of scientists will use
the LHC running at almost twice the energy achieved in 2012, 13 teraelectron
volts (TeV) as opposed to 7.5 (TeV). The group will look for events in which an
H decays to a fermion anti-fermion pair. (A fermion is an elementary particle
that has a half-integer value of the fundamental property of all elementary
particles known as spin. An electron, for example, is a fermion.) Details of
such decays, such as the frequency with which they occur, can reveal whether or
not other Higgs-like particles, predicted in various extensions of the SM,
exist. The increased energy will also allow the group to search for further,
more massive Higgs-like states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will support one
PI, a postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student. The group will collect and
analyze events from run II of the LHC, which begins in the summer of 2015 and
continues through the end of 2017.The group will also play a role in the
maintenance of the ATLAS tiled calorimeter system and the Fast TracKer trigger
(FTK, part of the planned upgrade of the ATLAS detector designed to rapidly
reconstruct data from the silicon-based charged particle detector system). Their
analysis focus will be in the study of Higgs couplings to ff where the Fermions
are from the 3rd generation (t, b, tau-nu).