* 1506925
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Computational and Experimental Studies of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Electrode Structural Evolution and Electrochemical Characteristics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Scott Barnett, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 465,908.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Solid oxide fuel cells, which are currently in early-
stage commercialization, provide an important means for clean efficient
conversion of fuels to electricity, and electricity to fuels, as well as for
electricity storage. More research and development, particularly for
understanding long-term durability, are critically needed to achieve widespread
application. This study integrates timely and unique approaches to achieve a
deep understanding of fuel cell electrode materials performance and degradation,
ultimately allowing design of higher performance, longer-lived fuel cells. A key
feature of the project is the use of three-dimensional image data to develop and
ultimately validate two types of computational models: (1) performance
simulations utilizing measured three-dimensional structure are developed and
vetted by comparison with experimentally measured electrode performance, and (2)
measured changes in electrode structure before and after fuel cell operation are
compared directly with simulated structural evolution. Tools developed for 3D
imaging, simulation, and data analysis with large data sets are relevant to many
other materials systems. The results are relevant to many communities, ranging
from modelers who can utilize three-dimensional data and simulation methods, to
industrial developers who can use the results to help improve their fuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project aims to study solid
oxide fuel cell performance and long-term stability, utilizing three-dimensional
imaging of fuel cell structure using state-of-the-art electron and x-ray
microscopy methods, combined with three-dimensional simulations of electrode
performance and structural evolution. The present research provides a critical
fundamental understanding of degradation processes, complementing more practical
studies, e.g., long-term fuel cell stack tests, being carried out in industry.
It is incredibly valuable to develop simulation models based on experimentally
observed microstructural changes, and then apply them to accurately predict
long-term (&gt;5 years) electrode evolution and associated performance changes.
Furthermore, this combination of 3D microstructures, validated simulation tools,
and computationally intensive data analysis provides a transformational
framework for design and discovery of electrode materials that includes not only
performance, but also durability. Graduate and undergraduate students receive
unique training - while each student focuses mainly on experimental or
computational aspects, exchange visits between campuses provide direct
experience in both areas. Students also work directly with researchers at
Argonne and Brookhaven national laboratories using state-of-the-art three-
dimensional imaging facilities. Educational and outreach activities focused on
K-12 students and the general public are also being actively carried out.