* 1506377
* RUI: A Search For Dark Matter With Superheated Liquid Targets
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Ilan Levine, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2017
* USD 278,993.00

One of the most enduring mysteries in science is the explanation for the
evidence that, on all scales larger than a single star, far more gravitating
material is seen to exist than can be accounted for by the atoms in these
systems. This material, called Dark Matter (DM), is intrinsically invisible and
has only conclusively been seen by its gravitational effects in aggregate. The
objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that DM is an exotic
particle, constituting about 85% of the mass of the Universe. If DM is observed
in this detector, the project would be able to characterize basic properties
such as its mass and the strength with which it interacts with ordinary
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many undergraduates have participated in the work
at IUSB as have high school teachers and students. They have participated in all
aspects of "big science" at an undergraduate institution. The group has aided
the broader scientific community by fabricating specially designed transducers
for a wide array of operating environments. An astrophysics experiment is now
using acoustic particle ID in a bubble chamber to study exotic reactions
relevant to large stars. The Muon Ionization Cooling Experiment uses them to
understand electrical breakdown in RF cavities. A competing dark matter
experiment uses them to eliminate boiling background. A neutron parity violation
spin rotation experiment will use them to understand bubble migration in liquid
helium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds to enable the IUSB group
to continue to contribute to the detector R&amp;D, installation, commissioning
and running of the PICO bubble chambers and analysis of the resulting data. PICO
uses superheated liquids to search for the tiny energy depositions left by
nuclei recoiling due to collisions with dark matter. These depositions cause the
liquid to explosively transform into gas. The bubble chamber technique
represents a unique approach in the field, since it is inherently immune to
sparsely ionizing particles (such as electrons), which are serious backgrounds
to other DM detectors. This will be especially important if robust observation
claims are made by experiments in the future. It has also been demonstrated by
the group that the target fluids are easily changed, which will be important in
determining the properties of any observed DM particle. The IUSB group has
designed and fabricated all of the acoustic transducers for the detectors. The
group recently discovered that one can even distinguish what kind of nucleus has
decayed. IUSB also participates in the commissioning and running of the various
bubble chambers at the deep site and energy threshold experiments at the
Fermilab test-beam facility. A new design for transducers mounted in the dome
over the bellows system will be made for a ton-scale detector. The group will
also continue to contribute to the analysis of data already collected with the
COUPP-60 and PICO-2L detectors.