* 1506513
* Quantum Field Theory and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Richard Woodard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Quantum gravity is the theory that arises from combining gravity with relativity
(how observers compare time and distance) and quantum mechanics (the key
principle of which is that every degree of freedom has a tiny amount of motion).
It has long been the subject of wild speculation, unchecked by the usual chain
of observation and experiment which characterizes hard science. Recent advances
in observational and theoretical cosmology have changed this by providing the
first quantum gravitational data ever taken, with a vast potential for increase.
The very early universe was expanding so rapidly and with such a high degree of
acceleration that the usually tiny fluctuations of gravitational fields in empty
space were amplified to a still-small but measurable amount. Equally important,
these fluctuations were stretched out in space so far that they became
effectively fossilized, and were thereby able to survive down to the current
epoch. This project will study how these fluctuations affect gravity itself, and
also the other forces and particles. Such studies are part of the great
transformation of quantum gravity from science fiction to science fact, and the
phenomenon they reveal may help us to better understand the current universe.

Interactions which involve undifferentiated gravitons and/or massless, minimally
coupled scalars can give rise to greatly enhanced quantum effects during
primordial inflation. This is the source of cosmological perturbations and
recent work has turned from these primary effects to secondary effects arising
from loop corrections to the power spectra and other quantities. The PI will
address these problems over the next three years by continuing work in six
areas: Computing and fully renormalizing graviton loop contributions to 1PI
2-point functions in general gauges; defining nonlinear extensions of
cosmological observables based on nonlocal functionals of the metric; computing
the one and two loop expectation value of an invariant measure of spacetime
expansion; studying nonperturbative secular effects using the scattering of
matter quanta by inflationary gravitons; investigating nonlocal modified gravity
models of inflation, of late time acceleration and of MOND; and exploring
phenomenological implications of inflationary perturbations build up from past
evolution.