* 1506051
* A Search for Neutrino-Less Double Beta Decay and Lepton Number Violation with the nEXO Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Andrea Pocar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 655,000.00

Investigating the rarest of processes between elementary particles is a very
powerful tool in understanding Nature at its most fundamental level. The
Enriched Xenon Observatory (EXO) program investigates the fundamental nature of
the neutrino, that intriguing elementary particle that for a long time was
thought to have no mass, doesn't interact with much of anything, and may hold
the key to why there is more matter than antimatter in the Universe. The EXO
program carries out its study of the neutrino by searching for the existence of
a nuclear decay called neutrino-less double beta decay. Beta decay involves the
emission of an electron from the nucleus, and is always accompanied by the
emission of an antineutrino. Neutrino-less double beta decay would be a process
in which a nucleus (xenon-136 in this case) transforms by emitting two electrons
(and nothing else). According to the Standard Model of particle physics, this
can only happen if neutrinos and antineutrinos are exactly the same. Such a
direct overlap between matter and antimatter could prove essential in answering
one of the most fundamental questions in science: why is our Universe made
exclusively of matter?

The first experiment of the program, EXO-200, uses 200 kg of liquefied xenon
enriched in the 136 isotope as a source and has operated at the underground
Waste Isolation Pilot Plant in New Mexico since 2010. EXO-200 is set to run for
another 3 years, and this award will support the PI and his group for up to
three years. The accumulated data will allow scientists to probe the existence
of neutrino-less double beta decay should this process happen with a
characteristic half-life of up four million billion times the current age of the
universe. The detector technology used in EXO-200 pioneers the use of selected
materials with ultra-low levels of residual radioactivity in order to produce
the most radio-quiet environment for the detection of rare events. Some of these
cleanliness protocols and requirements are now reaching the electronics and
pharmaceutical industries. In addition, the large noble liquid detectors, such
as the one used in EXO-200, are finding increased applications outside of
particle physics, in particular in nuclear reactor fuel cycle and composition
monitoring and in medical imaging (e.g. PET scan machines). The EXO-200 project
is proving an ideal stage for graduate students to grow into researchers with
both data analysis and hardware expertise. The UMass group has a track record of
successfully involving a diverse population of undergraduate students in core
areas of the project. The newly established Amherst Center for Fundamental
Interactions provides a stimulating and productive environment for a broad
scientific exchange between experimentalists and theorists.

The UMass group plays a central role in fully exploiting the data from the
EXO-200 experiment. The chosen xenon Time Projection Chamber (TPC) technology
allows the project to take advantage of the radiation self-shielding properties
of high-Z xenon, in a homogeneous layout with excellent event tracking
capability and energy resolution. The work includes a comprehensive study of
processes with spatial topology, such as bb decay of 136Xe to excited states of
136Ba, 137Xe background, and high energy gamma-rays originating from cosmic muon
interactions with detector components. An integral part of the proposal is a
laboratory program at UMass to test optical properties of various detector
materials and surfaces in liquid xenon and to use the results from these
measurements in a ray-tracing optical simulation of EXO-200. Together with
focused tests of novel detectors for the Vacuum Ultra-Violet (VUV) scintillation
light produced in xenon (silicon photo-multipliers in particular), they are part
of investigations under way towards a tonne-scale, next generation experiment
(nEXO) for neutrinoless double beta decay.