* 1506467
* Quantum Interface between Gamma-Photons - Nuclear Ensembles
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Olga Kocharovskaya, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 266,152.00

The elementary particles or "quanta" of light have a wavelength of about 500
nanometers (less than 20 millionths of an inch). The study of the interaction of
these photons with the electrons inside atoms led to development of devices such
as lasers, atomic clocks, supersensitive miniature magnetometers, etc. The goal
of the present project is to extend these studies to photons of much shorter
wavelengths: 10,000 to 100,000 times shorter. These photons, invisible to the
naked eye, begin to enter the regime where they are known as "gamma-photons" or
"gamma-rays." Rather than interacting with the electrons inside atoms, these
high energy photons interact with the nucleus of the atom. Some of the reasons
gamma-photons might be better than conventional (optical) photons for
applications is that they can be detected more easily, they can be focused to
much smaller spots (ultimately limited by the wavelength of the photon), and
they can in principle help process information more quickly because of their
higher frequencies. A problem is that they are currently very difficult and
expensive to produce and hard to control precisely because conventional optical
lenses and mirrors do not work at such short wavelengths. This work seeks to
advance the development of compact ("table-top") sources of highly controlled
gamma-photons, both through experiments and theoretical work. In effect, this
work seeks to extend the field of "quantum optics" to wavelengths approaching
the gamma-ray regime. If successful, the work may find applications in the areas
of quantum information science, spectroscopy, microscopy, metrology, and
sensors. The proposed joint theoretical and experimental research program will
provide training for graduate and undergraduate students in the emerging field
of the experimental and theoretical quantum gamma-optics as well as in the
related (and more general) experimental techniques, analytical methods, and
numerical modeling.

The project is focused on the experimental and theoretical development of
methods to coherently control the interaction of gamma-photons with nuclear
ensembles via the variation of the resonant frequency of the nuclear transition
in the laboratory reference frame. This variation is achieved via the Doppler
shift associated with precisely vibrating the solid through which the photon
passes. This is used in conjunction with a source of heralded single photons
provided by the essentially simultaneous emission of two photons at 122 keV and
14.4 keV via the natural radioactive decay of Cobalt-57. The advantages of
nuclear transitions over electronic transitions is that they have narrow,
lifetime-broadened spectral linewidths in bulk solids at room temperature (due
to the large mass and small size of nucleons, shielding from the environment,
and recoilless absorption due to the Mossbauer effect). This results in orders-
of-magnitude stronger interaction of the photons with the nuclear ensemble.
Progress has been limited, however, by the absence of bright coherent sources
and high finesse resonators in the desired short wavelength range. The present
work is based on the lead scientist's recent realization of a table-top source
of ultra-short photon sources in the 14.4 keV range with coherent properties, as
well as the demonstration of efficient control of single gamma-photon waveforms
(F. Vagizov et al., Nature, vol. 508| 3 April 2014, p. 80). The technical and
fundamental limitations of the technique as presently developed will be explored
and new techniques for the production of short intense pulses and single gamma-
photon shaping will be developed. Applications for the controlled single-photon
waveforms will be explored in the areas of quantum information science.