* 1506486
* Study of the Highest Energy Cosmic Rays with the Pierre Auger Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Lawrence Wiencke, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 718,505.00

Cosmic rays are highly energetic sub-atomic particles from space that travel at
velocities near the speed of light. The origin and acceleration mechanism for
ultra-high energy cosmic rays, which likely come from extreme astrophysical
phenomena outside our galaxy, are currently unknown. The Pierre Auger
Observatory is the largest cosmic ray detector ever operated, with an
instrumented area of more than 3000 square kilometers. Built in Malargue,
Argentina by an international collaboration, the Pierre Auger Observatory was
designed to study the origin and interactions of the highest energy particles in
the Universe. This award supports the astroparticle group at the Colorado School
of Mines in their work on Auger to address systematic uncertainties in the
measured energy and composition of cosmic rays. They will utilize a recently
completed upgrade to the laser calibration systems at Auger. They are also
installing and will operate Auger detector tanks on the site of another cosmic
ray observatory, the Telescope Array in Utah, to cross-calibrate the detectors
from both observatories. The work of the Colorado School of Mines group also has
broader applications to atmospheric sciences. They will use the laser
calibration system to validate and then share atmospheric aerosol measurements.
They will use the Auger optical detectors to study light emitted in the
ionosphere about 90 km above certain thunderstorms. They plan to host a
conference on interdisciplinary science with astroparticle
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colorado School of Mines group will focus on
improved air shower reconstruction methods and detailed measurements of
systematic effects to address the unresolved discrepancies in cosmic ray data.
The Raman LIDAR on the Auger Central Laser Facility will be used as independent
atmospheric calibration. The Auger water Cherenkov Surface Detector tanks
installed at the Telescope Array site will be used for a detailed cross-
calibration between Auger, which views the southern sky, and Telescope Array,
which views the northern sky. Planned analysis of the Auger data includes
developing a new method to reconstruct air showers with the Surface Detectors,
and developing a method for anisotropy scans that include energy and angular
uncertainties.