* 1506401
* Many-Particle Quantum Engineering with Photon-Mediated Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Monika Schleier-Smith, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 457,331.00

A remarkable feature of quantum physics is the non-locality of information.
Quantum information can be encoded not only in individual bits or atoms, but
also in the correlations amongst many atoms. Such correlations -- or
"entanglement" -- may one day offer profound benefits for computation and
precision sensing technologies. While the potential benefits of entanglement
multiply with increasing particle number, so do the challenges of manipulating
and preserving it. One key difficulty is that the naturally occurring
interactions among atoms are local, i.e., an atom ordinarily interacts only with
other atoms that are very near it. In this project, we will engineer a new type
of interaction that is non-local and can thus entangle many spatially separated
atoms. We will employ laser light as a messenger for conveying information
between these atoms to generate entanglement. A crucial challenge is to convey
this information discreetly, without letting it leak to the surrounding
environment; otherwise, the delicate quantum mechanical system would be
perturbed by the mere act of observation. Addressing this challenge will require
a customized experimental apparatus, which graduate and undergraduate students
will construct and operate, thereby acquiring valuable technical and analytical
problem-solving skills. The educational impact will be extended to students from
a local two-year college through summer internships designed to broaden
participation in the science and engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on engineering light-
mediated spin-spin interactions among laser-cooled atoms. The primary motivation
is to enable the study of novel many-particle entangled states emerging from
beyond-mean-field collective spin dynamics. By strongly coupling many atoms to a
single mode of light in an optical resonator, we will generate interactions that
are highly coherent, controllable, and non-local. By furthermore combining non-
local interactions with local addressing, we will harness a single quantum bit
non-linearity to manipulate the many-particle collective spin. The ease of
tuning and quenching light-mediated interactions, as well as varying the
strength and form of dissipation, will enable investigations of the emergence of
entanglement in a quantum phase transition or in quantum chaotic dynamics.
Sensitive, resonator-aided measurements will enable detailed quantum-state
characterization, including tomographic reconstruction into a phase-space
representation allowing for visual comparison of quantum dynamics with
corresponding classical trajectories.