* 1506208
* DAMIC-100: Low-Mass Dark Matter Particles Detection with CCDs
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Paolo Privitera, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2018
* USD 548,897.00

There is strong cosmological and astrophysical evidence for non-baryonic, cold
dark matter as a major constituent of the universe. The nature of Dark Matter,
so far elusive, constitutes one of the most fundamental questions in science.
Its discovery as a yet unknown particle would have profound implications in our
understanding of the universe, and open new directions in particle physics and
cosmology. A compelling explanation for what might constitute dark matter is the
existence of hitherto unknown Weakly-interacting massive particles (WIMPs), and
a world-wide experimental effort is on-going to test this hypothesis. This
project is part of that effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immersive research
experiences developed in collaboration with programs focused on underrepresented
groups will enhance diversity at the graduate and undergrad levels. Innovative
partnerships with Adler Planetarium and the School of the Art Institute in
Chicago (SAIC) will bring Dark Matter science to broad and diverse audiences.
Visitor experiences at the Adler Planetarium (450,000 visitors/year) will be
enhanced by the participation of DAMIC scientists and the integration of
visualizations of particle interactions with charge-coupled devices (CCDs). In
collaboration with SAIC, an advanced STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
Arts and Math) program will inspire art students as well as experienced
professionals (e.g. designers) via explorations of software and modeling tools
to display current scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dark Matter In CCDs
(DAMIC) experiment searches for low mass WIMPs with scientific-grade silicon
CCDs. With this novel technique, WIMP-induced signals are detected with an
unprecedented low energy threshold, and unique spatial resolution. DAMIC-100, to
be installed in 2015 at the SNOLAB underground laboratory in Sudbury, Canada,
will have an active detector mass of 100 g. This award provides support for the
participation of the U. Chicago group to DAMIC-100. They have played a major
role in the DAMIC R&amp;D phase and in the construction of the 100 g detector.
The group will have strong responsibilities in the test and calibration of the
CCDs, in the installation and commissioning of the experiment, and in the data
analysis. In addition, a calibration of the nuclear recoil energy scale will be
performed at U. Chicago with a neutron source.