* 1506155
* A Dartmouth-JSEP Partnership for International Science Education in Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Ross Virginia, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2019
* USD 673,137.00

Dartmouth faculty, postdoctoral fellows and graduate students will provide
support for U.S. participation in the Joint Science Education Project (JSEP) and
associated educational outreach efforts. JSEP is an internationally funded
program that brings American, Danish and Greenlandic students and teachers to
Greenland for a three-week field school experience. The program includes
research related experiences in the Kangerlussuaq area and at the U.S. supported
Summit Station on the Greenland ice sheet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Components of
the US participation included in this award are: sending a small team of
graduate student and postdoctoral researchers with polar field experience, along
with a Dartmouth faculty member, to Greenland to support field science education
in the JSEP programs; continued training of an international group of students,
teachers, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in cross-cultural
science communication to advance the understanding of polar science in
Greenland; sharing this training more broadly with the polar community; hosting
planning meetings and workshops to design the curriculum for Science and
Education Week and to help coordinate efforts by all parties engaged in JSEP;
working with partners in Greenland and Denmark to increase the visibility of
JSEP; and sharing and assessing the results of JSEP through public
presentations, education-focused symposia at national meetings and publications
in scholarly journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to U.S. students, teachers,
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty will include: improved
science communication skills; greater facility in framing and communicating
scholarship to meet the needs of Arctic communities; increased capacity for
recognizing, assimilating, and communicating traditional knowledge; and skills
for implementing programs that will broaden impacts of their future scholarship.
The postdoc and graduate students will receive training in managing
interdisciplinary research and outreach teams, thereby preparing them as future
leaders in Arctic science and policy. Program goals include developing and
disseminating curricula strategies that will increase general awareness of polar
issues, attract the next generation of polar scientists and strengthen the
international network of polar researchers.