* 1506119
* Quantum Phenomena in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Leon Balents, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2019
* USD 354,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
quantum materials. Fundamentally, everything on earth is governed by quantum
mechanics. Yet, while quantum theory is essential to understanding the gross
properties of materials, for example the existence of both metals and
insulators, and the phenomena of magnetism, it rarely manifests itself directly
in the more macroscopic world. This project aims to bridge this gap by
investigating materials in which quantum effects are unusually apparent in
laboratory-scale observations. These quantum materials offer new functionalities
that could not be achieved in more classical substances.

The research is broadly focused on two areas: quantum magnetism and conducting
"liquids" of electrons. In quantum magnets, the phenomena of quantum
entanglement - the strange situation in which a system must be considered to be
in multiple classical states simultaneously - can be designed theoretically and
investigated experimentally. This project will investigate and quantify
entanglement in "frustrated" magnets, in which competing magnetic interactions
between electrons induce exotic quantum mechanical effects. The research in
conducting materials focuses on novel systems where quantum effects can be
controlled, and where these effects may directly be probed by electrical
measurements. Specifically this includes compounds made from transition metal
elements that appear in the 5th row of the periodic table of the elements, and
artificial quantum materials grown one layer of atoms at a time. All the
research involves a combination of development of theoretical techniques,
numerical and analytical calculations, and close interplay with experimental
studies. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in an essential
way in the research, training them broadly in analytical reasoning, mathematical
methods, computation, and scientific communication, which form the basis for
many careers in STEM fields, both in and out of physics.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education aimed to address the
problem of understanding and controlling quantum correlations in solids, by
developing new materials and structures with useful functionality not currently
available, and by extending the basic scientific framework to understand matter
in new regimes and new phases. Specific projects focus on highly quantum
magnetism and correlated itinerant materials. The research will be carried out
using a diverse set of theoretical techniques: phenomenological modeling,
statistical mechanics, field theory, ab initio simulations, density matrix
renormalization group, and symmetry analysis.

In the area of quantum magnetism, the goal is to bring cutting-edge concepts of
exotic, non-locally entangled and quantum critical states into confrontation
with experiment. This research will address quantum spin liquids and frustrated
ferromagnets and ferrimagnets, addressing major open questions and new paradigms
for quantum ordering. Study of itinerant correlated systems directly attacks the
frontiers of modern materials - 5d transition metals and oxide heterostructures.
Specific projects identify several directions with a high likelihood for
discovery: frameworks to test ideas of unconventional superconductivity and
quantum critical transport in new venues, and clarifying the interplay of
localized and itinerant electrons in oxide heterostructures. All the research
fully integrates graduate students and postdocs, who will be trained in
forefront areas of physics and in the scientific process and communication.