* 1506172
* RUI: Studies of Nucleon Structure Using Electromagnetic Probes at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,07/31/2020
* David Heddle, Christopher Newport University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2020
* USD 552,182.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons, protons and neutrons, are made
up of more elementary particles called quarks. The main physics program
supported by this grant aims to study of the structure of the proton. More
specifically, we scatter electrons from protons at Jefferson Laboratory to
measure the electric and magnetic properties of the proton. Our group is
involved in these efforts through the design of new experiments, the
construction of advanced particle detectors, and the development of novel
analysis and modeling software. We involve students by providing meaningful,
substantive projects to both undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our group's long established program of experiments embody
Jefferson Lab's primary mission: to elucidate the underlying structure of
protons, neutrons, and mesons. We focus on experiments which will further our
understanding of the quark spin structure of the proton in the non-perturbative
regime. Jefferson Lab has recently completed an upgrade to electron beams of
energy 12 GeV, and our group is now poised to take advantage of the increased
physics reach. We continue to lead the efforts to extend the measurement of the
proton electromagnetic form factor ratio to the highest momentum transfers
possible at Jefferson Lab, and also investigate the possible modification of
this form factor ratio within the nuclear medium. These experiments will provide
severe tests of the available theoretical models of proton structure, and will
serve as a strong impetus for the development of more advanced models based upon
quantum chromodynamics (QCD).