* 1506245
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Molecular Design of Durable Lewis Basic Elastomeric Membranes for Clean Energy Conversion and CO2 Separation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Chang Ryu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 401,378.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Heavy dependence on fossil fuels as an energy source has created the need for
sustainable energy sources and technologies, as well as addressing the buildup
of CO2 in the atmosphere. In fuel cells, the chemical energy stored in fuel is
converted directly to electrical energy via electrochemical reactions without
producing gases such as CO2. Recently, anion exchange membrane (AEM) fuel cells
have been investigated as a promising sustainable-energy technology alternative
to burning fossil fuels. Currently, the chemical instability of AEMs, loss of
hydroxide conductivity, and deterioration of mechanical stability have been
major obstacles to their successful applications. Current CO2 separation
processes are not energy efficient, and CO2-selective membranes with better
permeability and selectivity are needed. To address these issues, a research
team composed of a synthetic polymer chemist, a physical polymer chemist, and a
membrane scientist will conduct an interdisciplinary research and education
program to advance our materials design based on durable elastomeric membranes
for clean energy generation and CO2 separation technologies. The team of
researchers will design new macromolecular materials to enhance performance of
polymer membranes, followed by determining their structures and properties.
Students will interact with experts in synthetic polymer chemistry, materials
characterization, and membrane property evaluation and thus will be educated
through multidisciplinary problem-solving approaches. In addition to basic
research and education programs for students, outreach programs on clean energy
and environmental sustainability will contribute to improving the scientific
literacy of the local community and broaden the impact of this research on
society.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

To date, the development of most membrane materials for anion exchange membrane
(AEM) fuel cells and CO2 separation has relied on rigid polymers because of
their good mechanical stability in dry states. However, elastic membranes with
block copolymer nanostructure are more suitable for practical applications
because they can better withstand the swelling and plasticization caused by
water and CO2. In this collaborative project, the PIs will molecularly design
polymer structures to enhance performance of polymer membranes for such
applications. They aim to improve understanding of molecular-level relationships
among polar groups, polymer architectures, nanophase-segregated morphologies,
and polymer membrane properties (e.g., mechanical, thermochemical, ion
transport, gas permeation), which may lead to the development of improved
membrane materials for applications in alkaline fuel cells and CO2 separation
processes. The outcomes of this SusChEM project will advance discovery and
understanding for the design of next-generation polymer membranes for alkaline
membrane fuel cells and CO2 separation.