* 1506518
* Nitronate monooxygenase: A model for flavosemiquinones in oxidative catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Giovanni Gadda, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2019
* USD 540,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Giovanni Gadda from Georgia State University to
elucidate the enzymology of nitronate monooxygenase, a flavin-dependent enzyme
that oxidizes propionate 3-nitronate to malonic semialdehyde, nitrite and
nitrate. Oxidative catalysis, speeding up reactions that involve the transfer of
electrons, is fundamental to life as it is at the core of the processes involved
in the extraction of useful energy from fuel, such as carbohydrates and fats.
Organisms then use the extracted energy to do work, to move, and to make the
various molecules of life. The involvement of flavosemiquinones in oxidative
catalysis has not been studied until now. This research project focuses on
nitronate monooxygenase, flavosemiquinone-dependent enzyme. This pursuit will
foster the integration of experiments with the education and training of
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students in a variety of techniques in
a multidisciplinary research environment. This will equip future generations of
scientists with tools that are in high demand to fill the gap that exists
between a wealth of information at the genome level and knowledge at the protein
structure and function level. Educational and outreach activities beyond the
laboratory will include the annual Southeast Enzyme Conference in Atlanta, the
Chemistry Graduate Program and the Annual Chemistry Department Poster Day at
Georgia State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an
opportunity to investigate the oxidation of catalytically relevant
flavosemiquinones in the active sites of enzymes. The involvement of
flavosemiquinones in oxidative catalysis has not been studied until now. This
research project will investigate the properties of nitronate monooxygenase, an
enzyme that uses flavosemiquinones in catalysis. The experimental approaches
will combine steady-state and rapid kinetics, pH effects, mutagenesis and
crystallography. The results will contribute to an understanding of the
enzymology of nitronate monooxygenase and the reactivity of flavosemiquinones
with oxygen in the active sites of enzymes. The project will also elucidate the
chemical mechanism of catalysis for a member of Class H of the flavin-dependent
monooxygenases, an enzymatic class that uses flavosemiquinones instead of using
C4a-hydroperoxy-flavin intermediates.