* 1506170
* Collaborative Research: Hydrazone-Based Solid-State Light Emitters
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Ivan Aprahamian, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 388,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Replacing widely used and highly inefficient
incandescent bulbs and compact fluorescent lamps with efficient solid-state
light devices can drastically reduce our total domestic energy consumption and
CO2 production. This project is developing two classes of solid-state light
emitters to address multiple drawbacks associated with organic material-based
solid-state light emitters. To accomplish this goal, the research team is
advancing the molecular level understanding of hydrazone-based solid-state light
emitters using experimental and computational techniques. The two lead
investigators are actively involved in educational and outreach activities that
provide meaningful learning opportunities for underprivileged pre-college
students in NH and VT, retain students already in the chemistry pipeline at
their institutions, and engage the general public through informal science
education activities. These research and outreach activities are supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research as well as the Marcromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
program in the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project employs the tools of
organic and physical chemistry to advance fundamental understanding of two
remarkable photophysical properties of hydrazone-based materials, namely,
aggregation induced emission (AIE) and broad fluorescent bandwidths.
BF2-hydrazone (BODIHY) dyes have brought about a paradigm shift in the field of
solid-state light (SSL) emitters as these molecules exhibit AIE in the solid-
state despite the presence of intermolecular pi-pi interactions that would seem
to favor quenching. The other family of hydrazone-based materials investigated
here, triazolopyridinium (TOP) salts, are blue light emitting materials with
large Stokes shifts and broad fluorescent bandwidths, two properties of great
potential value in advanced energy applications. The research team at Dartmouth
College uses an efficient synthetic approach to prepare diverse libraries of
BODIHY and TOP dyes for structure-property analyses. The photophysical
properties of these BODIHY and TOP dyes are extensively characterized, both in
solution and the solid-state, primarily using electronic absorption and
fluorescence spectroscopies. In addition, the research team at the University of
Vermont utilizes electronic structure calculations to elucidate the
photophysical mechanisms of hydrazone-based dyes, and make a priori predictions
regarding their fluorescent properties to expedite the discovery and development
of new and efficient solid-state emitters that can be easily deployed and
integrated into SSL applications. Ultimately, this project creates new,
fundamental knowledge in the fields of organic and physical chemistry, which is
of significant value to the materials and supramolecular chemistry communities.