* 1506329
* Collaborative Research: R&D Towards Higher Sensitivity Directional Dark Matter Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* John Matthews, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2018
* USD 34,998.00

In this era of precision cosmology, measurements suggest that ordinary matter
represents only a fraction of the total matter density in the Universe. The
rest, whose presence we only infer gravitationally, is unknown in its nature,
and is termed dark matter. Particle physics suggests that dark matter comprises
relic Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs) left over from the Big Bang.
Experimental efforts to directly detect WIMPs are extremely challenging due to
small interaction probabilities and large backgrounds. The motion of the Earth
through the galaxy produces a head-wind of WIMPs. The angular distribution of
recoils from WIMP interactions has a ~100% asymmetry, and is modulated at the
sidereal rate on account of the Earth's rotation. No known background can mimic
this signal.

The practical implications of the technology being developed for such searches
have promising applications to low background alpha and neutron measurements.
This work also includes the training of a diverse set of undergraduates and
graduate students in increasingly rare small-scale experiments, giving them
exposure to a wide range of research experience.

The Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks (DRIFT) experiment leads the
field of directional dark matter detection. The intellectual merit of this award
resides in DRIFT's sensitivity to this modulated signature, which provides a
unique window into one of the most important questions in science today. NSF-
funded DRIFT-IId work over the last several years has led to enormous
experimental progress. The collaboration is in the final stages of commissioning
a new DRIFT-IIe detector. The operation of both detectors will test the
viability of long-duration background-free exposures. This award will provide
funding to continue the operations of DRIFT-II.