* 1506008
* Computational Polymer Field Theory: Revisiting the Sign Problem
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Nontechnical Summary

This project will build on recent developments by the PIs and co-workers of the
field-theoretic simulation method, enabling direct numerical investigations of
field theory models of polymers and soft materials without approximation. This
framework permits efficient computer simulations to be conducted for a wide
variety of complex fluids, polymers and soft materials and is particularly
effective for dense, high molecular weight, self-assembling polymer systems. The
proposed research aims to make fundamental breakthroughs in the methodology for
conducting simulations, which should enable up to two orders of magnitude
acceleration in computational design of soft materials for emerging applications
in microelectronics patterning, water purification, and energy and medical
devices.

Broader impacts of the proposed research include a continuance of the PIs'
strong record in graduate and post-doctoral training in theoretical and
computational polymer science. A particular focus will be to expose students and
post-docs with classical physics training to broader soft materials/polymer
science disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at UCSB in
chemical engineering, materials, and chemistry. The fundamental understanding
gained under the proposed project will be further leveraged through the Complex
Fluids Design Consortium at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic partnership
that is addressing the computational design of commercial polymer and complex
fluid formulations.



Technical Summary

This project will build on recent developments by the PIs and co-workers of the
field-theoretic simulation method, enabling direct numerical investigations of
field theory models of polymers and soft materials without resorting to the
mean-field approximation. The proposed research aims to make fundamental,
transformative breakthroughs in understanding and methodology by challenging
current approaches to the "sign problem" associated with complex-valued models.
The PIs' approach will enable studies of entirely new classes of polymers and
soft materials and applications to emerging polymer technologies. Specific
components of the project include: 1. Complex to real mapping methods. Methods
will be developed for systematic mapping of (d+1)-dimensional complex-valued
microscopic polymer field theory models to d-dimensional real-valued, density
explicit models. Such a methodology will enable highly efficient simulations of
diverse families of nano-structured polymers on unprecedented length scales. 2.
Hybrid Monte Carlo -Complex Langevin methods. The PIs will utilize a new "basis
function free" approach inspired by hybrid quantum-classical treatments of hard
condensed matter. This technique will offer improved stability and enable a
diverse set of sampling options, e.g. force-bias Monte Carlo method and flat
histogram methods. 3. Applications to challenging polymer morphology problems.
The new field-theoretic simulation methods developed in this program will be
used to address difficult materials problems such as recently discovered
"bricks-and-mortar" fluctuation-stabilized phases in mikto-arm polymer alloys.
The computational efficiency gains will be exploited in studies guiding directed
self-assembly approaches to advanced lithography.

Broader impacts of the proposed research include a continuance of the PIs strong
record in graduate and post-doctoral training in theoretical and computational
polymer science. A particular focus will be to expose students and post-docs
with classical physics training to broader soft materials/polymer science
disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at UCSB in
chemical engineering, materials, and chemistry. The fundamental understanding
gained under the proposed project will be further leveraged through the Complex
Fluids Design Consortium at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic partnership
that is addressing the computational design of commercial polymer and complex
fluid formulations.