* 1506512
* Mathematical Theory of Peridynamics and Nonlocal Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Tadele Mengesha, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2017
* USD 104,355.00

Mengesha 1312809

The principal investigator and his colleague study the mathematical properties
of nonlocal models, particularly the peridynamic model of continuum mechanics.
The project focuses on establishing the well-posedness of both linear and
nonlinear models for dynamic and equilibrium problems involving nonlocal
boundary (volume-constrained) value conditions; classifying emerging
discontinuities and developing a regularity theory for solutions of nonlocal
models as functions of given data; and studying conditions that enable
nucleation and propagation of singularities in peridynamic equations and other
nonlocal models. The investigators use analytical tools ranging from
perturbation methods to calculus of variations. The project addresses technical
challenges that are absent from the traditional local approach, leading to
extensions of classical mathematical concepts and techniques to the nonlocal
setting.

The project offers a mathematical framework for studying nonlocal operators and
equations that may be useful to the study of many common nonlocal phenomena. It
helps establish the necessary theoretical footing for nonlocal models. The
project findings are integrated by the investigators into classroom teaching and
other educational endeavors. The investigators' long-term goal is to work with
mechanical engineers, physicists, biologists and materials scientists to make
nonlocal models useful tools for studying complex systems in various scientific
and engineering applications such as anomalous diffusion, nonlocal heat
conduction, phase transition, and biological aggregation.