* 1506677
* RUI:  Investigation of Strongly Correlated Electron Behavior in Rare Earth Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Pei-Chun Ho, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 307,198.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project supports materials science
research of rare-earth related materials at an undergraduate institution. The
primary focus is on the synthesis and characterization of superconducting
materials and magnetic nanoparticles, with the goal of understanding their
underlying mechanisms. Many versatile technical applications result utilization
of the rare-earth compounds under study such as energy conservation and energy
storage by applying superconducting materials and digital information storage
and medical imaging by utilizing the magnetic nanomaterials. The research in the
principal investigator's laboratory allows direct participation of undergraduate
and master-degree-program students in the experimental condensed matter physics,
giving them hands-on experience at the early stage of their academic life. The
research experience and practical placement provided by this project encourage
students to pursue higher education and careers in the fields of STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project supports experimental research in the strongly
correlated electron phenomena in rare-earth related materials. These phenomena
arise from a subtle interplay between competing interactions, either electronic
or magnetic. They can be controlled through tuning the experimental parameters
such as temperature, magnetic field, chemical composition, and reduced
dimensionality. The rare-earth materials under study can be used as model
systems to probe the localized and itinerant nature of the electron states and
test the existing theories for strongly correlated electron physics. These can
be achieved through the synthesis of high-quality specimens and the
establishment of transport and thermodynamic properties. In the rare-earth
filled skutterudite systems Pr1-xNdxOs4Sb12, the principal investigator is
aiming to understand the unconventional nature of the superconductivity in
PrOs4Sb12 by the effect of neodymium substitution. Furthermore, via the
investigation of the electronic structures of related compounds CeOs4Sb12,
NdOs4Sb12, and SmOs4Sb12, it can give insight on the quantum critical behavior
in the Pr1-xNdxOs4Sb12 system and the role of the quadruple moment fluctuation.
The study of nanoparticles of gadolinium and neodymium can enhance the knowledge
on the effect of reduced size on magnetic ordering, domain wall movement, and
surface electron states.