* 1506141
* UNS: Real-Time Economic Model Predictive Control of Nonlinear Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Panagiotis Christofides, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 311,730.00

1506141 - Christofides&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of next-generation
advanced manufacturing (e.g., Smart Manufacturing, market-driven manufacturing,
and real-time energy management) is of paramount importance to sustaining the
future competitiveness of the U.S. chemical industry, a vital sector of the U.S.
economy. The core of next-generation manufacturing objectives involves tightly
integrating the components of the manufacturing processes to deliver increased
safety, profitability, efficiency, variability, capacity and sustainability.
Within the context of chemical process operations, process control systems
should account for economic process considerations such as variable demand,
changing energy prices, variable feedstock, and product transitions in the
computation of the control actions and should be able to operate a process in a
dynamic fashion to account for the volatile market conditions. Most of the
existing control infrastructure has been designed to achieve the best possible
performance with respect to steady-state (time-invariant) operation.
Transitioning from steady-state operation to dynamic or time-varying operation
represents a significant paradigm shift in chemical process operations and
chemical process control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economic optimization of
chemical processes has traditionally been addressed through a two- layer
architecture. In the upper layer, economic process optimization is completed by
computing optimal process operation set-points using steady-state process
models. These optimal set-points are used by the feedback control systems in the
lower layer to force the process to operate on these steady-states. In the lower
layer, model predictive control (MPC) has been widely adopted in the chemical
process industry because of its ability to optimally control multivariable
systems subject to input and state constraints. The conventional formulations of
MPC use a quadratic performance index along a finite prediction horizon to steer
the system to the optimal (economically) steady- state. While this strategy
(steady-state optimization and operation) has been traditionally used in
chemical process industries, steady-state operation may not necessarily be the
economically best operation strategy. Recently, economic MPC (EMPC), an MPC
scheme that uses a cost function that directly accounts for the process
economics, has been introduced as an alternative approach to the two-layer
economic process optimization and control. EMPC operates systems in a possibly
time-varying fashion to optimize the process economics. However, the rigorous
design of real-time EMPC systems, which address key practical considerations
(time needed to compute control actions, guaranteed performance improvement over
steady-state operation, time-varying cost functions, and monitoring and safety)
poses significant fundamental and implementation challenges. Motivated by these
considerations, the main objective of this research program is to develop the
theory and methodology needed for the design and implementation of real-time
economic model predictive control systems for chemical processes described by
nonlinear dynamic models and to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
methods in the context of chemical processes of industrial importance.
Specifically, this research will address: a) the development of real-time EMPC
systems capable of handling real-time im- plementation issues and practical
considerations including real-time calculation time and explicitly time-
dependent cost functions accounting for variable energy price and demand, b) the
development of monitoring schemes for evaluating the performance of EMPC systems
accounting for time-varying operation and the design of EMPC systems that
explicitly account for process safety constraints and deal with operational
limitations due to possible malfunction of control system components, and c)
applications of the real-time EMPC schemes to large-scale chemical plant
simulators us- ing high-fidelity process models and a state-of-the-art
experimental ultra-filtration/reserve osmosis water desalination system to
demonstrate that EMPC can significantly reduce energy consumption. The
development of real-time EMPC system methods is expected to signifi- cantly
improve the operation and performance of nonlinear processes, thereby enhancing
the com- petitiveness of the US economy. The integration of the research results
into graduate and senior undergraduate courses and the writing of a new book on
"Economic Model Predictive Control" will benefit students and researchers in the
field.