* 1506942
* Development of Highly Sensitive and Selective Fluorogenic Chemdosimeters
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Kazunori Koide, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2020
* USD 462,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
program and the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Kazunori Koide of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Pittsburgh will develop new classes of chemical reagents with
useful fluorescence properties. The goal of this research is to exploit the
characteristics of hydrogen peroxide and mercury for the development of
fluorescence detection methods. The project lies at the interface of organic,
analytical, inorganic, and biological chemistry, and is therefore well suited to
the education of scientists at all levels. This group is also well-positioned to
provide interdisciplinary education and training for undergraduate and graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers. Outreach activities involving freshman
college students will be part of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, chemosensors that fluoresce when exposed to
mercury or hydrogen peroxide will be developed. For mercury detection, the
principal investigator proposes to exploit organic reactions catalyzed by
mercury. The catalytic systems will amplify fluorescence signals, yielding
highly sensitive analytical methods. The catalytic reactions include a
sigmatropic rearrangement and a cyclization reaction, both of which will produce
a fluorescent product from a nonfluorescent starting material upon exposure to
mercury species. These methods will be applied to the analyses of wastewater
from coal-fired power plants. Mercury will be quantified below 0.1 ppb levels.
For hydrogen peroxide detection and quantification, a [2,3]-sigmatropic
rearrangement mediated by hydrogen peroxide, which creates a green fluorescent
dye from a nonfluorescent precursor, will be used. The objective is to develop
new probes for detecting and quantifying hydrogen peroxide in living human
cells. Toward this objective, nonfluorescent rearrangement substrates will be
made. When the substrates react with hydrogen peroxide and the rearrangement
occurs, a green fluorescent fluorescein derivative will be produced.