* 1506263
* Time Dependence and Textures in Low Dimensional Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Herbert Fertig, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2019
* USD 345,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on the role of specially arranged external disturbances
in creating novel electronic states in materials. Topology in the context of
condensed matter systems provides a way of understanding how electrons are
organized in a material, as well as predicting robust properties of how they
move through and along the edges of the material. The concept has become
increasingly recognized as an important facet of the physics of condensed matter
systems. In this project, the PI will explore how topological characteristics of
electronic states in materials can be manipulated using periodic time-dependent
disturbances, such as light or electric and magnetic fields that vary in time.
The resulting systems are generically known as Floquet systems, and they share
the ability of supporting "textures," regions where discrete properties, such as
the direction of the intrinsic magnetism of the electron, vary in ways which,
when combined for the system as a whole, lead to patterns with interesting
properties. The research is focused on ways to understand and predict when such
patterns should be present, and furthermore in developing useful models of how
such reorganization and patterning of microscopic properties leads to measurable
electronic consequences. The PI will also explore, in the case of Floquet
systems, the possibility of exploiting textures as possible resources in quantum
information processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be conducted
with the full participation of graduate students, who will be trained in modern
methods of condensed matter physics, preparing them for careers in science and
technology. Scientists from the US and abroad will be collaboratively involved
in the work. In addition, the PI will be involved in an educational initiative
specifically for high-school students from rural and/or low-income areas in
Indiana: the creation of an online introductory physics course for Indiana high-
school students without access to an Advanced Placement physics course. Included
will be discussions about the remarkable modern materials relevant to this
proposal, such as graphene and carbon nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the roles of topology in Floquet materials. Floquet systems are
defined by periodic time-dependent potentials, for example by shining strong,
circularly polarized light normally onto a two dimensional electron system. In
some cases such potentials can induce texture and topology in a band of states,
which may not be present, or may have a different form, in the corresponding
static system. The PI seeks to answer fundamental questions about these systems.
The research will include studies of edge-state structure and transport
properties, which appear to be related in a more complicated way than in
analogous static topological systems. As part of this, the PI and coworkers will
explore topological invariants that directly address transport coefficients, and
investigate how they relate to the edge states they support. Studies of disorder
effects, including localization and disorder-induced transitions among different
topological states, will be undertaken. Also explored will be new concepts in
optically generated "valleytronics" which might be realized for certain Floquet
systems. The studies will also include simpler models with an eye towards
defining density matrices for Floquet systems, with the eventual goal of
developing methods in which contacts and/or thermal baths need not be explicitly
included in modeling a Floquet system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Textures can also
be present in real space, and have particularly interesting realizations in
quantum Hall systems, for which they carry physical charge. In the project, such
physics will be explored in multicomponent Dirac systems, in particular graphene
and topological insulator surfaces, where different possible broken symmetries
may compete to yield the lowest energy ground state. Textures introduced by
doping such systems away from integer fillings should result in states that
combine different types of orderings in spatially non-uniform patterns. These
systems offer rich phase diagrams and novel transitions, both quantum and
thermal, between different phases. The PI and collaborators will seek to fully
characterize and understand such systems. In addition, an exploration of edge
theories of thin topological insulators in which interactions induce coherence
between transverse surfaces will be conducted. This impacts the spectrum and
physical behavior of electrons at the edge both at the mean-field level, and
when fluctuations of the surface ordering are
incorporated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be conducted with the full
participation of graduate students, who will be trained in modern methods of
condensed matter physics, preparing them for careers in science and technology.
Scientists from the US and abroad will be collaboratively involved in the work.
In addition, the PI will be involved in an educational initiative specifically
for high-school students from rural and/or low-income areas in Indiana: the
creation of an online introductory physics course for Indiana high-school
students without access to an Advanced Placement physics course. Included will
be discussions about the remarkable modern materials relevant to this proposal,
such as graphene and carbon nanotubes.