* 1506152
* Unconventional quantum phase transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Thomas Vojta, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2019
* USD 339,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
into the quantum properties of materials as well as education and outreach
activities. If external conditions such as pressure or magnetic field vary, the
quantum state of a material at the absolute zero of temperature can undergo
abrupt transformations. Such quantum phase transitions are a central concept of
modern physics, have consequences for nonzero temperatures, and serve as
universal ordering principle in the quantum world. However, their behavior can
differ greatly from that of more common phase transitions driven by thermal
fluctuations such as the melting of ice or the boiling of water. This project
will explore quantum phase transitions in magnetic and superconducting
materials, in man-made nanostructure, and in atomic gases. The main goal is to
understand how these transitions control materials properties at low
temperatures over broad ranges of external conditions. In addition, activities
supported by this award will contribute to training young scientists, improve
the computational education and research infrastructure, and help engage broad
audiences in science and technology by means of yearly "Nobel Prize Colloquia"
that give elementary introductions into the science behind the prizes.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports research in theoretical and computational
quantum condensed matter physics and associated education and outreach
activities. The scientific objective is to explore unconventional quantum phase
transitions in correlated electron materials, ultracold atomic gases, quantum
nanostructures, and other types of quantum matter. The PI will employ a
combination of analytical and computational methods to perform this research
including renormalization group calculations and large-scale Monte-Carlo
simulations. Quantum many-particle systems display rich phase diagrams due to
the interplay between quantum coherence, correlations, spin-orbit coupling, and
disorder. The concept of a quantum phase transitions between different ground
states is among to the most important of modern condensed matter physics because
a quantum phase transition can control materials properties in wide parameter
regions, and serves as universal ordering principle for the phase diagram.
Recent research has shown that many quantum phase transitions do not follow the
established perturbative Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson paradigm for thermal
transitions. As a result, many quantum phase transitions observed in nature are
still poorly understood, and sometimes not even the correct theoretical
framework is known. The PI will therefore investigate several classes of quantum
phase transitions beyond the Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson paradigm, focusing on four
areas, (i) first-order quantum phase transitions and emerging criticality, (ii)
microscopic probes in strongly disordered quantum systems, (iii) Berry phases
and dissipation at impurity quantum phase transitions, (iv) topological
disorder, correlations, and criticality. This research will transform our
understanding of quantum phase transitions by helping to establish novel
paradigms that complement the traditional Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson scenario. The
research will also explain experimental results in transition metal and
f-electron compounds as well as ultracold gases, and it will suggest new
experiments. In addition, the activities will train young scientists, improve
the education and research infrastructure, and help engage broad audiences in
science and technology.