* 1506937
* CDMR: Tuning the Mechanical Properties of Ordered Supramolecular Polymers and Their Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Honggang Cui, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2018
* USD 426,000.00

PART1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Supramolecular polymers represent a new generation of polymeric materials,
offering advantageous properties in processing, self-healing, and recycling, and
have important technological applications as both electronically and biological
active materials. Possessing the fundamental knowledge that would enable the
precise tuning of the mechanical properties at the polymer molecular and network
level could lead to a significant shift in the way that supramolecular materials
are designed. This project is in the general area of Computationally and Data-
Driven Materials Research (CDMR). It aims to develop an in-depth understanding
of the various factors that affect the cooperative association of small
molecular building units into supramolecular polymers, and to use the knowledge
gained to achieve precise control over the mechanical properties of individual
polymers as well as their 3D networks. A combined use of experimental and
computational methodologies will help elucidate the key features of these
building units for precise control over the mechanical properties of the
resulting supramolecular polymers. Prediction of the pathway of self-assembly is
proposed with molecular modeling at multiple length-scales. Knowledge generated
from this work will impact the development of advanced materials for
applications in organic electronics, where the polymer length and inter-polymer
associations are important, and in regenerative medicine, which requires
biologically active hydrogels with defined stiffness. The two PIs bring
complementary experimental and theoretical/computational expertise to this
integrated project and are committed to providing a broad educational experience
at all levels.



PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The formation of ordered supramolecular polymers (SPs), utilizing small
molecular building units that can assemble into highly ordered and discrete one-
dimensional (1D) nanostructures, has led to the development of functional
supramolecular materials. This project is in the general area of Computationally
and Data-Driven Materials Research (CDMR) and is focused on in-depth
understanding of the various factors that affect the cooperative association of
small molecular building units. It aims to design and synthesize a series of
small-molecule mikto-arm star building units (MASBUs) possessing three distinct
functional arms (two hydrophobic and one hydrophilic), and to elucidate the key
molecular design features that define their growth kinetics and eventual
mechanical properties of ordered SPs. A combined experimental and computational
approach with an active feedback mechanism will be applied to correlate the
sequential variation of each arm with the mechanical properties (persistence
length, contour length, bundling) of the resulting SPs and their networks.
Specifically, Objectives 1 and 2 will focus on the synthesis and study of MASBUs
possessing isomeric hydrocarbons and pi-conjugated segments, respectively,
aiming to determine the relationship between the internal packing order and the
persistence length. Objective 3 aims to establish a correlation between the
growth kinetics and the contour length by varying the strength of associative
interactions within a peptide segment capable of forming intermolecular hydrogen
bonding. Objective 4 will attempt to identify the key factors that determine the
bulk mechanical properties of the supramolecular networks formed by the
assembled SPs, in particular looking at the effect of the persistence and
contour length and also the SP bundling. A successful outcome will lead to
significant advances in our fundamental knowledge of structure-property
relationships in ordered SP systems, and could have a substantial impact on the
creation of supramolecular materials. The two PIs bring complementary
experimental and theoretical/computational expertise to this integrated project
and are committed to providing a broad educational experience at all levels.