* 1506357
* A First Measurement of the Coherent Elastic Neutrino-Nucleus Scattering Cross Section
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Juan Collar, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

Precise experimental tests of fundamental particle properties are now a well-
established way to search for new laws of nature beyond our current physical
knowledge. The Standard Model of particle interactions describes known
fundamental particles and their interactions. However, the Standard Model in its
simplest form does not include a nonzero mass of the neutrino, for which there
is now experimental proof. This calls for a continued effort to improve the
Standard Model, and to further our knowledge of neutrino properties and
interactions. Neutrino scattering from the nucleus, which leaves the nucleus
intact, was first described some forty years ago, but still lacks an
experimental demonstration. An accurate measurement of this mode of neutrino
interaction, as planned here, will provide a handle on several still
unconstrained neutrino properties, contributing information that helps to
formulate refinements to the Standard
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use sodium-doped
cesium iodide scintillators as an advantageous target for the detection of
Coherent Elastic Neutrino-Nucleus Scattering, exploiting the intense neutrino
yield from the Spallation Neutron Source facility at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. The response of this material to low-energy nuclear recoils, like
those expected from this process, has been characterized and a full feasibility
test has been performed using a 2 kg low-background prototype crystal in a
dedicated radiation shield. Based on these studies, a planned 14 kg detector is
expected to measure approximately 550 events per year from this mode of neutrino
interaction. The still unmeasured neutron-generating charged-current neutrino
interaction on Pb-208, of interest in nuclear physics and for supernova
detection, will also be studied during the period of the award.