* 1506551
* Open Gromov-Witten Theory, Mirror Symmetry, and Toric Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Hsian-Hua Tseng, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 191,999.00

Mathematics and physics are traditionally closely related. In recent years many
new mathematical subjects have been created due to the influence of attempts to
study the nature of subatomic particles. One important example of such new
mathematics is the rapidly-developing subject of Gromov-Witten theory. One
reason for the importance of Gromov-Witten theory is its deep connections with
many other subjects, such as string theory, integrable systems of partial
differential equations, counting of geometric objects, and parameter spaces for
geometric objects. Another example is mirror symmetry, which is a duality
arising from physics and is interpreted in mathematics as the equivalence of two
seemingly completely unrelated geometric objects. Such a highly nontrivial
correspondence is extremely interesting in its own right, while also important
for theoretical physics. This research project will explore several key
questions in the deep relations between Gromov-Witten theory and mirror
symmetry. The research will further advance knowledge about mirror symmetry,
enumeration of holomorphic disks, and the geometry of parameter spaces of
surfaces, and it will also further promote the existing interactions between
algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry, combinatorics, mathematical physics,
and string theory.

This research project aims to study several aspects of open Gromov-Witten theory
and mirror symmetry: calculations of open Gromov-Witten invariants of compact
Calabi-Yau manifolds; understanding the relations between mirror maps defined
using period integrals and open Gromov-Witten invariants; proving mirror
symmetry statements for open Gromow-Witten invariants of symplectic toric
orbifolds; and studying the behaviors of open Gromov-Witten invariants under
birational transformations. The PI plans to study open Gromov-Witten invariants
by relating them to other quantities, such as closed Gromov-Witten invariants,
and to derive relations among open Gromov-Witten invariants. Techniques such as
virtual localization, mirror theorems, analysis of Kuranishi spaces, tropical
geometry, Seidel representations, and quantum differential equations will be
used in the research.