* 1506018
* Sensing, Imaging, Tuning and Creating Nanomaterial Chirality using Liquid Crystal Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Antal Jakli, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 470,000.00

Non-technical Abstract Chirality is a central scientific concept, and best
described by the inability to superimpose an object onto its mirror image by
translation and rotation. The most common example is our left and right hands.
Another example to demonstrate the concept of chirality is the active
ingredients in caraway seeds and spearmint. While they have identical molecular
structures, the two substances taste differently because they are chiral
opposites. Creating and understanding chirality at the nanoscale (more than
thousand times smaller than the thickness of a human hair), is critical for the
use of materials in optical devices, to engineer materials not found in nature
(metamaterials), for the characterization of large, complex biomolecules and to
make novel sensors. To understand such chiral nanoscale materials one needs to
detect, measure, visualize, and transfer nanoscale chirality. In this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, the research team uses liquid crystals (commonly used in
LCDs) to achieve these goals and to find their applications. Students will
experience an interdisciplinary research-oriented environment, utilize state-of-
the-art equipment, and become proficient in presenting their research to peers.
Students also experience collaborative research by travelling oversees and
working with colleagues in Europe. The project features several outreach
activities including a scientific symposium and training of high school students
from low-income households, hands-on lectures and lab research for high school
and undergraduate students. Virtual reality will be also used to explore and
visualize chiral nanomaterials.

Technical Abstract Metal nanoparticles, or their atomic surfaces, can exhibit
chirality by virtue of optical activity in metal-based electronic transitions.
This chirality can be realized either by adsorption of chiral organic molecules,
or by assembly of otherwise achiral or racemic nanoparticles in chiral
environments. Transfer of chirality from an adsorbed molecule to a metal
nanoparticle surface depends on the structure of the adsorbate and its
interactions with the surrounding. This is often difficult to elucidate, and
thus is the key focus of this project. The motivation for this research is to
advance recent findings that chirality at the nanoscale is uniquely able to
generate more intense responses in soft condensed matter systems such as liquid
crystals than their organic molecular chiral counterparts. The research team
utilizes several liquid crystal phases and materials as ideal constituents to
detect, visualize, and tune chirality of nanoscale particles. To measure, tune,
and visualize nanoscale chirality and apply the full potential of chiral
nanomaterials, the research team focuses on the synthesis, characterization, and
testing of chiral motif-functionalized metal nanoparticles differing in size and
shape, and on nanoscale metal patterns functionalized with self-assembled
monolayers of potent chiral molecules. The research also offers new prospects in
nanoscale chiral induction and chirality transfer from various liquid crystal
superstructures to achiral and racemic nanoparticles. Conversely, stabilization
and induced optical activity will also be examined in the newly discovered
twist-bend nematic phase. Combined, these chiral nanoscale materials serve as
viable test platforms for applications ranging from chiral nanoscale sensors and
tunable chiral metamaterials to chiral nanoscale inducers, discriminators, and
catalysts.