* 1506678
* Manipulating 2D Superconductivity through atomic scale control of boundary conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Chih-Kang Shih, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 382,798.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is aimed at controlling the
properties of thin superconductor films in the range of only a few atomic
monolayers and studying the superconducting properties in this new regime. The
superconducting films in such a thin regime are likely to exhibit properties
that are not found in the bulk form. For example, such a thin film may be able
to carry supercurrent in the presence of very high magnetic fields making the
film much more useful for device applications. The research activities involve
state-of-the-art synthesis techniques that can lay down the thin film atomic
layer by atomic layer thus enabling us to achieve the ultimate material control
at the microscopic scale. In addition, we will use characterization tools to
study the superconducting properties from nanometer to macroscopic (millimeter)
length scales. The proposal focuses on the integration of research and education
to train internationally competitive students in materials research. We are also
committed to educational outreach to broader audiences at all levels. At UT-
Austin the PI will take advantage of the Summer Academy of Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology for state-wide high school teachers and students, previously
established under the IGERT program. Moreover, we will offer summer internship
opportunities for female high school students through the Alice in the
Wonderland program; the PI has already hosted four of these students as summer
interns and will continue to do so in future years. Finally, this program is
fully committed to broadening participation of under-represented groups in
graduate research with specific goals of increasing the percentage of graduate
students that are women or/and of Hispanic background.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Elegantly fabricated
functional materials with reduced dimensions occupy a central stage of modern
materials research. Supported by an NSF-FRG program in the past, the PI has been
focusing on the novel physical properties of precisely tailored metallic thin
films and related nanostructures in the quantum regime. These past efforts have
substantially advanced the field in terms of growth and characterization of such
structures. In the proposed program, we will take another leap forward by
creating new heterostructures based on these quantum films to explore and
harness their emergent exotic superconducting properties for potential
applications. Specifically, we will focus on the interplay of superconductivity
with three different quantum degrees of freedom, including electronic, lattice,
and spin, and we will implement the following four major task areas: (a)
Correlating microscopic and macroscopic measurements - manipulating structural
defects and investigating their roles on phase fluctuations; (b) Revisiting
quantum size effect on superconductivity ultra-thin films and unraveling the
quantum confinement of phonons; (c) Tuning superconductivity of atomic-layer
superconducting films with interfacial engineering; and (d) Exploring
superconducting - spin-paramagnetic (SC-SP) transition in ultra-thin epitaxial
films.