* 1506254
* RUI: Sensitive Searches for Compact Binary Coalescence in LIGO Data
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joshua Willis, Abilene Christian University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 152,384.00

This project continues the development and use of advanced software algorithms
to search for gravitational waves - ripples in spacetime predicted by Einstein's
theory of gravity - in data from the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO). These are a predicted signature of some
of the most energetic events in the universe, including neutron stars and black
holes that orbit one another and spiral inwards and collide. The detection of
gravitational waves from such collisions will allow a direct confirmation of
this prediction of Einstein's theory, and will also allow measurement of the
properties of the neutron stars or black holes whose collision generated the
waves. Such properties are often difficult to measure indirectly through present
observations with telescopes and satellites. The broader impacts of this
proposal will include the training of undergraduate students in the nascent
field of gravitational wave astronomy, and dissemination of the first results of
that field to the broader public through short videos and public
talks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific problem this proposal will address is
the tuning and deployment of an offline, matched-filter search for compact
binary coalescing sources for non-spinning and aligned-spin systems, and the
development and testing of a search for precessing spin systems. This will be
done using the PyCBC pipeline toolkit of which the PI is a developer, and the
tuning studies and investigation of precessing searches will each test the
detection sensitivity of their respective searches on Mock Data Challenge (MDC)
data collected from earlier LIGO running and engineering runs. These detection
sensitivity studies will in turn be used to decide on tuning choices, and for
precessing searches, whether overall detection efficiency is improved by
searching over a precessing waveform template parameter space. Broader impacts
will be achieved by involving undergraduates in this research both locally at
ACU, and by traveling to the Albert Einstein Institute in Hannover, Germany.
Additionally, public outreach will continue the sequence of short, educational
videos that the PI and his students have already made on relativity.