* 1506179
* GOALI: Nanostructured Sapphire Optical Fiber for Sensing in Harsh Environment
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Henry Du, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 406,733.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The excellent potential of sapphire optical fiber for
sensing in harsh environments such as those encountered in advanced combustion-
based energy generation systems for high operation efficiency and low emission
has long been recognized. The lack of viable cladding on sapphire fiber for low-
loss light transmission and fiber protection remains the roadblock to real-world
applications. This project aims to develop a novel alumina cladding with highly
organized nano-sized air channels on sapphire fiber and to understand the
associated processing-structure-property-performance correlations for
evanescent-field chemical sensing and measurements via a strategy of fiber
coating with aluminum followed by its anodization. The success of the project
has the potential to overcome the decades-old sapphire fiber cladding challenge
as well as offer a myriad of opportunities to transformative sapphire fiber-
optic technology especially for sensing under adverse conditions where silica
fiber sensors are no longer suitable. This project is carried out in partnership
between Stevens Institute of Technology and Fiberguide Industries,
Inc.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The inability to fabricate stable
and high-quality cladding of controlled optical properties severely hampers the
design and development of sapphire fiber sensors for a host of applications,
particularly in corrosive environments at high temperatures. This project aims
to develop and evaluate nanostructured alumina cladding on sapphire fiber for
evanescent-field chemical sensing and measurements. The main objectives are: (1)
evaluation of the theoretical correlation between mode-field overlap and
cladding nanostructure to guide cladding fabrication; (2) determination of the
window of processing parameters for aluminum coating and anodization as well as
scale-up at Fiberguide; and (3) establishment and understanding of the interplay
between the cladding nanostructure and sensing performance in combustion
environment using evanescent-field laser absorption and surface-enhanced Raman
scattering as the detection modalities. This project is transformative in that
it has the potential to resolve the bottle-neck cladding problem long-faced by
sapphire fiber and that the resultant specialty optical fiber may well lead to
significant development of sapphire fiber-optic technology. Furthermore,
industrial partnership and international collaboration as an integral part of
the research activities greatly enriches the educational and research training
experiences of the doctoral, undergraduate and high-school scholars
participating in this project.