* 1506361
* I-Corps:  iLooc-Commercialization Feasibility Research and Implementation of Indoor Smartphone Localization via Indoor Positioning Satellites and Opportunistic Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,06/30/2016
* Xiaolin Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

A large number of mobile services such as location-based services, maps, and
navigation systems have been developed when smartphones were enabled with GPS.
However, about 80% of mobile data consumption originates from and indoor
environment where GPS will not work. Current location services are mainly for
outdoor and severely limited when applied in more pervasive indoor environment.
More pervasive fine-grained indoor location techniques could enable new mobile
engagement scenarios. For example, it would not be possible to welcome a
customer into a store with a personal message and recommendation; offer an in-
store deal or deliver a coupon in front of specific cereal boxes; deliver
biographies or art commentary on a specific object when wandering through a
museum; or remind users of social events within proximity. All these could lead
to more context-aware mobile computing and move towards a holistic mobile smart
life. The proposed technology will usher in enormous opportunities with
transformative impacts in broad domains. Using off-the-shelf smartphones with
the proposed technology, various indoor location services such as indoor
navigation, near-field advertising, augmented-reality, mobile
education/campus/health and entertainment, and shopping/tour guides can be
revolutionized.

This I-Corps team has developed iLooc, an indoor positioning system that is both
convenient and can be deployed at relatively low cost. Current day indoor
position systems are too coarse-grained (room-level or multi-meter level) for
many indoor mobile applications. Though significant progress has been made over
the last decade on indoor localization for smart and mobile phones, cost and
convenience are two factors that are still limitations for wide scale adoption
of these technologies. The iLooc ecosystem developed by the team consists of a
set of indoor positioning satellites, an app on a smartphone (iOS or Android)
for opportunistic sensing (with IPS,WiFi, BLE, and GPS), and a cloud server for
offloading heavy processing, location services and content management. The
algorithm used can localize position to within 5 centimeters. The system relies
only on off the shelf smartphones, using no specialized hardware and thereby
reducing cost. Similar to outdoor GPS, the system is passively synchronized and
doesn't require information back from the smartphone. This type of system is
much more convenient and scalable for large number of users. The team has tested
the ecosystem in several indoor environments including classrooms, museums, and
shopping centers.