* 1506451
* RUI: Search for the Electric Dipole Moment of the Neutron
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Shirvel Stanislaus, Valparaiso University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 12/31/2021
* USD 142,700.00

The main physics program supported by this award is to search for an electric
dipole moment of the neutron, which if found would signal new physics beyond the
physics of the Standard Model of particle physics, which describes the existence
and properties of the principal elementary constituents of known matter. The
search for physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) is one of the primary goals
of physics in the 21st century. The experiment, called the neutron Electric
Dipole Moment (nEDM), will be carried out at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
using instruments constructed and tested by a consortium of institutions.
Construction of the detector and the data taking will take place in the next few
years, providing first hand experience in cutting edge research for
undergraduates at Valparaiso University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precision
measurement of the properties of the neutron presents an opportunity to search
for violations of fundamental symmetries and to make critical tests of the
validity of the Standard Model. The Standard Model nearly prohibits the
existence of a permanent electric dipole moment of the neutron, whereas
extensions to the Standard Model predict an electric dipole moment of the
neutron at varying strengths that are potentially attainable by this experiment.
The discovery of a nEDM would imply a violation of time reversal invariance and
a violation of charge-parity symmetry that, depending on its magnitude, has
implications for the particle-antiparticle asymmetry in the universe.
Measurements of the particle electric dipole moment provide some of the tightest
constraints on extensions to the Standard Model. The experiment is designed to
improve the sensitivity by a factor of 100 compared to previous experiments.