* 1506145
* Multi-TeV Particle Astrophysics with the HAWC Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Miguel Mostafa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 655,085.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a ground-
based facility designed to observe very high energy gamma-rays. HAWC has unique
capabilities with a wide field of view that can observe two-thirds of the sky
every day. This award supports scientists at Pennsylvania State University to
carry out research with HAWC. The group will participate in both technical
operations in support of the observatory and scientific investigations. The
Pennsylvania State University group is engaged in education and outreach
efforts. They are developing new data acquisition systems and activities that
can be used in high-school teacher summer workshops.

HAWC consists of an array of 300 water tanks equipped with photomultiplier tubes
that detect particles from the extensive air showers generated when high energy
gamma-rays and cosmic rays impact the upper atmosphere. The Pennsylvania State
University group is involved in critical aspects of the HAWC observatory,
including the calibration of the photomultiplier tubes, the online acquisition
and analysis system, and the development of analysis tools. They are also
involved in the study of high-energy emission from gamma-ray bursts and high
energy diffuse emission regions.