* 1506668
* Inelastic Light Scattering as a Probe of Electronic Correlations
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Maxim Khodas, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2020
* USD 92,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and educational activities on a class of materials in which electrons
interact strongly. Many of these materials become superconducting at
sufficiently low temperature. The phenomenon of superconductivity is signaled by
the conduction of electricity without energy loss. If materials can be
discovered that exhibit superconductivity at sufficiently high temperature, then
they could be used for the transmission of electrical power. This award supports
research geared toward deeper understanding of the role of correlations in
electron motion that arise from strong electron interaction in a family of
superconducting materials which contain the element iron in their chemical
composition. These materials may be stepping stones to developing new materials
which exhibit superconductivity at higher temperatures, perhaps reaching up to
room temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop theory to understand
the implications of data obtained from experiments in which light is scattered
off iron-based superconductors. Strong interactions between electrons cause the
state of each electron to be determined by the motion of all other electrons.
The resulting electron-electron interactions cause the electrons to self-
organize and cause them to respond collectively to external stimuli. The PI and
his research team will study collective behavior that arises in the broad class
of iron-based superconductor materials. The PI will focus on the interplay of
three types of electronic self-organization: superconductivity, magnetism, and
structural order. While the individual electrons in ordinary metallic conductors
lose their energy through interaction with material imperfections leading to
losses, the collective flow characteristic of superconductors is rigid and
cannot be easily disrupted leading to loss free transmission of electricity.
Magnetism appears when the microscopic elementary magnets inside the solid all
point in the same direction setting the north pole of a magnet. Structural
ordering is caused by the electrons preferring a specific propagation direction.
The PI will carry out a comprehensive study of all these collective phenomena
within a single theoretical framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
have a broad impact on the scientific community and the public through
conferences and journal publications, and through an existing outreach program
to school children. The PI will further design university courses that
incorporate modern developments in theoretical physics to train the next
generation. This award will support and contribute to the training and education
of graduate students seeking their PhD degrees in theoretical condensed matter
physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
educational activities with the goal of advancing understanding of the
collective behavior of electrons in iron-based superconductors and low-
dimensional electronic materials. The PI will focus on collective phenomena in
iron-based superconductors probed by light. As the collective phenomena are the
fingerprints of ordering, the PI will investigate the structure and interplay of
order parameters, and closely related questions of the mechanism of
superconductivity and possible symbiotic relationships among magnetism, lattice
deformation and superconductivity. The major objective of the proposed research
is to advance understanding of collective behavior emergent at the onset of
different macroscopic orders, and the interplay and the competition among
ordered states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to advance analytical
techniques for describing correlation effects and collective response of layered
superconductors and interacting electron liquids. A variety of standard modern
methods will also be used in the research. The PI aims to contribute to the
understanding of universal aspects of symmetry breaking at the onset of
classical and quantum phase transitions. This project also includes a study of
spin transport in low dimensional systems. The collective behavior in these
systems sets in due to the interaction-induced self-organization of microscopic
fields felt by individual electrons. The PI will investigate enhancement of
electronic quantum coherence as shown by sharp modes in Raman spectra and the
ways in which correlations affect the electron
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have a broad impact on the
scientific community and the public through conferences and journal
publications, and through an existing outreach program to school children. The
PI will further design university courses that incorporate modern developments
in theoretical physics to train the next generation. This award will support and
contribute to the training and education of graduate students seeking their PhD
degrees in theoretical condensed matter physics.