* 1506441
* Theoretical Investigation of Strong Field Processes for Advancing Attosecond Chemistry
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Xi Chu, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 210,000.00

This research studies how electrons of an atom or molecule react to intense
laser fields and to each other. Strong laser fields are used to study electron
dynamics at the attosecond (10^-18 s) timescale for applications such as solar
energy conversion and photosynthesis. Previous studies have assumed that only
one electron is active in these systems. However, experiments have now shown
that the interaction of many electrons, both with each other and with the field
must be included. This project will attempt to include these effects. In
addition, this project will provide two undergraduate students and one graduate
student a broad array of theoretical and computational training. As part of the
project, computations that yield useful information on attosecond chemistry will
be incorporated into the curriculum for the undergraduate advanced physical
chemistry class. Collaborations with experimentalists and quantum chemists
involved in the project will contribute to building the connection between
conventional spectroscopy and the emerging attosecond
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this investigation will be the
suppressed ionization of transition metal atoms vanadium, nickel, niobium,
palladium, and tantalum in intense laser fields, and spectral features of high
harmonic generation (HHG) for argon, nitrogen, and the molecule NO. The features
include Cooper minima and HHG enhanced by resonances. There will be extensive
benchmarking that consists of comparisons with published results and among
different conditions, which will provide insight into the time-dependent density
functional theory (TDDFT) approach and methods to improve it as well. The
proposed study will render the most probable ion state, the form of the out-
going electron wave function, and the time-dependent exchange and correlation
potentials. This knowledge will lead to new understanding and improved modeling
of strong field many-electron dynamics.