* 1506424
* Search for Topological Dark Matter with Atomic Clocks and GPS Constellation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Andrei Derevianko, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 463,286.00

This project seeks to answer the question "what is the nature of dark matter"?
Dark matter is invisible, yet it is known to exist with about five times more
abundance in the universe than the ordinary matter (like stars) we can see.
Although the astronomical evidence of dark matter is overwhelming, so far nobody
has detected it in the laboratory, and we know almost nothing about it. Many
attempts to seek dark matter as fundamental particles of nature have so far
failed. Our project will search for a different possible type of dark matter
known as topological defects, predicted by some models of how the universe
formed. Our approach to detect topological defects is by observing their
predicted effect on atomic clocks, the most precise instruments ever devised.
Specifically, we will use existing data from the Global Positioning System (GPS)
and seek the tiny effects of dark matter on time kept by atomic clocks connected
to GPS instruments. Since the GPS system and the atomic clocks already exist and
are paid for, this is a relatively low-budget project with high potential
payoff. If topological defects do exist and we find them, this would help set
our understanding of the universe on a more sure footing. Likewise, it would
also be valuable to be able to rule out this possibility with a small margin of
error, to help science focus on more likely explanations. In this way, such
investigations promote the progress of science. Society also benefits in terms
of new technologies that can only be made possible with the unpredictable
knowledge that comes with scientific progress.

Understanding the nature of dark matter remains one of top outstanding problems
in physics today. Some models predict dark matter in a form of stable
configurations of light fields, the topological defects (TD). The presence of
TDs may lead to occasional transient changes of particle masses and coupling
constants, thus giving a distinct signature that can be searched for with the
network of sensitive atomic clocks. This project will use atomic clocks of the
existing GPS satellite constellation and ground station network as a 50,000 km-
aperture sensor array. Data from this detector have been accumulated over 15
years and are publicly available. The PI, an expert in precision positioning and
timing, will conduct the GPS data processing by customizing the NASA/JPL
software GIPSY/OASIS of which he is a co-author. The output will be a time
series of clock phase for all GPS satellites and ground stations, which we have
demonstrated can be monitored with a precision of ~0.1 ns. If DM exists in the
form of macroscopic TDs, then there is a chance to discover this with this
macroscopic experiment. Assuming TDs exist in sufficient abundance, then the
Earth would pass through these TDs occasionally. For TDs that pass through the
GPS system at galactic speeds ~300 km/sec, TDM-SM coupling would lead to
transients in fundamental physical constants, which would cause a sequence of
transients in atomic clock frequency, hence producing step-like functions in
clock phase across an aperture of ~200 s for the GPS constellation, and ~40 s
for ground stations. Since GPS carrier phase data is routinely acquired with
few-mm precision at intervals of 1 s, detecting ~1 ns signals in the atomic
clock phase over a 200-s aperture is easily achievable. Observing such a
signature would provide decisive evidence of the existence of TDs with a high
confidence level, as there is no known mechanism for background events that
would mimic such a signature. Non-observation will place constraints on certain
new-physics couplings.