* 1506829
* Colloidal Nanocrystal Routes to Inorganic Nanocomposite Thermoelectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Robert Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 425,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this project
synthesizes and characterizes advanced nanocomposite thermoelectric materials.
Thermoelectric materials directly convert temperature differences into voltage
differences and vice versa. This phenomenon enables the creation of solid-state
thermoelectric power generators and coolers that can play a promising role in
addressing the energy landscape and climate change. One of the most promising
applications of thermoelectric devices is the conversion of waste heat (e.g.
automotive exhaust) into electricity. Thermoelectric coolers are also promising
because these devices do not use refrigerants, which are generally potent
greenhouse gases. As a part of this activity, the principal investigator is
creating a thermoelectric lab module for an undergraduate course on internal
combustion engines. This lab integrates thermoelectric devices into an engine's
exhaust system, and thereby enables the study of waste heat conversion into
electricity. The engine is also equipped with a dynamometer that characterizes
its mechanical power. Hence students are able to measure the electric power
produced by the thermoelectric devices as they relate to the primary engine
variables: speed and torque. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance the thermoelectric
materials field by combining three separate mechanisms to improve performance in
nanocomposite materials. First, the microstructure of these composites consists
of nanoparticles embedded in a matrix. This morphology promotes strong phonon
scattering and favorable reductions in thermal conductivity. Second, quantum-
confined nanocrystals are being used for the nanoparticle inclusions. This
confinement causes sharp peaks in the electronic density of states, which leads
to large thermoelectric power factors. Lastly, band convergence is being used to
create a large effective band degeneracy, which further promotes large
thermoelectric power factors. Colloidal nanocrystals and metal-chalcogenide
cluster precursors are being combined as modular building blocks to create the
nanocomposites. The local atomic and electronic structures of the nanocomposites
are being characterized using an aberration-corrected scanning transmission
electron microscope equipped with a high resolution electron energy loss
spectrometer. A complete suite of thermoelectric property measurements (i.e.
Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, and thermal conductivity) is being
performed on the nanocomposites over a broad range of temperatures.
Collectively, this project's combination of novel nanocomposite formation,
atomistic materials characterization, and thermoelectric measurement suite
enables the targeted discovery of thermoelectric design rules for improved
performance.