* 1506037
* Collaborative Research: LIGO Science Education Center Partnership - Broadening Participation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Joseph Giaime, The Baton Rouge Area Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,243,445.00

This award is one component of a collaborative effort to fund the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) Science Education Center
Partnership between Southern University in Baton Rouge (SUBR), LA, the LIGO
Livingston site in Livingston, La, through the Baton Rouge Area Foundation
(BRAF), and the Exploratorium. The managing institution for LIGO itself is
California Institute of Technology. The project is the continuation of the LIGO
Science Education Center Partnership focused on scientific outreach to the
general public, teacher training, and teacher education focused on LIGO
activities in Louisiana. A previous award helped create the SEC building, with a
classroom and a large exhibit hall, with exhibits developed by the Exploratorium
and staffed by SUBR student docents and a (separately funded) professional
staff. The multilayered partnership of HBCUs, a cutting edge research facility
and a renowned informal science center created a model for future partnerships.
With the expansion of this partnership the model is extended, and research on
the effects of these extensive partnerships can provide information for future
attempts at leveraging the resources of research laboratories for educational
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the LIGO-SEC Partnership to
amplify and nurture a Science, Technology, Engineering, Education and
Mathematics (STEEM) pipeline that taps into under-represented audiences and
engages them in techniques that encourage students to advance their education in
STEEM fields. The docent program and the teacher programs will increase
participation of under-represented audiences within the STEEM fields. The docent
program will train between sixty and eighty under-represented STEEM majors to
become community ambassadors in conjunction with LIGO Science Education Center's
outreach program, and the docents will interact with between 12,500 and 5,000
participants. The teacher professional development activities target high-need
areas in New Orleans and Baton Rouge. The activities will develop around 250
teachers' familiarity with engineering design processes and underlying science
concepts. These teachers will create and build interactive science activities to
use in the classroom to engage with students. Graduate students will conduct new
research in the use of inquiry and informal science methods within the formal
(School) and informal (LIGO-SEC) environments. The graduate students'
dissertations will contribute to the literature on Informal Science Education.
The project is guided by an on-going evaluation.