* 1506480
* Large-Area Synthesis and Carrier Transport and Dynamical Properties of Atomically Thin Two-Dimensional In2Se3
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Yi Gu, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 376,312.00

Nontechnical Description: The behavior of electrons in a solid material is
central to electrical and optical characteristics of the material and plays a
critical role in determining the performance of electronic and optoelectronic
devices such as transistors, photodetectors, and solar cells. Recently, two-
dimensional materials, with the thickness down to a single atomic layer, have
emerged as a new class of material systems with novel properties beyond
conventional bulk materials. This project studies the charge carrier transport
and dynamics in a technologically important two-dimensional material, indium
selenide, and develops a fundamental understanding of the synthesis-structure-
property relation. The research is integrated into education and outreach
activities. In addition to providing research opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, including those from the underrepresented groups in
science and engineering, the research results generated in this project are
incorporated into the classroom teaching and hands-on experience with optics,
electric circuits, and photovoltaics is offered to high school students through
a summer workshop.

Technical Description: This research project aims to establish a fundamental
understanding of charge carrier transport and ultrafast carrier dynamics in two-
dimensional indium selenide. This project involves patterned synthesis of
atomically thin single-crystal indium selenide over a large area using van der
Waals epitaxy, and property characterizations utilizing a combination of
transmission electron microscopy, confocal Raman spectroscopy, scanning probe
microscopy, and spatially resolved ultrafast optical pump-probe techniques. This
project addresses important issues in this material, particularly the transport
properties and dynamics of both majority and minority charge carriers, and the
correlation among the properties, structures, and material synthesis. The
understanding of this synthesis-structure-property relation provides a
fundamental materials science basis for innovative optoelectronic applications.