* 1506417
* CDS&amp;E: Regularization Adaption Processes for Multivariate Calibration and Maintenance
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* John Kalivas, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2019
* USD 453,321.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering program of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
Professor John Kalivas of the Department of Chemistry at Idaho State University
is developing new methods of multivariate calibration. Calibration is a
multidisciplinary problem, but in analytical chemistry, it involves forming a
quantitative mathematical relationship between an instrumental signal, such as
from a hand held near infrared spectrometer, and a property of interest in a
sample, such as the pulp content of trees or the amount of the active
pharmaceutical ingredient in tablets. A key feature of the new mathematical
calibration processes is the ability to include unlabeled data, for instance,
spectra of samples without reference values. With unlabeled data, calibration
costs and time will be substantially reduced. Another key feature is a
mathematical process allowing adaption of a calibration to new measurement
conditions with minimal effort, even if unlabeled data is not available. A
minimum of four undergraduates from Idaho State University and a Hispanic
professor as a Research Opportunity Award from Central New Mexico Community
College in Albuquerque will learn state-of-the-art calibration methods and
become proficient at performing scientific research including dissemination.
Education of undergraduates in these advanced methods prepares them for
subsequent scientific professional pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on new regularization processes for multivariate calibration and
prediction based on the fundamentals of Tikhonov regularization. The calibration
processes allow multiple penalties (tuning parameters) providing flexibility in
forming accurate and precise calibrations and mechanisms to adapt a calibration
to new conditions. With these regularization methods comes the ability to
include unlabeled data, samples without reference values. Because the expensive
component in calibration is obtaining reference values, costs in forming and
maintaining calibrations can be substantially reduced with unlabeled data. In
order to select optimal values for tuning parameters, new fusion ranking methods
will be developed and applied. The overall objective is development of
computational regularization processes to adapt a calibration to a new domain
using multiple tuning parameters, multiple calibration merits, and unlabeled
data if it is available. Results from this project will advance the
multidisciplinary field of multivariate calibration. For example, process
analytical technology for the pharmaceutical and chemical industries,
environmental and agriculture monitoring, and medical diagnostics all rely on
multivariate calibration. With the improvements being targeted in this project,
these diverse fields may well be better equipped to perform and sustain
calibrations. Another broader impact of this project is the planned
dissemination of the calibration algorithms via the investigators' web sites,
allowing newcomers and practitioners direct access.