* 1506374
* Precision Measurements in Intermediate Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Robert Carey, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2018
* USD 219,114.00

Muons are very much like the familiar electron, with many of the same
characteristics (e.g. intrinsic spin and electric charge) but approximately 200
times more mass. Those similarities and that difference make muons a sensitive
tool for exploring new physics and will be exploited in two experiments
supported by this award: the MuSun experiment at the Paul Scherrer Institut
(Villigen, Switzerland) and on the muon g-2 experiment at the Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL,, near Chicago). Proton-proton fusion is the
initial nuclear reaction in a chain of reactions which are the source of the
energy produced by our sun. The rate of this fusion reaction cannot be measured
in the laboratory nor has it been calculated from first principles. In the MuSun
experiment, muons will be used to study something like proton-proton fusion in
reverse. When a muon is captured by a deuterium nucleus, consisting of a neutron
and a proton, the deuterium breaks apart into a pair of neutrons and a muon
neutrino. The measurement of muon capture by deuterium will provide the
necessary information to make possible a first principles calculation. That
calculation will also provide a more solid theoretical foundation for the
results concerning neutrino characteristics. The new muon g-2 experiment at FNAL
aims to measure the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon with unprecedented
precision. Because the muon has intrinsic angular momentum (spin) and an
electric charge, it also possesses a magnetic moment, that is, it behaves like a
tiny magnet. The relationship between the angular momentum and magnetic moment
is described by the gyromagnetic ratio or g factor. For the electron and the
muon, g is very slightly greater than 2. This difference from 2 is the so-called
anomaly. The anomaly, for both electrons and muons, can be measured and
calculated with great precision. Any significant disagreement between the two is
a hint of new physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique for measuring the
capture rate is simple. Negative muons are stopped in a detector filled with
ultra-pure deuterium gas. The experiment will measure the disappearance rate of
the muons, similar to any radioactive decay experiment. Because of the capture
process, the disappearance rate will be slightly larger than that of free muon
decay to electrons plus neutrinos (of both electron and muon types) - the
difference is the capture rate. The sensitivity goal of 1.5 percent on the
capture rate will require the collection of approximately 20 billion muon
disappearance events. To measure the anomaly, muons are injected into a storage
ring, a doughnut shaped device, roughly 44 m in circumference, which guides them
in roughly circular orbits. As the muons circle the storage ring, their spin
vectors, which act like gyroscopes, turn faster than their momentum vectors. The
rate of the precession, which is extracted from the time distribution of muon
decay electrons, is directly proportional to the anomaly. The experimental goal,
a fractional error on the anomaly of approximately one part in ten million,
should provide a stringent test of possible new physics.