* 1506870
* Natural Abundance Si-29 and O-17 NMR Methods for Measuring Silicate Glass Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Philip Grandinetti, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2019
* USD 435,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professor Philip Grandinetti at Ohio State University to
develop high-throughput methods for characterizing the atomic level structure of
glasses using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Glasses have been
used by mankind for millennia. The first historical record of man-made glasses
appears as far back as 4500 years ago and the use of glass in windows began over
2000 years ago. Today the technological and economical impact of glassy
materials is both immense and diverse. Despite its technological success, glass
scientists and engineers still often resort to Edisonian approaches in attempts
to understand the chemical compositions of glasses with desired properties. This
is because the physical and chemical processes responsible for the properties of
glasses and for glass transition are incompletely understood. Professor
Grandinetti and his coworkers aim to achieve significantly higher throughput NMR
measurements on such samples by optimally integrating two NMR sensitivity
enhancement strategies, echo train acquisition and paramagnetic relaxation
enhancement. Such high throughput NMR measurements in silicate glasses would
considerably expand the range of chemical compositions that could be studied and
eliminate the burden and cost of preparing isotopically enriched samples. This
would have benefits for scientists studying the physics, chemistry, and
materials science properties of glasses. The project will also provides
interdisciplinary training opportunities to undergraduate, graduate and post-
graduate students. The PI's ongoing partnership with scientists at the CEMHTI-
CNRS lab in Orleans, France, will provide students the opportunity to
collaborate across national boundaries. A partnership between Professor
Grandinetti and Berea College will provide undergraduate students with summer
research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this multi-tiered project, the
Grandinetti group will bring natural abundance Si-29 and O-17 2D NMR
measurements of oxide glasses into the realm of routine measurements. In an
effort to lay the groundwork for this project, the group will develop a next
generation dynamic-angle spinning (DAS) probe in partnership with Revolution
NMR, LLC. The group will then employ the DAS probe in a suite of complementary
2D NMR measurements to explore a series of thirty binary glass compositions of
fundamental interest. In these studies, the Grandinetti lab will quantify the
distributions of Si-O distances, Si-O-Si angles, and network-forming anionic
species distributions. They will also develop the chemical shift anisotropy of
Si-29 and the quadrupolar coupling of O-17 into a qualitative and quantitative
probe of network modifier cation clustering, and develop the Si-29 J coupling
across a Si-O-Si linkage into a more reliable probe of Si-O-Si angles and
network connectivities. Taken together, these studies aim to provide a new level
of qualitative and quantitative detail about structural order and disorder in
glass. The structural details of glass to be elucidated through these studies
would also benefit scientists seeking to develop thermodynamic models of glasses
and melts, and seeking to refine potentials used in molecular dynamics
simulations of glasses. Details on modifier cation clustering behavior in
glasses will be useful to scientists developing improved structural models of
ionic transport, of the mixed alkali effect, and of the microscopic structure of
chemically strengthened glass.