* 1506752
* SusChEM: New Proteomic Strategy to Visualize and Analyze Phosphoproteomes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Weiguo Tao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2020
* USD 389,935.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professors Tao and Zhu at Purdue University to develop
and implement a platform for identification and quantification of
phosphoproteomes of interest. Reversible protein phosphorylation regulates a
number of biological processes, such as onset of many diseases and plant
signaling. While it has been found extensive, at any given time only a small
percentage of phosphorylated proteins may change their phosphorylation status in
response to a particular cellular event, which makes it extremely challenging
for detection and quantitative measurement of phosphorylated proteins of
relevant. The proposed proteomic platform aims at a versatile and cost-effective
analytical tool. The technique will be applied to identify important
phosphoproteins involved in osmosis, water, temperature, cold, and nutrient
deficiency stress in Arabidopsis. In addition to providing interdisciplinary
learning experience to both graduate and undergraduate students, the PIs also
plan to promote teaching, training, learning, and discovery through the
development of a new summer undergraduate lab course to engage students in a
genuine research project that emphasizes the utilization of modern analytical
methods and to enhance students' academic opportunities.

The project will develop a novel proteomic platform that addresses two major
analytical questions related to large-scale protein phosphorylation analyses:
how to quantitatively visualize and detect phosphorylated proteins in a complex
sample and how to identify phosphoproteins of interest and their sites of
phosphorylation. The core of the platform is novel chemical reagents that are
multi-functionalized for high specificity and selectivity toward phosphoproteins
in complex biological samples such as whole cell extracts. The platform will
allow for the selection of phosphoproteins of interest that are further
subjected to tandem mass spectrometry to get sequencing information and sites of
phosphorylation. The technique seeks to provide researchers with a useful
technique for routine phosphorylation analyses. Major applications include
quantitative measurement of phosphorylation, assays of kinase and phosphatase
activity, screening for kinase/phosphatase inhibition, and detection of in vivo
phosphorylation in different cellular states.