* 1506707
* Novel Phenomena in spin orbit coupled systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Vivek Aji, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2020
* USD 243,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education to study new states of electronic matter with novel
functionalities in many body systems. The PI will investigate states involving a
large number of electrons in materials that arise from the interplay of two
ingredients: 1) the interaction between pairs of electrons, and 2) strong spin-
orbit interaction which quantifies the influence of an electron's spin, a
fundamentally quantum mechanical phenomenon in which an electron appears to spin
like a top, on its motion. Over the last decade a number of new phases of matter
have been theoretically proposed and experimentally discovered. In many cases,
their unique characteristics can be described with the help of concepts from the
branch of mathematics dealing with shape, deformation and topology. The
intersection of topology, spin-orbit coupling and many body physics is a rich
and current area of study that may lead to new device
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus investigation on two
specific kinds of materials systems. The first kind is comprised of the two-
dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. These are materials that are
essentially a single atomic layer thick, made from a transition metal such as
the elements Tungsten or Molybdenum, and a chalcogen such as the elements
Sulphur or Selenium. The projects explore: i) how the coupling of spin and
electron motion can lead to new magnetic properties with the potential for
device applications; ii) what new magnetic states of matter are possible due to
the interactions; and iii) whether consequences of topology allow for new ways
of controlling device characteristics using circularly polarized light. The
second kind is comprised of the topological semimetals, which are intermediate
between a metal and a semiconductor. The PI will map out the possible phases and
phenomena supported in these systems, and in parallel use the lessons learned to
develop a better understanding of materials with strong spin-orbit
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will include one graduate
student who will be trained in the needed technical expertise, and in developing
an understanding of real materials. The award will help support an outreach
effort at University of California-Riverside, by providing stipends for high
school teachers to attend a week long Summer Academy for Teachers hosted by the
Physics and Astronomy department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to study new states of electronic matter with novel functionalities in
many body systems. The PI aims to discover and design new states of matter and
associated properties arising from the interplay of spin-orbit coupling and
interactions in many-body systems. Topologically nontrivial states such as
topological insulators and Weyl semimetals arise in non-interacting systems.
Natural questions that arise are: What happens when interactions are included?
Do the topological aspects survive? Are new correlated phases realized which
allow new functionalities? The PI will address these questions in the context of
two-dimensional dichalcogenides and three-dimensional Weyl
semimetals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects on two dimensional dichalcogenides
aim to characterize new magnetic phenomena that arise due to unique band
structure afforded by spin-orbit coupling. For example the nature of the Kondo
effect, where an impurity spin is screened by the host electrons, will be
established. Opto-electronic coupling with spin specificity provides a new probe
to test and manipulate this correlated phase which will be theoretically
analyzed. Nontrivial topology also has potential application in spintronics due
to the anomalous velocity acquired by the electrons in external electric fields.
The PI will explore these new functionalities and the viability of a nonlocal
spin-valve device, and whether these phenomena can be further enhanced in
proximity to a magnetic insulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weyl semimetals are
topological yet possess no energy gap in the bulk. This is due to the
topological protection of the band crossings and only interactions that couple
nodes with opposite topological charge can open a gap. The PI will characterize
the excitonic phases and their properties that arise due to electron-electron
Coulomb repulsion. A combination of symmetry considerations, field theoretic
techniques, and computation will be utilized to achieve the broad objectives of
the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will include one graduate
student who will be trained in the needed technical expertise, and in developing
an understanding of real materials. The award will help support an outreach
effort at University of California-Riverside, by providing stipends for high
school teachers to attend a week long Summer Academy for Teachers hosted by the
Physics and Astronomy department.