* 1506458
* RUI: The Sources of Substrate Specificity in Hydroquinone Dioxygenases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Douglas Juers, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2020
* USD 385,400.00

There is much interest in the use of bacteria to remove pollutants such as
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and the pesticide pentachlorophenol from the
environment (bioremediation). Bacterial enzymes can break down the stable six-
carbon ring of such compounds, removing them from the environment. However,
enzymes that break down chlorinated compounds are rare and have been little
characterized. The enzyme PcpA is one that has this capability. Previous
research has shown that it is specific for chlorinated compounds, but how it is
capable of distinguishing the chlorinated versus the non-chlorinated versions of
a compound is not known. The proposed research seeks to understand the origin of
this unusual specificity. Results of these efforts may provide insights into
methods of engineering other bacteria with novel properties, for use in
bioremediation or other applications. This work engages 8-12 Whitman College
undergraduate students in cutting-edge research involving various biochemical
techniques, providing them with important research training opportunities,
including presenting their work at conferences and coauthoring
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about how enzymes recognize
chlorinated compounds. Hydroquinone dioxygenases, such as PcpA, provide an ideal
platform for understanding the sources of specificity for chlorinated compounds.
PcpA binds substrates and inhibitors with chlorine or bromine substituents much
better than those with fluorine or methyl substituents. One hypothesis is that a
little-studied interaction, metal-halogen secondary bonding, is responsible for
this specificity. The proposed research uses protein crystallography,
spectroscopy and quantum chemical calculations, to determine how PcpA
specifically recognizes hydroquinones with chlorine or bromine substituents and
activates these compounds for oxidative ring cleavage. The results of these
investigations are complemented by studies on other hydroquinone dioxygenases
that lack the specificity towards chlorinated and brominated compounds.
Kinetics, mutagenesis, and substrate binding titrations are used to determine
differences in substrate specificity and what factors are responsible for these
differences. The results inform preliminary efforts to engineer different ring-
cleaving activities into a given enzyme transforming a catechol dioxygenase into
a hydroquinone dioxygenase. Synthetic iron(II)-hydroquinone complexes are used
to show the fundamental aspects of how hydroquinone protonation state affects
the binding mode and reactivity with dioxygen as a precursor to oxidative ring
cleavage.