* 1506081
* Continuous quantum measurements with superconducting circuits:Most likely paths and optimal control
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrew Jordan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 314,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on measurement and control of a quantum mechanical system
using models fabricated from superconductors as artificial quantum systems.
Superconductors exhibit unusual properties as compared to ordinary conductors
like copper, such as the ability to conduct electricity without dissipation.
Quantum mechanics is required to describe tiny objects like electrons and atoms
which behave differently than familiar macroscopic objects like baseballs which
obey the laws of classical mechanics. The superconducting state made up of many
electrons can be described by quantum mechanics at a level of complexity similar
to that of a single atom. Unlike observing the trajectory of a baseball, making
measurements on a quantum mechanical system changes the system. The research
team will theoretically investigate quantum mechanical systems fabricated from
superconductors to advance understanding of how a quantum mechanical system
changes in time under measurements. This work will be done in collaboration with
an experimentalist to perform rigorous experimental checks, and implement the
ideas and concepts developed in the course of the theoretical research. The
ability to precisely measure, control and guide a quantum system is a critical
element of the emerging field of quantum technology. This includes the operation
of a quantum computer in which quantum mechanical states would be manipulated to
achieve high performance computing. This research is particularly relevant for
proposals of quantum computers that utilize superconducting elements as the
quantum mechanical bits.&lt;br/&gt;This award supports training graduate
students involved in this research effort, as well as an outreach activity in
which the PI teaches a summer course to high school students. This class teaches
students quantum physics at a qualitative level using minimal mathematics, and
focuses on hands-on demonstrations, lab tours, as well as classroom
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education to advance the fundamental
understanding of continuous quantum measurement in superconducting transmon
qubits. Technological development of superconducting quantum systems has made
great strides leading to the fabrication of systems having long coherence times;
experiments can continuously measure the stochastic collapse of the wavefunction
as well as implement continuous feedback. The quantum trajectory approach to
continuous measurement permits instantaneous tracking of the quantum state
during individual measurement runs. The research team will systematically
investigate the physics of continuous quantum measurement in superconducting
transmon qubits. The PI's group has developed a stochastic path integral
formalism of continuous quantum measurements that is well suited to investigate
and characterize the physical properties of the measurement process. Fixed
initial and final states of the quantum system are considered as boundary
conditions on the stochastic dynamics, which are imposed by a pre- and post-
selection. In this case, an important topic is how the quantum system gets
between these two states. In particular, the average or most-likely path through
the quantum state space and the distribution of arrival times provide deep
insight into the physics of the continuous quantum collapse process.
&lt;br/&gt;The most-likely paths the quantum state takes through its space will
be investigated as well as the distribution of first passage times in the case
where the state is pre- and post-selected. This will be done when the quantum
system is unitarily changing while it is being measured. Associated questions,
such as the dynamical stability properties of the trajectories, are of
fundamental importance in the developing area of quantum control. The nonlinear
equations of motion for the most likely path indicate (i) there can be cases
when there are multiple most likely paths between the boundary conditions, and
(ii) the possibility of chaotic behavior, in the sense of exponential
sensitivity to initial conditions. This behavior will be explored and
characterized. Joint measurements on multiple transmons will also be
investigated, as well as the most likely ways to start in a separable state and
end in a desired entangled one. This effort will capitalize on new research
horizons in this rapidly developing field of condensed matter physics. The PI
will collaborate with colleague Irfan Siddiqi's group (UC Berkeley) to test
these theories and implement the physics described here in his laboratory.