* 1506542
* Studies of Mixed Polymer Brushes Designed for Periodic In-Plane Order
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2019
* USD 632,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are valuable
materials in everyday life. These long-chain molecules are the basis of
industries ranging from food packaging to medical device manufacture to the
clothing we wear. Polymers are critical components in the nanotechnology
revolution enabling the manufacture of microelectronics that make possible smart
phones. This project studies mixed polymer brushes, that is, more than one kind
of polymer chain tied to a surface. Unique features of polymer brushes compared
to other polymer systems are that they are bound to a surface, extended
perpendicular to the surface, and have a controlled thickness and controlled
surface chemistry. We will study how mixtures of two brushes phase separate,
like oil and water, and form structures smaller than possible with today's
advanced patterning methods. Over length scales of a few nanometers the nature
of a surface can be transformed from a rigid inorganic structure to one that is
soft and organic. Computer models predict symmetrical, periodic structures that
we will explore as new nanostructures, as new energy storage materials and as
new materials for biotechnology applications. We will work with computer experts
to improve their theory and models by providing information about how well their
concepts correctly predict these new mixed brush coatings. The research program
will engage students in polymer science and materials research, foster globally
aware graduate students and train students to work in a collaborative
environment. Graduate students will in turn serve as mentors and role models to
undergraduate students from Cornell and other universities, while gaining
supervisory skills. REU students from other schools with an emphasis on
underrepresented students will participate in research during the summer months.
The PI and graduate student volunteers will interact with high school teachers
in an RET program and teachers' workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This fundamental
research program will investigate the synthesis, processing and characterization
of mixed polymer brushes designed to form controlled periodic spacings in the
plane of the brush film. By using mixed polymer brushes of coil-coil and rod-
coil architectures and harnessing their in-plane phase separation we will create
patterned structures with controlled topography, porosity or multipath transport
properties. Mixed polymer brushes will be synthesized using living radical
polymerization of flexible coil polymers and Kumada chemistry of conjugated rod
polymers. The in-plane phase separation process of dense brushes with controlled
brush uniformity will be investigated. Studies will make use of new binary brush
initiators developed using Passerini chemistry to form coil-type homopolymer,
diblock copolymer and multiblock copolymer mixed brushes. The phase behavior and
how it compares to computational predictions will be studied for homopolymer and
block copolymer pairs with the goal of creating stable periodic structures.
Computational materials science through our collaborations will be used to guide
brush design and selection, to predict physical structure and to aid examination
of the physical properties of these new materials. To achieve our goal of
uniform long-range order in these brush layers, we will investigate solvent
vapor annealing and thermal transient laser spike annealing in conjunction with
guiding structures. Characterization of the brushes will be made using a variety
of analytical methods including X-ray reflectometry, grazing incidence (GI) SAXS
and WAXS, neutron reflectivity and STORM superresolution fluorescence microscopy
measurements. Charge transport measurements will be carried out on new rod-coil
mixed brushes. Each technique will provide information about the internal or
surface organization of the material and will aid our understanding of the
structures produced.