* 1506284
* OP: Quantum Optical Physics with Nanophotonics Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Hongkun Park, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,760,001.00

Atoms (the particles that constitutes ordinary matter) and light interact with
each other through absorption and emission of photons (individual quanta or
particles of light). Such atom-photon interactions constitute one of the most
basic processes in physical science, and underlie many everyday phenomena as
well as many device applications in areas such as optoelectronics. Most of these
processes and devices involve large numbers of atoms and intense beams of light,
since the interaction between single atoms and single photons are typically
negligibly weak. The interaction can be made substantial if one builds a system
in which an atom interacts with light confined in a very small space. Such
strong atom-photon interactions lead to many new phenomena that not only deepen
our understanding of nature, but may also form the basis of future technologies.
These include novel transistors based on individual photons interacting with
each other, novel states of matter in which atoms and photons are intertwined
with one another, and robust quantum information systems that enable advances
such as secure communication over long distances and ultra-precise quantum
sensors. The present research program will explore new physics by using
precisely engineered hybrid systems that combine nanoscale solid structures for
confining light with well-isolated atoms and "atom-like" features (color
centers) in solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the present project aims
at (1) understanding interactions between ultra-cold atoms and solid-state atom-
like systems with photons confined to sub-wavelength photonic and plasmonic
structures, (2) creating and controlling non-classical states of light and, (3)
manipulating multi-atom quantum dynamics within hybrid quantum systems of
increasing complexity. The project will also explore new theoretical approaches
that focus on quantum dynamics of strongly interacting photons and atoms, with
emphasis on using coherent and dissipative mechanisms to control quantum many-
body states. The proposed effort will not only create new hybrid systems where
many ideas of quantum optics can be realized, tested, and refined, but also lay
the groundwork for a number of applications, ranging from realizations of robust
quantum information systems and quantum optical circuits operating at the single
photon level to the development of nanoscale sensors for studying complex
systems. The principal investigators will also continue to develop new and
efficient ways for disseminating physics knowledge through teaching,
collaborations, review articles, lecture notes, organization of workshops and
summer schools. To enhance the appreciation and understanding of science by the
general public, outreach efforts such as visits to local K-12 schools will be
combined with colloquia and public talks.