* 1507506
* Computational Studies of Disordered Systems in Statistical Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Machta, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports research and education in computational
materials science with application to modeling of disordered materials. The
paradigmatic system that will be investigated is the "spin glass". Spin glasses
are magnetic materials that order in a complex fashion due to competing
interactions at the microscopic level. Theoretical models of spin glasses
incorporate these competing interactions and reproduce many of the complex
phenomena seen in these materials. Spin glass models have also found
applications in neuroscience and evolutionary biology and turn out to have close
connections to difficult optimization problems arising in computer science and
industrial engineering. The PI's group will develop and use a powerful new
computer algorithm called population annealing to study spin glasses and related
models. Population annealing has potential applications in many areas of
computational science ranging from chemistry and biology to optimization
problems in computer science.

The project will involve both graduate students and undergraduate students in
computational studies. Students will learn advanced computational methods and
modern techniques in statistical physics.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports research and education in computational
materials science with applications to disordered systems. The population
annealing Monte Carlo algorithm is the primary computational tool that will be
developed and used. The main emphasis will be on spin glass models but other
systems to be studied include the hard square/hard sphere fluids.

Glassy systems present formidable intellectual and computational challenges and
have remained controversial for decades. Understanding the low temperature
properties of spin glasses is a foundational problem of materials science. The
large scale computational approach based on the population annealing algorithm
combined with new analysis methods promises to clarify the nature of the low
temperature phase of Ising spin glasses and to distinguish between competing
theories. Spin glass models are closely related to combinatorial optimization
problems and understanding spin glasses thus could shed light on many other hard
computational problems. For example, temperature chaos in spin glasses is
closely related to the computational difficulty of finding ground states using
heuristics such as parallel tempering, population annealing or quantum
annealing.

Population annealing is a new paradigm for equilibrium simulations in
statistical physics. The population annealing algorithm promises to find
application in a wide range of fields including chemistry, biology and computer
science. It is useful both for simulating thermal equilibrium and as a heuristic
for finding solutions for combinatorial optimization problems. It is a massively
parallel algorithm well suited to distributed computing and thus may pave the
way to solving problems in computational physics on a larger scale than
previously possible. Combining population annealing with other algorithmic ideas
such as kinetic Monte Carlo will expand the range of effective tools available
to computational statistical physics for studying systems with rough free energy
landscapes.

The project will involve both graduate students and undergraduate students in
computational studies. Students will learn advanced computational methods and
modern techniques in statistical physics.