* 1507773
* High-efficiency self-resonant transmitters and receivers for wireless power transfer
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Charles Sullivan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,925.00

Wireless power transfer has emerging and potential applications such as charging
personal electronics and electric vehicles, and powering wireless sensors.
However, at present, the capabilities in terms of distance and efficiency are
limited. This work will develop a new self-resonant structure to replace the
transmit and receive coils now used, and enable improvements in distance and
efficiency. The structure can be fabricated using low-cost non-toxic recyclable
materials, and is scalable for a wide range of power levels, frequencies and
sizes. The increased efficiency of this new approach can allow migration from
conventional wired connections to wireless power transfer with minimal loss of
efficiency, while expanded use of wireless power can facilitate beneficial new
technologies such as low-cost sensor networks and electric vehicles. The quality
factor Q of the resonant circuits used for transmitting and receiving wireless
power is an essential figure of merit that determines the achievable distance
and efficiency. The new resonant structures developed in this work are expected
to achieve higher Q and therefore make longer distance and higher efficiency
power transfer feasible. Beyond the application to wireless power transfer, the
approach developed in this work may lead to more efficient resonant structures
applicable to more conventional power and energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two geometries of the resonant structure will
be developed. A planar version uses a stack of thin foil conductors separated by
thin polymer dielectric layers. Each foil is much thinner than a skin depth,
thereby overcoming skin-effect losses. The capacitance between the foil layers
resonates with the inductance of the current loop at the frequency of operation,
such that the main high-current path is completely within the coil, eliminating
the need for high-current connections exiting the coil, as well as eliminating
the need for external resonant capacitors. The capacitors formed by the layers
also act as ballast impedance in order to achieve equal current sharing between
layers, a critical and difficult challenge in more conventional layered-foil
windings. The planar technology works best in conjunction with a magnetic core
that shapes the field to achieve the most effective coupling between the
transmitter and receiver, and to minimize losses by making the field parallel to
the foil layers. For higher frequency applications, where soft magnetic material
performance is not as good, similar structures deposited in multiple steps on a
toroidal substrate will be used to effect the same advantages without the need
for a magnetic core.