* 1507192
* Back-Channel Communication Embedded in Standard Compliant Wireless Packets
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* David Wentzloff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

In modern Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications, wireless communication is
typically the dominant factor in overall power consumption. Enabling energy-
efficient wireless communication, therefore, is the most critical issue to
prolong the lifespan of ultra-low power (ULP) IoT devices and eventually realize
perpetual operation only powered by harvested ambient energy. This program
presents innovative "back-channel" communication techniques for ultra-low power
devices, which could not afford standard WiFi or Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
based wireless communication due to their extremely limited power budget. The
concept of back-channel communication will make it possible to interconnect
heterogeneous ULP IoT devices through existing WiFi or BLE networks even if
these ULP IoT devices are incapable of decoding regular WiFi or BLE messages. In
addition, WiFi and BLE standard compliant nodes will benefit from the back-
channel technique to significantly enhance their power efficiency without
employing a proprietary wakeup signal transmitter and/or dedicated channel
resources. Novel concepts such as WiFi-on-demand, replacing conventional always-
on WiFi Access Points, can be realized by the outcomes of the proposed research.
The results of this program will be disseminated in the form of Web applications
and software packages so that students, researchers and industry experts can
explore other applications utilizing the concept of back-channel communication
embedded in ubiquitous WiFi and/or BLE standard packets. The proposed research
could make direct impact on the next wireless standardization to adopt more
flexible packet structures to enrich use-cases of back-channel
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed back-channel signaling embedded
in WiFi and BLE messages has unique properties that are easily detectable by ULP
receivers consuming only 10s of micro-Watts or even less. The proposed scheme
eliminates the need for specialized transmitter hardware or dedicated channel
resources for embedded back-channel signal transmission. Instead, carefully
sequenced data bit streams will generate back-channel messages from already-
deployed WiFi and BLE infrastructure without any hardware modification. This
WiFi and BLE back-channel communication is feasible in various modulation
formats that are easily decodable by non-WiFi / non-BLE IoT devices. This
research program will demonstrate multiple types of ULP back-channel receiver
integrated circuits (ICs) that include the RF and analog frontend as well as the
baseband signal processing. A complete ULP wakeup scheme will be demonstrated
with fabricated back-channel receiver ICs interacting with commercial off-the-
shelf WiFi and BLE devices. The IC design goal is to achieve 1/1000x lower power
consumption than a commercial low-power WiFi receiver and 1/200x lower power
than a commercial Bluetooth receiver. A generalized back-channel communication
framework will be proposed to expand the back-channel use cases beyond WiFi and
BLE standards.