* 1507546
* GOALI: Integrated On-Board Universal SiC-based Fast Charging for Plug-In Electric Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Patrick McCluskey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 460,860.00

One of the important realities which would facilitate widespread adoption of
next generation of plug-in electric vehicles is the capability of traveling long
distances. Since nearly all residences and businesses are already equipped with
a 120VAC mains connection, and most with a 240VAC connection, it is assumed that
the majority of vehicle charging will take place when the vehicle is parked
either overnight at home or during the daytime at the office. The drawback to
this paradigm is that level-1 and level-2 charging can take anywhere from 4 to
20 hours depending on available power and battery size; meaning that trips of
any substantial distance would involve some amount of planning and vehicle down-
time. The current alternative is high power level-3 off-board charging. Off-
board chargers are bulky, costly to manufacture, expensive to install, and are
not practical without the evolution of a comprehensive national charging
infrastructure. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project addresses design of an integrated universal on-board fast
charger, compatible with level-1, level-2, and level-3 charging capabilities. In
addition, the research team will ensure the highest quality integrated education
and research to meet the emerging workforce and educational needs of the U.S.
energy and transportation industries by educating young and talented graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to design, control, develop, and validate a universal onboard
Silicon Carbide based high-power motor-integrated inverter/charger for electric
vehicles. The underlying foundation behind this project is to provide a
transformative solution to overcome present limitations of the charging methods,
which integrates different disciplines such as electrical engineering and
mechanical engineering, thus fostering multidisciplinary collaborative research.
This important work will (1) lead to theoretical advancements in the design of
onboard high-power chargers and introduce unique control strategies to prevent
torque generation during three-phase charging; (2) result in innovative
packaging and thermal management methods as well as physics of failure mode
analyses for wide band gap based converters, leading to increased efficiency
with lower size, weight, and cost; and (3) involve interdisciplinary research in
power electronics, control, adjustable speed drives, packaging, reliability
assessment, and thermal management.