* 1507245
* Blocky Copolymers via Gel-State Functionalization of Semi-Crystalline Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Robert Moore, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2018
* USD 369,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers are a unique
class of long-chain molecules (polymers) that can be designed to contain well-
ordered physical structures in thin films capable of efficiently separating the
passage of molecules based on discriminating chemical attractions. Due to the
ability to precisely control the size and chemical make-up of these physical
structures, emerging applications of block copolymers include membranes for
water purification and energy-efficient fuel cell vehicles. While polymer
chemists have made remarkable progress in developing new ways to synthesize
block copolymers for these applications, commercial success has been limited due
to the complex chemical procedures needed to control the block-like growth of
the molecular chains. In this project, a new physical approach will be used to
create blocky polymers in a straightforward, economically attractive fashion by
selectively modifying commercially available polymers in the gel state. This
research will provide significant advancements in accelerating the creation of
tailored block copolymer assemblies and enhance fundamental insight needed to
enable next-generation membrane technologies and broaden the base of advanced
materials available. The interdisciplinary nature of research activities in this
project, ranging from materials chemistry to membrane properties, will provide
many educational opportunities to a diverse community of citizens and
researchers eager to contribute to our nation's leadership in ensuring a
healthier, more energy-efficient global
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on a new way to create
blocky copolymers using straightforward, post polymerization chemistries on
semi-crystalline homopolymers in the gel state. With the introduction of
reactants capable of functionalizing the homopolymer, the desired chemistry is
restricted to reaction upon only the accessible amorphous chain segments within
the semi-crystalline network. This new physical process yields a non-random,
blocky incorporation of functionality, and is a simple alternative to the
complex polymerization mechanisms that are conventionally employed in the
synthesis of block copolymers. The technical advancement of this approach is
rooted in the fundamentals of pure physical polymer chemistry, and clearly
transforms our way of thinking with respect to the creation of blocky copolymer
architectures. By tailoring the morphological parameters of the semi-crystalline
gel, the content and dimensions of functionalized and non-functionalized chain
segments will be altered in the creation of new blocky ionomers from
commercially important polymers for mechanically robust membranes targeted for
water purification and fuel cell applications. The goals of this project are to
develop a fundamental understanding of the physical, chemical, and compositional
parameters needed to control the gel-state functionalization chemistry. In
comparison to random copolymer analogs, the blocky architecture of gel-state
sulfonated ionomers will be controlled with respect to ion content, block length
distribution, crystallization conditions, and processing parameters. Membranes
of the blocky copolymers will be prepared and compared to model membrane systems
in order to facilitate the design of architecturally tailored membranes for
energy conversion and water purification applications. The interdisciplinary
nature of research activities in this project, ranging from materials chemistry
to membrane properties, has proven to be attractive to a diverse community of
researchers, including underrepresented groups. Educational outreach activities
will engage citizens of all ages through the focus on cutting-edge research
aimed at ensuring a healthier, more energy-efficient global society.