* 1507341
* Ion Channel Probes for Scanning Ion Conductance Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Lane Baker, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 440,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Lane Baker at Indiana University to develop
chemical/biochemical sensors which consist of lipid bilayers and ion channels
suspended at the tip of a glass capillary, called ion channel probes (or ICPs).
The sensor will be combined with scanning ion conductance microscopy (SICM), a
probe imaging platform, to enable spatial location of the sensor on the order of
50-100 nm. By incorporating ion channels with selective responses, sensors that
respond to unique analytes will be developed. The positionable ICP will be
tested on porous membranes and will enable measurement of small molecules and
ions at subcellular scales and will enable new studies of cellular
communication. As such, it is expected that the tools developed in this work
that will have broad application in chemical biology. Students trained in this
project will learn state-of-the-art fabrication, measurement and
characterization protocols, providing them with high level technical skills for
the current workforce upon their graduation. In addition, efforts will be made
to improve chemistry faculty engagement in evidence-based teaching methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide new routes to
chemically selective imaging methods, even at single molecule levels, with
scanning ion conductance microscopy. This overcomes a significant drawback of
scanning ion conductance microscopy; namely, the lack of chemical information
collected. The use of inherently selective and sensitive ion channels will
impart chemical sensing abilities to scanning ion conductance microscopy. As
described, ICP-SICM promises to increase the reliable operation, signal and time
response of sniffer patches, which will, in turn, inform the biochemical process
they are commonly used to study.