* 1507033
* FRG: Predictive Computational Modeling of Two-Dimensional Materials Beyond Graphene: Defects and Morphologies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Peter Voorhees, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,097,424.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this award. It supports
interdisciplinary research and educational activities in computational materials
science, with a focus on the growth of two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting
materials. While graphene is the best-known 2D material, it is limited in device
application due to its high conductivity. More recent research has focused on 2D
semiconducting materials, which can be manipulated to block or permit current
flow. These research activities have been primarily based on experimental
explorations due to a gap in the fundamental understanding in what determines
their structures and properties. This project aims to help fill this gap by
developing a model for the growth of these systems based on the phase field
crystal modeling approach. This approach allows researchers to study materials
involving tiny structures as small as atoms. The team of researchers will
develop, parameterize, and validate a phase field crystal model for 2D
semiconducting materials, which can be used improve the synthesis process of 2D
materials and their assembly. Simulations will also be used to examine the
structure of these materials and associated defects at the atomic level.
Educational activities include courses on crystal growth for high school
students, proposed as part of the California State Summer School for Mathematics
and Science at UC Irvine, engaging with Science Olympiad, and other STEM events.
These activities will help develop the future generation of mathematicians,
scientists and engineers. Graduate students will receive interdisciplinary
training and will present their findings at conferences, which will enhance
their educational experience. The team shall also act as a resource for the
research community by distributing the codes that are developed and by
organizing symposia on phase field crystal models at national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
contribute funds to this award. It supports interdisciplinary research and
educational activities in computational materials science, with a focus on the
growth of two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting materials. The recent discovery of
two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting materials such as MoS2 and MoSe2 has
intensified the research efforts in these materials. These materials exhibit
unique properties due to the 2D confinement, but they, unlike graphene, also
possess the ability to switch between conducting and insulating states, offering
a potential to yield revolutionary new technologies. The research efforts have
been primarily based on experimental exploration based on various synthetic
routes, and significant gaps exist in the fundamental understanding of what
determine their bulk and defect structures and morphologies, as well as how they
influence their properties. Due to the small length scale involved,
computational modeling is essential for developing such understanding. Phase
field crystal (PFC) modeling is uniquely suited for this problem because of its
ability to resolve atomic-scale structure and its extended time-scale comparable
to those associated with synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary
project addresses the challenge of understanding multiscale phenomena associated
with the formation of nanostructures by exploiting recent developments in PFC
models, which follow the dynamics of individual atoms over diffusive time
scales. Originating from classical density functional theory, the PFC method
naturally incorporates elastic and plastic deformations as well as crystalline
defects. The team of materials scientists and a mathematician will develop a new
PFC-based computational methodology for modeling the structure and the synthesis
of two-dimensional, multicomponent materials. The models will be parameterized
and validated with the aid of atomistic simulations and experimental results.
Defects such as grain boundaries, which must be controlled in device
applications, will be examined. The computational tools will build on the
efficient numerical algorithms developed under previous funding and tailor it to
the new models and will be disseminated through repositories such as GitHub.
These tools will provide a framework for the computational discovery of the
fundamental mechanisms underlying synthesis of 2D materials, their assembly, and
their atomic-scale structure. Educational activities include courses on crystal
growth for high school students, proposed as part of the California State Summer
School for Mathematics and Science at UC Irvine, engaging with the Science
Olympiad, and other STEM events. These activities will help develop the future
generation of mathematicians, scientists and engineers. Graduate students will
receive interdisciplinary training and will present their findings at
conferences, which would enhance their educational experience. The group shall
also act as a resource for the research community by organizing symposia on
phase field crystal models at national meetings.