* 1507166
* Collaborative Research : Joint utilization of experimental and theoretical information: a new paradigm for modeling complex materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Parthapratim Biswas, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2019
* USD 213,426.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on a collaborative
proposal and supports computational and theoretical research and education on
novel complex materials for which the arrangement of atoms cannot be described
by regular spatially periodic patterns typical of a crystalline material. These
non-crystalline materials have complicated atomic-scale structures and are part
of everyday life. They are important for the development of new devices,
corrosion-resistant coatings, artificial bone, and other advanced materials.
Conventional computational modeling approaches involve a simulation process that
leads to a computer model which is then compared to experiment. In contrast, the
research team aims to build known experimental or other information into the
process of the simulation itself through a new approach with a basis in
information theory. The research contributes new methods and computational tools
for materials modeling and the discovery of new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics outreach program focused on the southern
Mississippi region. It involves the participation of minority students at the
high school and college level, and the development of a tutorial program for
gifted undergraduates at the University of Southern Mississippi. The program
will build on the experiences of the entire team. This award also contributes to
the development of a computational materials program with a focus on complex
materials. The PIs aim to create a broader collaborative program on materials
computation that builds on the strengths of neighboring universities and serves
the southern Mississippi region. The research will involve international
collaborations with the University of Cambridge, and provide international
research experience to students supported under the
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on a collaborative proposal and
supports theoretical research and computational modeling of complex amorphous
materials and educational outreach. The research team aims to develop a new
approach to the modeling of complex non-crystalline materials that incorporates
experimental information through an appropriate total-energy functional that
jointly satisfies both theory and experimental data. The determination of
structure of complex amorphous solids is posed as an inverse or hybrid problem.
The problem is mapped onto a multi-objective non-convex optimization program.
The team will utilize recently developed bio-inspired global optimization
techniques to address the problem. An integration of theory and experiments will
be achieved by developing a mathematical framework to enable the search for
structural solutions in an augmented solution space consisting of a direct
product of the configurational space of a suitable total-energy functional and
the solution space spanned by a set of input experimental data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting experimentally constrained molecular/atomic
relaxation approach will be applied to several problems in amorphous materials
ranging from superionic conduction in solid glassy-electrolytes and modeling
large-scale inhomogeneities in amorphous solids to the structural and dynamical
properties of few representative metallic and bulk metallic glasses at the
intermediate length scale. In particular, the superionic conduction in solid
glassy-oxides will be reviewed in light of the new hybrid models by
incorporating structural information at the intermediate length scale from
experiments, which is of direct significance in developing durable solid-state
batteries, smart sensors, and portable, fuel cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics outreach
program focused on the southern Mississippi region. It involves the
participation of minority students at the high school and college level, and the
development of a tutorial program for gifted undergraduates at the University of
Southern Mississippi. The program will build on the experiences of the entire
team. This award also contributes to the development of a computational
materials program with a focus on complex materials. The PIs aim to create a
broader collaborative program on materials computation that builds on the
strengths of neighboring universities and serves the southern Mississippi
region. The research will involve international collaborations with the
University of Cambridge, and provide international research experience to
students supported under the award.