* 1507790
* Nanoscale Curvature Effects on the Properties of Anisotropic Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

With this award the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Teri Odom at Northwestern
University to study a specific type of nanoparticle -gold nanostars-that can be
efficiently synthesized. Nanoparticles made from noble metals such as gold and
silver are promising in a range of applications, from chemical sensors to
optical imaging probes to anti-bacterial agents. However, preparing and
controlling specific features (tips, edges, curves) on metal nanoparticles with
non-spherical shapes are still challenging. These nanoscopic features are
expected to be important as their sizes approach that of molecules. The project
aims to obtain nanostars with desired features by tuning the chemistry at the
nanoparticle surface. Broader impacts of these unique nanomaterials include
integrating the one-pot gold nanostar synthesis with an existing lab on
colloidal gold nanoparticles in freshmen general chemistry. In addition,
freshman seminars focusing on nanoscience are developing projects similar to
'Ted Ed'-like videos explaining nano-concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to determine how anisotropic nanomaterials that support unique
curvature regions of positive, negative, and neutral curvature simultaneously
exhibit properties distinct from symmetric (spherical) or elongated (rod-like)
nanoparticles. Gold nanostars can serve as a unique model system since they can
be synthesized through a seedless method resulting in distinct numbers of
branches with tunable thicknesses and lengths. This work aims to resolve the
mechanism of seedless growth at the single-particle level as well as determine
how gold nanostar sample purity can be optimized by physical post-processing.
Other goals include determining the structure-activity relationships of gold
nanostars related to ligand attachment. Major outcomes of this work on nanoscale
curvature include: (1) identifying functional groups in Good's buffers
responsible for the formation gold nanostars with different branch numbers,
branch lengths, and negative curvature degrees; (2) resolving the growth
mechanism of gold nanostars at the single-particle level using in situ
transmission electron microscopy; and (3) determining where biological ligands
having secondary structure (double-stranded, looped, quadruplex) preferentially
adsorb on the gold nanostars.