* 1507420
* Peptide Derivatized Poly(ester urea)s for Regenerative Medicine
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Matthew Becker, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to the University of Akron aims at discovering systematic
method for controllably tethering bioactive peptides to novel polymer scaffolds
for use in regenerative medicine applications. This award is also co-funded by
the Biomedical Engineering program in CBET/ENG. If successful, this work will
optimize peptide concentrations that enhance cell proliferation and accelerate
stem cell differentiation. This knowledge would help guide the rational design
of future peptide-functionalized polymer surfaces, scaffolds and hydrogels used
by the wider tissue engineering community. The biological measurements will
drive the design of advanced bioactive and biomimetic materials for use in many
applications where synthetic materials contact biological systems. The research
team is involved in the educational training components of the project. The
effort will provide advanced, multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and
graduate students, orthopedic surgery residents, and high school students in
areas of molecular and cell biology, chemistry and polymer science. The outcomes
from the research are being directly incorporated into graduate level and
undergraduate courses being taught by Professor Becker. Undergraduate students
from the University of Akron, and summer interns enrolled in the research
experiences for undergraduates (REU) program will participate extensively. The
research team's outreach activities include mentoring and provide educational
and research experience for students from local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This award by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research and the Biomedical
Engineering program in CBET/ENG to the University of Akron aims at discovering a
systematic method for controllably tethering multiple bioactive peptides to
novel poly(ester urea) scaffolds post-3D printing for use in regenerative
medicine applications. The biomaterials community clearly understands that the
molecular presentation and spatial distribution of peptides and growth factors
can dramatically influence many important aspects of cell behavior. This award
aims to translate previously discovered GRGDS and BMP-2 peptide concentrations
to translationally-relevant degradable poly(ester urea) constructs in two-
dimensional thin films and three-dimensional printed scaffolds. The project will
impact several fields of biomaterials including (1) developing new methods for
functionalization of degradable polymer scaffolds with bioactive peptides post
3D printing and (2) new methods for characterizing surface concentrations of
these peptides and (3) identification of synergistic peptide concentrations that
influence hMSC cell proliferation, lineage commitment, and differentiation. The
project offers multiple opportunities for the educational training of students
(both undergraduate and graduate) and medical residents in advanced polymer
science, state of the art chemical functionalization and translationally-
relevant strategies for advanced manufacturing of 3D scaffolds. These skills
will be critical to public and private entities aiming to move 3D printed
scaffolds into mainstream device and regenerative medicine applications.