* 1507970
* GOALI: Zintl Engineering of Epitaxial Ceramic Films on Gallium Nitride
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Rytis Dargis, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 640,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM)
and Ceramic (CER) Programs in the Division of Materials Research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Silicon has been the
substrate of almost all microelectronic devices for the semiconductor industry
over the last several decades. Motivated by the need for faster device speeds,
the industry is considering compound semiconductors, such as gallium nitride,
which have higher electron mobility. Accordingly, new dielectric layer materials
that enable gallium nitride-based electronic devices are needed. This research
project is exploring approaches to growing crystalline rare earth oxide films on
gallium nitride that are well-matched to the crystal lattice of gallium nitride
and make gallium nitride a viable substrate. Because gallium nitride and the
rare earth oxides have different types of chemical bonding, this research is
exploring interfacial layers that bridge the bonding types and force the oxide
to grow as a two-dimensional layer. The partnership between academic researchers
and Translucent, Inc., a technology leader in gallium nitride, will help
graduate students appreciate the factors involved in developing a viable new
technology. As well, the researchers are engaging in an outreach program (called
"Alice in Wonderland") that is aimed at attracting female high-school students
to the physical sciences and engineering. These students and physics instructors
in local high schools are spending their summers at the University of Texas at
Austin participating in research within a supportive
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;The overarching
objectives of this research project are to discover, understand and describe
processes that lead to the formation of crystalline lanthanum, gadolinium, and
erbium oxides on wurtzitic gallium nitride, GaN (0001). This research advances
methods for precise interface engineering and elucidates the role of
intermetallic compounds (called "Zintl compounds"), comprised of Group 1or 2
elements and Group 13-15 elements, in altering the surface energy to facilitate
wetting and direct the [111] growth direction of the oxides on GaN (0001). The
research benefits from the infrastructure, adjacency of related research, and
expertise and complementary skills the academic researchers and the industrial
partner bring in atomically controlled growth, materials characterization,
surface chemistry, first-principles modeling and electrical characterization.
Specific focus areas for the fundamental studies include: 1) discovery of
approaches to grow crystalline, C-type La, Gd and Er oxide films epitaxially on
GaN(0001) surfaces; 2) elucidation of the underlying interface chemistry
responsible for oxide on semiconductor heteroepitaxy; and 3) exploring the
structure-property-growth relationships so the results can be extended to
additional oxide-semiconductor systems. The research uses molecular beam epitaxy
and atomic layer deposition techniques to grow the epitaxial structures; first-
principles density functional theory (DFT) approaches to identify suitable
intermetallic compounds and to model the atomic structure, electric and
electronic properties of the oxide-gallium nitride interface; and ex situ
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and electrical measurements to validate
model predictions and establish structure-property relations.