* 1507223
* Environment-dependent coarsening of supported metallic nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Patricia Thiel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2020
* USD 385,000.00

Environment-dependent coarsening of supported metallic nanoclusters

"Nature abhors a vacuum" is an old adage, but its modern-day and equally-valid
counterpart could be "Nature abhors a nanoparticle". The forces of nature
embodied in thermodynamics dictate that bare nanoparticles are intrinsically
unstable; they will inevitably merge (coarsen), becoming larger (and fewer)
under normal conditions. Eventually they will lose the properties inherent to
smallness. And that can be detrimental, since the properties of nanoparticles
are exploited in numerous technologies. Drs. Thiel and Evans are investigating a
major, and largely unexplored, aspect of the coarsening process, namely, the
nature of the species that shuttle material back and forth between
nanoparticles, allowing them to change size. This is a challenging task, but Dr.
Thiel is gaining deep and surprising new insights by studying model systems of
nanoparticles supported on flat surfaces. Her co-PI, James Evans, models these
systems computationally, and helps interpret Dr. Thiel's experimental efforts.
Focusing on nanoparticles of Cu, Ag, and Au, which have valuable optical and
catalytic properties, Dr. Thiel can directly "see" stoichiometric surface
complexes that are involved in coarsening. These complexes can be thought of as
mobile molecules containing a few atoms from the nanoparticles and a few atoms
from the environment. She has discovered, for example, a heart-shaped "molecule"
containing two copper atoms and three sulfur atoms, which can shuttle copper
atoms across a surface. The instrumentation and experimental/theoretical
approach involved in this research are complex. Because of this, as well as her
supportive mentoring, Dr. Thiel's students have a wide reputation as excellent
experimentalists and scientists. They are valued, for instance, in the
microelectronics industry and other high-tech environments, where they
constitute a part of the human technological infrastructure of the nation. Dr.
Evan's students are also in high demand for their excellent computational
modeling skills.

In this research program, Dr. Thiel and Dr. Evans of Iowa State University are
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
to study the mechanisms and kinetics of coarsening of metallic nanoclusters on
surfaces in the presence of chemical additives. The success of nanoscale science
and technology is dependent on robustness of such synthesized functional
nanostructures, especially in operating environments. Their analysis exploits a
closely integrated combination of experimental studies in a controlled ultra-
high vacuum environment and predictive system-specific theory/modeling studies.
In-situ Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) studies provide key information on
the coarsening mechanism (e.g., Ostwald ripening where small clusters disappear,
versus Smoluchowski ripening where cluster diffuse and coalesce) and kinetics.
mass transport is mediated by additive-metal complexes, where the interaction of
metal additives with the surface has the potential to induce restructuring, and
the formation of such complexes is of particular interest in these studies.
Theoretical studies utilize Density Functional Theory to assess the metal-metal
and metal-additive energetics which control the above described behavior. These
energies inform statistical mechanical models describing the surface structures
and dynamics observed in the STM studies. This project provides training for
junior scientists in a range of sophisticated experimental and versatile
modeling techniques which enable chemical materials and nanotechnologies of
importance to the US.