* 1507792
* Activity Probes to Monitor ATP-Dependent Proteolysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Irene Lee, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 09/30/2020
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Irene Lee of Case Western University to develop and
utilize chemical tools to interrogate the physiological functions of
mitochondrial ATP-dependent proteases at a posttranslational level. Mitochondria
are known as the powerhouse of cells because they generate chemical energy known
as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) that sustains life. These powerhouses function
by harnessing the chemical potential of molecular oxygen to generate ATP through
respiration. Dysfunctions in human mitochondria are often associated with
diseases. As oxygen is broken down in mitochondria to produce ATP, reactive
intermediates known as reactive oxygen species (ROS) are generated. The
integrity of mitochondria is compromised when proteins, lipids or nucleic acids
housed within the mitochondria react randomly with ROS. The overarching goal of
this proposal is to study the mechanism by which proteins damaged by reaction
with ROS are removed from mitochondria by the ATP-dependent proteases known as
Lon and ClpXP. In this proposal, chemical agents will be developed to track the
changes in Lon and ClpXP activities individually in mitochondria in order to
understand the involvement of the two proteases in protecting mitochondria from
ROS-induced protein damage. Obtaining such information will enhance our
understanding of the biology of mitochondria. The students and a post-doctoral
fellow participating in this project will be trained in a highly
multidisciplinary environment. They will also be trained to teach science and
become more involved in the community by participating in an outreach program
known as the National Youth Sports Program (NYSP). NYSP is a summer program
offered to children of low-income families in the greater Cleveland area between
ages 10-16, designed to expose the children to a variety of sports and academic
enrichment activities.

There is now a wealth of data in the literature to suggest that ATP-dependent
proteolysis plays a crucial role in the turnover of oxidatively modified
proteins in the mitochondrial matrix. The evaluation of Lon protease activity in
isolated mammalian mitochondrial matrix has always been done in the presence of
ClpXP using labeled casein as substrate, which is degraded by both proteases.
Given that the two proteases exhibit overlapping specificity in the degradation
of certain proteins, chemical reagents developed to specifically detect the
physiological functions of the respective proteases during mitochondrial
metabolism will provide insights into their contributions to the preservation of
the integrity of the organelles. In this proposal, experiments will be conducted
to improve the selectivity, mitochondria-permeability and sensitivity of
existing activity probes of Lon and ClpXP by modifying the sequences of the
peptide substrates; and to develop fluorescently labeled peptidyl chloromethyl
ketones, which are irreversible inhibitors of Lon and ClpXP, into activity-based
probes to monitor the activation of the two proteases in cells.