* 1507070
* In situ lipophile labeling in living cells
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Arterburn, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2019
* USD 830,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professors Jeffrey Arterburn, Charles B. Shuster, and
Tanner Schaub of New Mexico State University to develop methods for labeling
unsaturated lipids in the membranes of living cells with fluorescent dyes. To
meet this challenge, a combined approach involving catalytic cross-metathesis
coupling chemistry, live cell imaging and ultrahigh resolution mass spectrometry
will be used. The aims are to synthesize useful lipid probes for imaging, and
then characterize the labeling chemistry within the biological context of the
cell membrane. The interdisciplinary methodology and research environment are
well suited to the education of scientists at all levels, and continue the PI's
efforts to promote participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
science. The methodology will be employed outside the University setting in a
boot camp for science journalists. The team will develop displays featuring
"Chile Chemistry" to introduce chemistry and scientific principles to elementary
school students during tours of the NMSU Chile Pepper Institute.

The identity and distribution of labeled lipids will be determined by ultrahigh
resolution mass spectrometry and their localization and dynamic motion will be
imaged using optical microscopy. The strategy of chemically modifying native
unsaturated lipids by fluorescent dye attachment to produce optical imaging
probes is new and complementary to existing strategies that utilize exogenous
probes, bioorthogonal labeling, and direct spectroscopic methods to study
membrane lipids. Aim 1 will optimize chemistry to synthesize useful lipid probes
for live-cell imaging, evaluate metabolic alterations to the lipid probes, and
label lipid extract mixtures to characterize the composition of unsaturated
lipids as a basis for comparative analyses. Aim 2 will label specific lipids in
live cells to investigate biological context of the cell membrane as a factor in
selectivity. Additionally, the identity and distribution of dye-labeled lipids
will be determined by ultrahigh resolution mass spectrometry and their
localization and dynamic motion will be tracked by optical imaging. Aim 3 will
use advanced fluorescence microscopy experiments to assess the membrane
localization and the functionality of the CM-labeled lipids through short and
long term observations. In the long term, the realization of this labeling
methodology will provide a powerful analytical approach for fundamental studies
of lipid localization, dynamics and determining the roles of discrete lipids in
membrane biology.