* 1507816
* Increasing Amino Acid Diversity in In Vitro Translation with Expanded Genetic Alphabets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Steven Benner, Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,970.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences
and the Molecular Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Steven Benner of The Westheimer
Institute for Science and Technology (TWIST) within the Foundation for Applied
Molecular Evolution to expand the power of biologically created proteins. The
next generation of biotechnology will use components of living systems to create
unnatural biopolymers, including proteins that contain unnatural amino acids.
This award will develop this biotechnology, at the same time as deepening our
understanding of how proteins are made in living cells. Proteins produced by
biotechnology find use in products as diverse as pharmaceuticals, cosmetics,
industrial manufacture, and laundry detergents. Adding unnatural amino acids to
these may open up for exploration a horizon of proteins having properties that
natural proteins cannot reach. The project trains undergraduate students in
methods of cutting-edge technology development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experiments designed for this project combine chemical synthesis with molecular
biology, laboratory evolution, and bioinformatics to gain control over each step
in the in vitro synthesis of proteins. This includes developing new ways to put
unnatural amino acids onto unnatural transfer RNA molecules by directed
evolution of charging catalysts, chemically synthesizing new nucleic acid
analogs to manage infidelity in RNA biosynthesis and translation, and
understanding of how translation systems exploit auxiliary factors to determine
the starting point and ending point of messenger RNA translation. These are
coupled with models for the ribosome, recently supported by X-ray
crystallography, to build a complex picture of synthetic biology in this space.