* 1507764
* Correlating Transport with Ionomer Membrane Structure from Molecular to Micron Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Louis Madsen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic polymer membranes are used to purify
water, convert chemical energy to electrical energy (batteries and fuel cells),
and conduct a wide variety of chemical separations. By controlling membrane
chemical structure, it is possible to generate desirable highly conductive (but
soft and liquid-like) regions that are surrounded and supported by mechanically
and chemically robust regions. A key problem in designing new membranes lies in
understanding the details of these various regions in the membranes, and how
these regions affect the movement (transport) of water and ions such as lithium,
sodium, and chloride. This project pulls together disparate techniques and
theories, including nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), computational simulations,
electron microscopy, and X-ray analysis, to understand how membrane structure
influences properties. Indeed, new insights into membrane behaviors can only
arise from such a combined multi-disciplinary approach. Such new fundamental
knowledge would enable the design of membrane structures to accelerate ion and
water motions. In turn, these advances in design would provide valuable
information to engineers and entrepreneurs to increase the efficiency and
decrease the cost of devices such as water purification systems and advanced
power sources. Since membrane technology represents a $15B (and growing)
commercial market, such advances could bring huge gains in US productivity and
competitiveness. The project also involves education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as K-12 educational outreach.&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane-
separations applications such as reverse-osmosis water desalinization and fuel
cells involve the selective transport of water, alcohols, and ions through an
ion-containing polymer (an ionomer). What effects drive the transport of these
various mobile species inside an ionomer membrane? These effects can be thought
to arise from a combination of two major contributions: 1) local intermolecular
interactions such as ion and water associations, polymer chain topology, or
acidity; 2) morphological features such as phase symmetry (cylindrical,
lamellar, cubic) and domain sizes and properties. This project will work toward
an experimental and theoretical framework for quantitatively separating and
fundamentally understanding these two major regimes that affect transport. By
combining an array of cutting-edge nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods
combined with molecular dynamics simulations, microscopy and X-ray analyses,
this project will systematically study water and ion diffusion as well as local
intermolecular associations inside ionomer membranes and thus build a more
comprehensive mechanistic understanding of permeation and selectivity in these
materials. Starting with existing theories of molecular transport, fluid
permeation through porous media, electrolytic transport, and oriented soft
matter, new thinking and theories will arise regarding membrane behaviors. In a
broader context, this project aims toward design of all new materials that are
less expensive, more efficient in energy use, more robust, and more specific to
desired tasks. Students and collaborators involved in this project will gain
sophisticated and fundamental knowledge of polymer membrane behaviors. This new
knowledge will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate polymer science
classes on the Virginia Tech campus, and propagated to children and their
parents in a K-12 educational outreach program in the New River Valley region of
Southwest Virginia.