* 1507344
* Nano-Containers for Novel Separations and Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Bruce Gibb, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Bruce Gibb of Tulane
University to develop new 'nano-containers' for applications in both chemical
reactions and chemical separations. In the everyday world containers are
utilized to store, transport, and separate items. Chemists also use containers
(reaction flasks) to form new matter; mixing A and B gives new compound C; a new
pharmaceutical, perhaps, a new coating material to prevent rusting in bridges
and other infrastructure, or perhaps a new molecule for the next generation
flat-screen OLED television. This project concerns very small containers. These
nano-containers spontaneously form in water and possess inner-spaces
approximately one-billionth the size of a small dust particle. As a result, when
even the smallest of molecules is stored in these containers they constantly
bump into the sides of the vessel. This leads to some very unusual chemical
properties, of which two are being investigated: 1) Nano-containment can lead to
new chemical reactivity, and consequently this program investigates some of the
reactions that can occur within these containers to evaluate their overall
properties; 2) New separation protocols are also possible, and with this in mind
the purification of industrially important chemicals from complex mixtures is
being investigated. Both the identification of new chemical reactions and the
development of new, non-energy intensive separations have the potential for
broader scientific impact across the chemical enterprise. This program of
research will also provide research training for undergraduate and graduate
students in both analytical and synthetic chemistry. This proposal has two
related overall goals. Both concern the selective complexation of guest
molecules within well-defined, nano-capsules formed by water-soluble cavitands.
The first aim is to examine the ability of this family of hosts to act as phase-
transfer catalysts for new and unusual chemical conversions. Early work has
identified that these hosts bind reactive anions, including inorganic anions,
and that these can be co-encapsulated with organic guests. Trapped within the
yocto-liter volumes formed by these dimerized hosts, the two guests experience
high effective molarity, relative to each other. Building on these points, the
proposed studies utilize NMR and GC-MS to investigate the co-encapsulation of a
range of reagents and substrates and hence bring about efficient, regioselective
conversion processes that are catalytic in host. The second aim of this proposal
is to use the observed selective guest-binding properties of these hosts to
bring about the separation of complex mixtures of terpenoids and
constitutionally isomeric hydrocarbons. The proposed plans examine the hosts as
shape-selective phase-transfer catalysts in U- and W-tube experiments. NMR and
GC-MS experiments are utilized to examine the performance of each host carrier
for the different cases studied.