* 1507989
* Gas-Phase Structural Analysis of Metal Cationized Carbohydrates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Eric Dodds, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Dodds and his research group at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln are developing new analytical tools for rapidly discriminating
isomeric carbohydrate species. Complex carbohydrate structures are known to be
essential for many the most crucial processes of life, yet their chemical
complexity has limited the ability to fully understand many of their biological
roles. This complexity represents a significant barrier, since very subtle
differences between carbohydrate structures can drastically affect their
activities in living systems. Professor Dodds is working to establish new
methods for distinguishing between carbohydrates that are very similar
chemically, but may be very distinct biologically. His approach takes advantage
of how carbohydrates interact with various metals in ways that allow closely
related structures to be differentiated using analytical approaches such as
tandem mass spectrometry and ion mobility spectrometry. This work may lead to
new insights on how metals can serve as probes of carbohydrate structure and
facilitate the rapid structural discrimination of carbohydrate isomers.
Professor Dodds also works closely with postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate
students, especially women students, by providing them with unique
interdisciplinary training opportunities.

This research project develops a novel method to enable understanding of
carbohydrate/metal ion interactions. The approach uses cationic charge carriers
as probes of carbohydrate structure in conjunction with both tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS) and ion mobility spectrometry (IMS). This work also employs
gas-phase electron transfer reactions to expand the catalog of these structural
probes to include those that cannot be accessed in solution. Overall, this
research provides the means to leverage gas phase carbohydrate / metal ion
interactions and gas-phase ion chemistry to generate cationic, isomeric species
in which isomers adopt characteristic, distinguishing conformations and undergo
unique, structurally-informative, unimolecular dissociation processes upon
vibrational activation.