* 1507553
* Reversible and Non-reversible Mechanically Connected Polymers and Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Harry Gibson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 470,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Harry W. Gibson at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University perform research on new polymeric
materials. The research explores the use of mechanical linkages (threaded loops
and knots) at the molecular scale to bind polymers together in novel ways.
Polymers such as plastics are ubiquitous in everyday life and this research
program seeks ways to efficiently prepare new and novel types of polymers with
unusual and/or improved properties, e.g., self-healing, response to external
stimuli, such as mechanical stress, heat, pH or solvents, and rubber-like
elasticity. The interdisciplinary nature of this project provides valuable
technical training to a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students
including those from underrepresented groups. Educational outreach to high
schools is planned to include hands-on polymer-related activities and
discussions of polymeric materials in everyday life. Increased inclusion of
these topics in the graduate and undergraduate curriculum is expected to
contribute to the preparedness of such students for technical careers in
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intersection of polymer chemistry and
supramolecular science offers a fertile space for the design and preparation of
new materials with unusual properties and potentially novel practical
applications. High fidelity self-assembly processes for pseudorotaxanes and
rotaxanes are planned and, if successful, should lead to the formation of
polymeric architectures that involve mechanical linkages. Utilization of the
threading principle with polymers that contain host species in the backbone
would enable formation of unique bottle brush polymers whose structures can be
varied widely and easily, providing entirely new types of polymers. These new
materials with unusual architectures are expected to possess novel properties
and the potential for new polymer applications. For example, the pseudorotaxane
and rotaxane linkages in "slip-link" polymers are expected to display "self-
healing" properties and a new type of elastomeric behavior, respectively.
Morphological, rheological, thermal and mechanical studies are planned to
elucidate the novel properties and responses of these systems that distinguish
them from covalent macromolecules, providing new insights into the properties
that may be achievable through supramolecular science.