* 1507955
* Mechanical Behavior of Novel Metal-Oxide Composites with Hierachical Microstructures:  Effect of Scale and Interfacial Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Helen Chan, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 460,610.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Often, a material with nanometer-sized internal
features has remarkable properties such as high strength (when compared to the
same material with larger features). However, it can be difficult to create such
materials with these nanometer-scale features at an affordable cost and in large
quantities. This research project is focused on a new route for creating
materials with nanometer-scale layers of ceramics and metals that have the
potential to possess unusual and advantageous mechanical properties and to be
processed at a reasonable cost. Electron microscopy techniques and specialized
small-scale mechanical tests are revealing the role of the ceramics-metal
interfaces, the orientation of the individual phases, and the size of the phases
on mechanical properties. The results are providing a fundamental scientific
understanding of these phenomena that can be applied to fields such as joining
of ceramics and metals, creation of strong materials for load-bearing
applications, and prevention of failure in microelectronic devices. In addition,
the broad scientific concepts developed during this work are being incorporated
into outreach activities that target K-12 children, thereby encouraging their
participation in science and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This research project is focused on understanding the microstructure
development and mechanical behavior of ceramic-metal composites derived from the
partial reduction of mixed oxide ceramics that have a delafossite starting
structure. Reducing this class of materials to partially remove oxygen yields a
hierarchical structure with unique ceramic-metal composite morphologies that
hitherto have not been studied and that promise to exhibit attractive mechanical
properties. The microstructural scale of the ceramic/metal features range from
tens of nanometers to tens of microns, and both layered and globular
morphologies can be achieved. The discovery of a unique microstructure that can
be created by reducing delafossite materials, combined with the relatively
recent advent of aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopes
and in situ micro-mechanical testing instruments, make it possible for the first
time to reveal the effects of ceramic-metal nanocomposite microstructure scale
and lamellar orientation on stiffness, hardness, and toughness. The findings of
the study are relevant to technological processes such as joining, and to
understanding scaling effects in ceramic-metal systems. Additionally,
university-level students are developing expertise in the emerging areas of
aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy and in situ
micro-mechanical testing.