* 1507391
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Studies of Na-Ion Storage in Hard Carbon
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Peter Greaney, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 430,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Sodium-ion batteries have important advantages
over lithium-ion batteries: unlike lithium, sodium is abundant, inexpensive, and
is not geographically concentrated. There is sufficient sodium to provide
economically the quantity of batteries needed for large-scale applications such
as grid-level energy storage and for a global transition to electric vehicles.
These qualities give sodium-ion batteries the potential to overcome the barriers
that currently prevent the widespread adoption of intermittent renewable energy
sources such as wind and solar power. The principal scientific obstacle for the
realization of sodium-ion batteries lies on the anode side, where hard carbon is
one of the most promising anode materials. Hard carbon electrodes can be
synthesized cheaply from abundant precursors such as sucrose, cellulose, and
peat moss. With the support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
in the Division of Materials Research, the research team work to provide the
understanding to unlock the potential of these materials and guide the future
development of sodium-ion batteries. More broadly, the knowledge generated with
this research enriches our general understanding of carbon materials and could
initiate a new research frontier tailoring non-graphitic carbon materials for
other applications. On an educational level, this project provides highly
collaborative training opportunities in materials chemistry for graduate
students. Through well-established pre-college outreach activities at OSU, this
project also integrates under-represented K-12 students in order to inspire
their interests in science, engineering and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Sodium shares many innate
chemical properties with lithium, giving sodium-ion batteries (NIBs) similar
characteristics to the well-known lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). However, Na ions
are much larger than Li ions besides other differences, so many of the
mechanisms for Li-ion storage are not applicable to Na ions. The PIs'
preliminary results show that the prevailing model of Na storage in hard carbon
is inconsistent with systematic experimental results. The attendant knowledge
gap is holding back the realization of next generation NIBs, and thus the PIs
work to elucidate the new model of basic mechanisms of Na-ion storage in hard
carbon and test the model. The research is conducted to accomplish three goals:
(1) Generate detailed atomic level understanding of the structure of hard
carbons. (2) Elucidate the underpinning mechanisms of Na-ion insertion in hard
carbon. (3) Test empirically that the new model is predictive of the
relationship between the physicochemical properties of hard carbon and the
corresponding electrochemical behavior in NIBs. To achieve the goals, the team
of investigators brings together expertise in synthesis and electrochemical
characterization of hard carbon, advanced atomistic and morphological
characterization of materials, and atomistic modeling of carbon structures.