* 1507942
* Computational studies of solid electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Natalie Holzwarth, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 332,333.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of stable and
efficient batteries for a variety of applications, ranging from micro devices to
electric vehicles to energy storage from renewable sources, is an important
societal need which can benefit from the results of basic research on materials.
Improvements to current battery technology require innovations in the materials
making up the positive and negative electrodes, the electrolyte materials
through which ionic species moves, the interfaces between these materials, and
the integrated battery itself. Recently, there has been considerable progress in
developing batteries constructed with all solid state components. These have
efficiency and stability advantages over batteries developed with liquid or gel
electrolytes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research
and education that focus on using a variety of computational techniques to study
several solid electrolyte systems and their interfaces with ideal electrodes.
Computer simulations of solid electrolyte crystals and their interfaces with
electrode materials will be used to identify compositions and structures of
ideal stable and metastable materials and to establish attributes which control
their ionic conductivities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team composed of
the PI and several undergraduate and graduate students will work in close
collaboration with several experimental groups. In this mentoring environment,
undergraduate students will receive their first exposure to scientific methods,
and graduate students will learn and develop basic skills and practices needed
for their professional careers as scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research and
education on the development and use of simulation methods to make realistic
models of materials, focusing on solid electrolytes and their interfaces with
electrodes relevant to the development of all solid state batteries. In addition
to studying the equilibrium properties of these systems, development of the
simulation methods to study transport properties will also be pursued. Close
collaboration with experimental collaborators will provide opportunities for
iterative refinement of the computational tools and for enhanced understanding
of the material systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By using first principles
simulation methods in tandem with empirical potential molecular dynamics
techniques, the best strengths of the two approaches will be used to develop
both a quantitative and qualitative understanding of the real battery systems.
The project also includes educational and training opportunities for
undergraduate students who will receive their first exposure to scientific
methods, and for graduate students who will learn and develop basic skills and
practices needed for their professional careers as scientists.