* 1507095
* GOALI: Deformation Microscopy of Retained Austenite Transformation in TRIP Steels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Tyson Brown, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 455,515.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The efficiency of modern vehicles critically
affects individual and national prosperity, national energy independence, city
pollution levels (and related health) and climate change. A key element in
deciding this efficiency is vehicle weight. While many ongoing efforts aim at
introducing lightweight materials (such as aluminum, magnesium and carbon
composites) into automotive structures, the dominant constituent, by far, is
still relatively heavy steel. Hence this project focuses on the alternative
light-weighting strategy of developing advanced high strength steels with
improved formability; this will allow less metal to provide the same structural
and safety performance. New and emerging microscopy techniques are combined with
simulation to reveal the relationships between microstructure and properties of
modern high-strength steels. The resulting insights lead to the deeper levels of
understanding and improved models that are required for the nascence of so-
called third-generation steels and a step-change in vehicle weight and
efficiency. Not only does this research project provide an environment for
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students in a mixed academic / industrial
setting (via a strong collaboration with General Motors), but high school
education is being improved via an outreach program. Teachers from local high
schools spend time on the project during the summer months while receiving help
in developing new and relevant curriculum components for their
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Many studies have
been carried out on TRIP (Transformation Induced Plasticity) steels. However,
there is still no systematic information concerning the influence of austenite
chemistry and microstructure on the resulting transformation to martensite. Such
knowledge is critical to the design of texture, morphology and volume fraction
of retained austenite in order to enable low-alloy TRIP steels to achieve
enhanced strength, formability, and fracture resistance necessary to achieve the
desired automotive structure performance. Proposed retained-austenite and
martensite identification technologies (based upon emerging electron-backscatter
diffraction techniques), along with meso-scale dislocation characterization, are
combined with micro-digital image correlation (DIC) to provide a new
'Deformation Microscopy' capability. The resultant framework allows for the
assessment of interactions between dislocations and hard phase boundaries, while
also precisely capturing the strains at which the various retained austenite
islands transform. Knowledge of the fundamental links between microstructure and
formability enables the formulation of a meso-scale model for transformation of
austenite to martensite, and related deformation phenomena.