* 1507314
* Power Integration by Multifunctional Molding
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Khai Ngo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 449,998.00

Magnetic components such as inductors and transformers are indispensable parts
of commercial power supplies. Although they are often blamed as a hindrance
toward higher power density, the magnetic volumes could actually be less than
those occupied by the unused spaces and the product's housing. Converter size
will shrink significantly if the discrete inductors and transformers are
eliminated by integrating magnetic energy storage or functionalities into the
housing and unused spaces. Since the housing is often realized by molding a
protective, non-magnetic compound over the power converter, this project will
pursue the innovation of incorporating a molding material that has magnetic
properties. Molding such multifunctional material over the converter will form
both the protective housing and the magnetic components, realizing "power
integration by multifunctional molding ". Students affinity to new materials and
to integration will be leveraged to share research opportunities and results
with others. Construction of a multi-disciplinary engineering suite to realize
the visions outlined above is expected to be a magnet attracting new
undergraduates into electrical and material engineering and science, enticing
juniors and seniors to graduate school, and promoting diversity. The engineering
suite will serve as a campus test facility for laboratory experiments covering
magnetic materials, molding resins, coupled magnetic fields, power-electronic
circuits, and capstone design projects. "Scieneers," undergraduates in Virginia
Tech's Scieneering program, will team with graduate research assistants to
assist in simulation and experimental validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the research is to integrate energy-storage function into the
encapsulating case of power module, thereby reducing material usage and possibly
simplifying manufacturing process. Fundamental contributions are anticipated in
materials and electrical engineering, education, and application. Encapsulation
material that integrates mechanical/chemical (protective) and electrical (energy
storage) functions are to be synthesized using low temperature and low pressure.
Multi-magnetics module (MMM) with unexplored electromagnetic properties and
design methodology are to be devised to take advantage of such material.
Designability of power-electronic converters are to be assessed the presence of
magnetic medium. Converter topologies are to be synthesized to leverage the
field couplings inside an MMM. All fundamental advances are to culminate in a
manufacturing process of multi-magnetics module with less materials and cost,
possibly. In addition to the educational efforts noted above, point-of-load
converters and battery chargers will be packaged into semi-assembled modules to
be completed by the Center for Enhancement of Engineering Diversity's high
school students in the summer as a part of Virginia Tech's effort to recruit and
train engineers of diverse backgrounds.