* 1507417
* Dynamic Grain Growth in BCC Metals and Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Eric Taleff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 460,000.00

1. Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Metals and their alloys are critically
important to the production of structural components required in the complex
machines supporting modern society. Examples of metallic structural components
are readily evident in automobiles, aircraft, bridges and buildings. Less
obvious are the microscopic features inside these materials that control their
properties and enable them to effectively serve in the most demanding tasks,
features that are collectively called the microstructure. The microstructure
includes grains, small individual crystals of the metal, that determine
strength, ductility and other material properties. The grain structure must be
controlled during manufacturing of each component if it is to achieve the
properties required for its technological application. This project seeks to
build the science of how grains develop and grow while metals are deformed at
elevated temperatures, an important processing step in a wide variety of metals
manufacturing operations. The growth of grains under these conditions is called
dynamic grain growth. The new understanding produced under this project is
expected to positively impact future manufacturing practices for the forming of
metals. Through participation in this scientific investigation, students at the
graduate and undergraduate levels are trained. An integral aspect of this
project is a partnership with ASM International on enhancing the open
dissemination of research results so that valuable data can most positively
impact the scientific and engineering communities, as well as broader
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic grain
growth is a topic of great technological importance to the manufacture of
wrought metal and alloy products. Yet, it is also a topic within metals science
for which we have only a very limited understanding. This experimental research
project seeks to produce new understanding for the mechanisms that cause dynamic
grain growth, better establish why grain boundary migration behaviors are
different between the dynamic and static cases, and organize these new
understandings to positively impact manufacturing technologies. The mechanisms
responsible for dynamic grain growth in body-centered-cubic metals are a primary
focus. Both dynamic abnormal grain growth and dynamic normal grain growth are
addressed. The materials studied include the refractory metals, molybdenum and
tantalum, and iron-based alloys. The iron-based alloys include commercially
important interstitial-free steels, which provide both a nearly ideal model
material for scientific investigation and a material of technological relevance.
Experiments are designed to test new hypotheses for the relationship between
dynamic normal and dynamic abnormal grain growth; probe existing hypothesis for
the mobility of grain boundaries under dynamic conditions; and explore questions
for which no hypotheses currently exist. Experimental methods include unique
mechanical testing, modern characterization techniques, advanced computerized
data analysis techniques and interpretation through numerical models.