* 1507081
* Glycerol Polycarbonates as New Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Mark Grinstaff, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 510,420.00

Non-Technical section&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new polymer
compositions and polymers with novel properties is key to the future development
of medical devices. Scientific advances, such as those described in this NSF
sponsored research, will support US industries, which play an important role in
this medical polymers market estimated to exceed $3.5 billion by 2018. With NSF
funding, the PI (Grinstaff) and his team will design, synthesize, and evaluate a
novel class of natural metabolite-based, non-toxic, and biodegradable polymeric
materials. NSF funding will be used to support undergraduate students and
graduate students, who will benefit from an interdisciplinary cutting-edge
research and educational experience that encompasses training in biomaterials
and polymer chemistry. Students will be encouraged to think independently and
creatively while recognizing the importance of collaborating with other experts
(e.g., materials scientists, pathologist, biomedical engineers, and patent
lawyers). These activities will contribute to positive societal outcomes by
fostering excitement for basic research while educating and training a future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
section&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the biomaterials and biomedical field,
degradable polymers such as poly(lactic acid) and poly(glycolic acid) are widely
studied and are an integral component of many medical device products. Although
extensively used, these poly(hydroxy acid)s possess a number of limitations
including: 1) limited capability for backbone functionalization; 2) acidic
products upon degradation; and 3) poor control over molecular weight and
dispersity. Consequently, there is significant need for new polymeric
biomaterials that are amenable to facile modification, multiple processing or
manufacturing methods, and controlled degradation without the generation of a
local acidic environment. With NSF funding, the PI (Grinstaff) and his team will
design, synthesize, and evaluate a novel class of natural metabolite-based, non-
toxic, and biodegradable polymeric materials based on a polycarbonate of
glycerol. The activities in this highly interdisciplinary and cutting-edge
research environment will also afford educated and trained undergraduate and
graduate students for employment in industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;