* 1507371
* Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics of Co-Evolving Complex Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Royce K Zia, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2019
* USD 324,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education aimed to find fundamental principles that govern the behavior of
complex systems, an important and challenging problem. A complex system often
consists of components that each behave in a well-defined way, but when combined
display new distinctly different behavior that is more than the sum of the
individual behaviors. The new behavior is said to be emergent. The components of
complex systems often have heterogeneous properties and interactions. Examples
abound in nature, ranging from the brain and the regulatory systems of cells in
biology, to social networks and ecosystems, and from interdependent
infrastructure networks in engineering to atmospheric and oceanic dynamics. A
principal difficulty in understanding many complex systems is that their
dynamics is driven by external mechanisms that prevent them from reaching the
steady state of equilibrium. Thus, the foundational principles that govern
equilibrium systems, discovered over a century ago, typically do not apply to
them. The analogous principles of driven, non-equilibrium systems are poorly
understood, necessitating the need for finding the foundational principles of
the behavior of non-equilibrium systems and for understanding the range of their
possible behavior. This award supports research to address this problem by
focusing on three different types of non-equilibrium complex systems and their
generalizations. Each system is motivated as a model that captures the essence
of real neural, biological or social behavior, and so, understanding their
specific properties is important. The goal is either to develop or enhance
mathematical methods and tools that can be used generally to study co-evolving
complex systems, and thus, to gain transformational insight into complicated
systems such as the human brain.The work on each of the systems will build on
recent preliminary results obtained by the investigators in their ongoing
research effort. The research will be both analytical and computational, and
will range from fundamental problems in mathematical physics, to the analysis
and application of the fundamental ideas to real - world experimental data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded activities will significantly contribute to
ongoing efforts at the University of Houston in both Computational and Network
Science. These efforts foster interdisciplinary collaboration within the
University and with local industry. The PI and his group will participate in
outreach activities for the community each year. The PI will also continue to
teach multidisciplinary graduate courses he has designed to broadly educate
students about recent advances in both Computation and Network Science. The
grant will also support the PI's service as a faculty facilitator in the
continuing education training each year for 20 teachers without a physics
background that teach physics to approximately 3000 students in high-need school
districts in the Houston area. It will also support the Co-PI's collaboration on
a new text that teaches physics to students in the biological sciences. His
focus is on explaining the central role that understanding systems far from
equilibrium plays in all biological organisms. The graduate students supported
by the grant will be trained in broadly applicable analytic and computational
skills that will prepare them for a wide range of career opportunities. They
will also contribute to the planned educational and outreach activities.
Involving people from under-represented groups in this work will also be a
focus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education aimed to
find fundamental principles that govern the behavior of complex systems. A
principal difficulty in understanding many complex systems is that their
dynamics is driven by exogenous mechanisms, preventing them from reaching
thermal equilibrium. Unlike equilibrium statistical mechanics, the principles of
nonequilibrium statistical mechanics remain poorly understood. Yet, such systems
are ubiquitous, ranging from the neural, genetic, and metabolic regulatory
systems in biology, to population dynamics and competition in social systems and
ecosystems, and from interdependent infrastructure networks to
atmospheric/oceanic dynamics at the global scale. Establishing the foundational
principles of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics as they apply to complex
systems would transform not only our understanding of nature, but also our
ability to control it. In order to establish the principles of nonequilibrium
statistical mechanics, it is helpful to understand the range of possible
behavior in complex systems, driven far from equilibrium. A particularly
challenging set of such systems to understand is those in which two or more
distinct components co-evolve in an interdependent manner. Systems structured as
complex networks that have interdependent dynamics in both node- and link-
degrees of freedom are prime examples of co-evolving complex systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve three sets of simple model
network systems that capture the essence of non-equilibrium behavior found in
nature. These models are also chosen because they can be efficiently simulated
numerically, and have some aspects that can be understood analytically. The PIs
will combine careful simulations with analytic calculations, to gain insight
into both fundamental issues in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, and to
develop deeper understanding of the intriguing phenomena displayed in real-world
systems. The first set of projects will study the co-evolutionary dynamics of
social network models consisting of interacting agents endowed with a
temperament as either introverts or extroverts. Game-theoretic node dynamics
will be combined interdependently with link dynamics due to the temperament of
the nodes. These models merge two paradigms of non-equilibrium statistical
mechanics, one for the node dynamics and the other for the link dynamics, to
explore new co-evolutionary phenomena. The second set of projects will study the
adaptive dynamics of Boolean networks in which both nodes and links co-evolve.
They are prototypical examples of heterogeneous complex systems and as such
present distinct challenges to their understanding. They were originally
proposed as simple models of genetic regulatory systems, and recently have
become widely used as simple models of neural systems. Understanding the co-
evolution of the network structure and the rules of node behavior of these
models may unlock keys to understanding neural function. Finally, the third set
of projects will extend the PI's recent work on the co-evolutionary dynamics
leading to Emergent Speciation, a novel method of biological speciation that may
be a root cause of the origin of the species.