* 1507409
* Growth and Structure of Multifunctional Polymer Brushes from Ultra-thin Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Padma Gopalan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2020
* USD 384,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymer brushes are long stringy molecules that are chemically bonded to a
surface to form dense, thin coatings that drastically change the properties of
the surface. These coatings guide the behavior of cells for regenerative
medicine, promote biocompatibility in implant devices, resist deposition of
micro-organisms on ship hulls, or control flow of electricity in microelectronic
devices. The structure of the polymer brushes provides the needed mechanical
strength to form a stable coating and their chemistry provides the right
functionality to interface/communicate between the substrate and the
environment. This research program will develop new synthetic methodologies to
make these polymer brushes and develop materials characterization techniques to
promote a molecular-level understanding of the resulting structures. This
methodology has the potential to be of broad impact since the chemistry is
simple enough to be adapted by the coatings industries. The research program
will serve to inspire and involve undergraduate students in polymer science and
engineering research, by working with the PI and graduate student mentors
through the REU program. K-12 educational modules developed through this
research will be disseminated nationally by the PI and the graduate students by
partnering with UW-Madison Institute for Chemical Education (ICE). Through the
Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) Residential Program the PI will engage
in mentoring underrepresented students to create a supportive environment by
coordinating information, research and activities for and about women in the
sciences and engineering.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The research program will study the synthesis of a single-component crosslinked
coating to grow homopolymers and mixed polymer brushes with excellent control
over homogeneity of grafting sites, dispersities, chemical functionalities,
graft to graft distance, ability to grow low to high molecular weights, and with
stability to thermal annealing conditions. The growth of polymer brushes from
these coatings is fundamentally different from growth from traditional self-
assembled monolayers. A key aspect of this research will be to develop a
mechanistic understanding of the growth process by combining depth profiling and
angle resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ARXPS) studies. The
stratification effect as well as brush growth kinetics will be studied as a
function of crosslink density and coating thickness by embedding specific
elemental markers in the brush (Br and N). Combination of ARXPS, Atomic force
microscopy and 3D tomography will provide useful morphological information on
these polymer brushes. The brushes grown from these coatings will be floated off
from the substrate as "polymer carpets" and 3D morphological insight obtained by
3D tomography. Melt self-consistent field theory (SCFT) predictions of phase
diagrams for mixed polymer brushes are based on the assumption that the grafting
densities are uniform. So far experimental means for meeting these assumptions
have lagged behind. Using the unique chemistry for growth of well-defined
brushes and the characterization methods developed in this proposal the SCFT
predictions will be tested. Furthermore the simplicity of the chemistry is
expected to allow arbitrary changes in composition to tune surface properties by
incorporating appropriate comonomers. For these reasons the methodology
developed here has the potential to have major impact by highly simplifying the
way polymer brushes are grown.