* 1507875
* Buried Single Crystal Semi-Metal/Semiconductor Nanocomposites for 3D Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Christopher Palmstrom, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical Description: This project investigates a new class of crystalline
metal-semiconductor nanostructure composites. Because of their unique
3-dimensional (3D) nanostructures, these nanocomposite materials have the
potential for practical applications for enabling new semiconductor devices,
thermoelectrics, photodetectors, and terahertz technologies with broad impacts
to society. The mechanism by which these 3D nanostructure composites form is
studied by combining atomic-level control of growth with structural and
electronic characterization. Changes in growth conditions, such as the
proportion of metal to semiconductor components, the growth temperature,
substrates with various crystal orientations, and different metal-semiconductor
combinations, result in new nanostructures with different properties. The
effects of these parameters on growth are modeled and then used to design new
materials. This research involves graduate students and postdoctoral associates
in interdisciplinary research areas of materials science, electrical
engineering, condensed matter and materials physics, and chemistry. In addition,
participants of this project are engaged in a variety of educational activities
from high-school through graduate level and beyond, which brings people of all
ages and under-represented communities into contact with STEM opportunities.

Technical Description: The main objective of the project is to establish a
fundamental understanding of a surface mediated thermodynamic phase separation
mechanism that occurs during the molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) growth of GaSb,
GaAs and related compound semiconductors with co-deposition of a rare-earth (RE)
element such as Er. The MBE co-deposition results in the formation of embedded
epitaxial semi-metallic RE-V rods, branched trees and two-dimensional sheets.
Further study includes determining the physical properties of these
nanostructures and exploring their potential applications as buried contacts in
photodetectors. In-situ atomic level structural, chemical and electronic
characterization tools, including scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy
plus X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, are combined with MBE growth to study the
growth mechanism at the atomic scale. The electronic and optical properties are
studied ex-situ by temperature-dependent magnetotransport, photoluminescence and
terahertz (THz) spectroscopy. The fundamental materials exploration of these
nanostructured materials could enable future applications as buried contacts for
stacked photodetectors and terahertz polarization filters, detectors, and
sources.