* 1507760
* Biomimetic Mineralization by Combining Block Copolymer Self-Assembly and One Dimensional Crystal Nucleation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Michele Marcolongo, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 449,999.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Drexel University aims to use a "bottom-up", directed
assembly method to mimic the natural bone structure, and to understand the
origin of the properties of natural bone. Bone is the second most commonly
transplanted tissue; over 2.2 million bone graft procedures are performed
annually worldwide. Knowledge gained from the study will not only help to
develop new generation bone mimics for tissue engineering, it will also shed
light on novel hybrid materials design towards stronger and lighter
nanocomposites. The educational component of the proposal includes: 1)
developing two class modules addressing natural materials properties; 2)
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students; and 3) involving high school
students and teachers, particularly from underrepresented minority groups, in
the proposed research activities. These educational activities encompass the
following broad impacts: 1) the proposed plans will help bridge the existing gap
between levels of educational developments by involving high school students and
teachers in research activities; and 2) the proposed outreach program will be
specifically geared towards encouraging the participation of underrepresented
minority groups in the Philadelphia region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
Despite various macro-structures, morphogenically different bones share similar
nanostructures consisting of collagen fibrils within which organized
hydroxyapatite nanocrystals are embedded with a period of 67 nm along the
fibrils, and these nanocrystals are aligned parallel to the fibril axis.
Synthetic soft materials have been used to successfully to control the
orientation of mineral crystals. The spatial distribution of minerals in a
synthetic scaffold, however, has yet to be reproduced in a biomimetic manner.
The proposed design aims to mimic the hierarchical structure of natural bone on
the molecular level. The investigators will combine one-dimensional nucleation
and block copolymer (BCP) self-assembly to achieve this goal. By controlling
crystallization of carefully selected BCP on 1D polymer nanofibers, because of
depletion-induced concentration gradients, the crystal growth follows a periodic
pattern with the period ranging from a few terns to hundreds of nanometers. The
chemical environment in the vicinity of the BCP crystals can be tuned to allow
nanoconfined biomineralization. Through this approach, for the first time, both
the orientation and spatial distribution of the mineral nanocrystals can be
precisely controlled. Changing BCP molecular weight also allows detailed
morphological and structural control of the biomineralization process. These
researchers anticipate that the unprecedented structural control will provide a
new route for biomimetic design of hybrid materials in general and bone mimics
in particular. The broader impact activities include mentoring high school
students and teachers with a focus on underrepresented groups from the
Philadelphia region.