* 1507839
* Development of Controlled Palladium(0)-Catalyzed Suzuki Cross-Coupling Polymerizations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Qiao-Sheng Hu, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 315,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Qiao-Sheng Hu of the City
University of New York-College of Staten Island to develop new approaches to
preparing conjugated polymers that are difficult to synthesize by conventional
methods. Conjugated polymers have applications in fields ranging from
semiconductors, sensors to opto-electronics. In addition to advancing the
fundamental knowledge of polymerization chemistry, this research aims to produce
new conjugated polymers with potential application as opto-electronic materials.
As a part of the broader impacts of this project, the Hu Group is training
students and graduate students with state-of-art instruments and techniques for
the preparation and characterization of advanced materials.

Professor Hu's research group seeks to exploit Pd(0)-catalyzed Suzuki cross-
coupling chemistry for controlled polymerizations in the preparation of
conjugated polymers/block copolymers. Controlled Pd(0)-catalyzed cross-coupling
polymerizations have recently emerged as new tools for the synthesis of
conjugated polymers such as poly(arylene)s and poly(aryleneethynylene)s with
controlled degree of polymerization. However, limitations exist for reported
controlled Pd(0)-catalyzed cross-coupling polymerizations, which include
promising but less than ideal polydispersity indexes (PDIs)(~1.20 in general),
limited monomer scope, e.g., mainly donor-based AB-type monomers, and difficulty
to control chain end functionality. Such limitations greatly impede their
applications as powerful tools for the preparation of many valuable conjugated
polymers and block copolymers with controlled length, which have great potential
in molecular electronics and nanotechnology as well as in fields ranging from
semiconductors, sensors to optoelectronics. In this project, the specific foci
are: (a) the preparation of new palladacycle-based initiators; and (b) the
development of controlled Pd(0)-catalyzed Suzuki cross-coupling polymerizations
of acceptor-based and donor-acceptor monomers for the preparation of AB-type and
AA/BB-type polymers and block copolymers. The resulting materials are analyzed
by size exclusion chromatography, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-
time of flight mass spectrometry, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and
other characterization techniques.