* 1507623
* EAGER: Fire Whirls on Water: Clean and Efficient Hydrocarbon Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Michael Gollner, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 06/30/2017
* USD 63,090.00

1507623(Oran)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to investigate the
potential of fire whirls in cleaning up oil spill on water, as they are believe
to be faster, cleaner methods of burning up oil that would otherwise spread over
large areas. The understanding gained from the proposed study can help to reduce
the environmental impact of an oil spill, which is disastrous for people and
fragile wildlife and ecosystems living in these areas are greatly affected. As
such it has a tremendous socio-economic impact. Graduate student assistants will
be involved in the research under the supervision of the principal
investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oil spill over water poses a very dangerous
situation, not only in its impact on ecology but also in its potential of
causing large scale fires, which in turn are capable of causing losses in
properties and human lives. One method of mitigating the hazards associated with
fires over oil (mainly hydrocarbons) spill is, as the PIs propose, is to use
fire swirls. Because the swirling motion of the air generate a centripetal force
and flow toward the axis of the whirl, the air motion over the water surface
would prevent the oil from further spreading into larger areas. In the meantime,
the burning and the associated increase in the buoyancy effect further enhances
the whirl motion and the effect of preventing oil spread while burning the oil
in a smaller area (again, due to the inward motion of the air flow) is
amplified. The PIs propose to introduce spills over water over a range of sizes,
or areas. The swirling air motion will be initially generated, as in small scale
tornado-like phenomenon. The experimental approach includes observing and
measuring the air motion both near the fire whirl and water motion on and
beneath the surface of water, i.e., the mechanism of prevention of oil spread.
The results possess a potential to increase our understanding of both fire
whirls and burning over water for safety and spill remediation. Over many
different scales, these experiments will provide insight into the controlling
parameters that govern both oil spread and combustion of oil and other
hydrocarbons in open water which has not been explored before.