* 1507347
* NSF RUI: The Hadronization of the Omega and F1 Mesons at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Michael Wood, Canisius College
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 105,000.00

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is a successful theory of the strong interaction,
the force that binds the nucleus. It can account for the types of quarks and the
nuclear charges in the sub-structure of nuclear particles called hadrons. The
greatest successes of QCD occur at high energies. At lower energies, the quarks
clump together due to a phenomenon known as confinement. The simple picture is
that of stationary quarks held by strings of nuclear fields. If a quark is
extracted from a hadron, the string stretches and pulls a quark-antiquark pair
from the vacuum leading to hadron production. However, nature is more
complicated with dynamical quarks bound in hadrons. More experimental
information is needed to explain the process of hadron formation. This project
is a study of the formation of two hadrons, the omega and f1 mesons. These
particles are produced in reactions where a high-energy electron is scattered
from nuclei of deuterium, carbon, iron, and lead. The experiments are conducted
at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (TJNAF) in Newport News,
VA. The Canisius College Medium Energy Nuclear Physics group, led by Dr. Michael
Wood, is actively involved at TJNAF. The group will mine the data from an
experiment that has already taken place for these mesons. In addition, the group
is preparing for a follow-up experiment, which will extend the earlier research
to higher beam energy. The undergraduate students involved in the project will
gain valuable experience in mining large data sets and develop analysis skills.

The process of hadronization is characterized by two distinct time periods, the
propagation time and the formation time. The Canisius College Medium Energy
Nuclear Physics (CMENP) group seeks to understand the time frame for a free
quark to couple with other quarks (propagation) and to stabilize its color field
(formation). Nuclei of different sizes are used to extract these times. The
width of the transverse momentum-squared (p2T) varies for nuclei with different
sizes, with a greater broadening being associated with a longer propagation
time. This project is part of a larger program at Jefferson Lab (JLab) to study
long-lived hadrons forming in nuclei. To select the events from the E02-104
experiment at JLab, the data mining software, developed at Old Dominion
University, efficiently skims the existing data files and copies the output over
the network directly to the CMENP group offsite. The hadrons studied by our
collaborators are pions, kaons, protons, and hyperons. The analysis by this
group of the omega and f1 mesons and will investigate the mass dependence of
hadronization. These results are essential for the interpretation of jet-
quenching and proton-nucleus collisions at RHIC and the LHC as well as neutrino
interactions with nuclei at energies of a few GeV. This project will be extended
to CLAS12. The PCAL software of CLAS12 is needed for the identification of a
neutral pion, which exists in the decay of both the omega and f1 mesons. The
CMENP group has taken the lead on PCAL software development.