* 1507947
* Materials development for mid-infrared plasmonic applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Stefan Franzen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professors Stefan Franzen and Jon-Paul Maria of the North
Carolina State University to explore how plasmon oscillations in the mid-
infrared (IR) spectrum can interact with molecular vibrations to enhance the
infrared characterization science. To accomplish this goal, the team implements
extreme-mobility conductive metal oxides into thin film platforms that support
surface plasmon resonance phenomena, and determines how to functionalize them
for specific chemical attachments. Broader impacts of this work include
scientific impacts well beyond this project, such as (i)the development of new
methods to enhance sensing by mode mixing an IR plasmon and an IR absorption
band, and (ii) merging IR surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy with
fluorescence to monitor surface reactions at the monolayer scale. Educational
broader impacts are to be achieved by providing a training ground for graduate
students in an interdisciplinary, collaborative research environment.

This project merges complementary capabilities in Chemistry and Materials
Science that may enable new chemical sensing capabilities. For example, the
members of this collaborative research team seek to attach photoactive
oligonucleotides to CdO:Dy films using new SAM chemistries and monitor binding
simultaneously using fluorescence and mid-IR plasmonic detection. Heretofore,
such strategies have generally not been seen using conventional plasmonic
materials such as gold nanoparticles that quench fluorescence events. The team
is also exploring new plasmonic oxides other than CdO with promising mobility
and surface chemistry properties. The experiments include thin film preparation
by molecular beam epitaxy and sputtering, film characterization by diffraction,
infrared-ellipsometry, and electronic transport. Surface functionalization of
these layers utilizes approaches based on chemical attachment with and without
ultra-thin interface layers prepared by atomic layer deposition.