* 1507932
* Extending the Biopolymer Assembly Landscape Towards Functional Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* David Lynn, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2019
* USD 520,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor David Lynn of Emory University to
re-construct and extend the functions achieved with biopolymers in living
systems. The design of synthetic nanomaterials continues to benefit from
structural investigations of the biological molecules that perform the chemical,
electrical, and mechanical functions associated with cellular metabolism,
communication and energy capture and utilization. These functions have emerged
from the co-assembly of distinct biopolymer scaffolds in ways that exploit the
unique properties of each partner. The systems under investigation serve as a
guide for the first few steps in understanding a co-assembly code that can lead
to new functional materials. This funding will expand the structural, analytic
and modeling methods available for new functional materials and create the
insight necessary to provide a foundation for the discovery of functional co-
assembling materials.

While biopolymers continue to expand in their structural and functional uses in
our society, control of the electrostatic surface patterning of materials have
remained beyond our reach. The specific pattern of the cross-beta peptide
assemblies can now be extended into simple materials that self-assemble with
unprecedented atomic-level resolution of charged surfaces in a wide range of
formats. Sequence specific polymers are necessary, but generally require complex
co-assemblies to generate compatible surfaces with existing biological surfaces
and cells. Recently developed methods to define homogeneous peptide assemblies
with atomic resolution, to measure and define charge patterning, are positioned
to prepare blends and more elaborate co-assemblies of synthetic biopolymers into
supramolecular functional materials with structurally well-defined charged
surfaces. This bottom-up design of complex nanomaterials capable of extending
the functionality of biological systems is part of a new approach in materials
research and one with potential long-term applications ranging from therapeutics
to environmental monitoring.