* 1507030
* Modeling Solute Diffusion in Polymeric Membranes for Gas Separations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Nontechnical Summary This award supports a computational driven approach to
develop the design principles of polymeric membranes which present an efficient
solution for emergent technologies, such as CO2 capture and natural gas
purification. While there have been many advances made in this field, most of
them have been performed empirically - consequently, it is reasonable to state
that there is little quantitative understanding of the molecular principles that
control the separation ability of these membrane materials. Driven by these
facts, here we propose to critically delineate the underpinnings of these
separation technologies using a suite of molecular simulation methods on a
variety of models, going from those directly relevant to experiment to ones that
focus in extracting universal principles. The successful completion of the
proposed research could result in the development of computational tools and
fundamental understanding that could facilitate robust design methodologies for
polymeric membranes specific to current and emerging clean energy technologies.
Highly permeable, but selective, polymeric materials will enable efficient, low-
cost, CO2 separations. These research efforts will be coupled to a suite of
education and outreach activities. Driven by the group's recent success in
recruiting high school and undergraduate students for summer research, the
proposal is to continue to recruit students from historically minority schools,
as well as undergraduate and high school students from the greater New York City
area. The PI's group has previously worked with several women and minority high
school students who have subsequently decided to study science and engineering
in college. The proposal is to continue this pipeline approach to recruit and
retain underrepresented minorities in science and engineering fields.

Technical Summary This award supports a computationally-driven approach to
develop the design principles of polymeric materials for membrane applications -
materials which present an efficient solution for emergent technologies, such as
CO2 capture and natural gas purification. These polymeric materials have to be
capable of selective and efficient transport of gases. The main objective of the
proposed research is to critically delineate factors controlling separation
processes in polymeric membranes by using a suite of molecular simulation
methods, going from those directly relevant to experiment to ones that focus in
extracting universal principles. The PI's approach is focused on the local,
vibrational dynamics of a dense glassy polymer, as characterized by the long-
time plateau value of the mean-squared displacement of the frozen matrix. This
is postulated to define the appropriate dynamic "free-volume" metric. The PI's
group will establish: if this dynamic "free-volume" metric is universal, if it
has experimental backing, and how it is affected by chain stiffness, chain
packing, solute-solvent interactions, the solute size and shape, the glassiness
of the matrix, and the presence of heterogeneities such as nanoparticles. This
will be achieved through a fundamental, simulation-based understanding of this
relationship. The successful completion of the proposed research could result in
the development of computational tools and fundamental understanding that could
facilitate design methodologies for polymeric and polymer-hybrid membranes
specific to current and emerging clean energy technologies. Highly permeable,
but selective, polymeric materials will enable efficient, low-cost, CO2
separations. These research efforts will be coupled to a suite of education and
outreach activities. Driven by the PI's group recent success in recruiting high
school and undergraduate students for summer research, the proposal is to
continue recruitment of students from historically minority schools, as well as
undergraduate and high school students from the greater New York City area. The
PI's group has previously worked with several women and minority high school
students who have subsequently decided to study science and engineering in
college. The proposal is to continue this pipeline approach to recruit and
retain underrepresented minorities in science and engineering fields.