* 1507440
* Beyond Single-Molecule Conductance: Understanding and Controlling Charge Transport by External Stimuli and Supramolecular Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Latha Venkataraman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 570,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and by the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms Programs A and B (CSDM-A and CSDM-B) in the Division of
Chemistry (CHE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: The drive to
miniaturize electronics has not only motivated the search for new organic and
inorganic (macro)molecular materials, but has also spurred the development of
tools required for studying circuits with single molecules as active elements.
Most past research on creating molecular-scale electronic devices has focused on
the impact of molecular structure on the device properties. This project goes
beyond such studies by developing methods to exploit the environment around
molecular devices in order to control and modulate electronic characteristics.
The project contributes to the realization of functional molecular devices as
well as expansion of an arsenal of experimental methods to study and control
charge transport at the single-molecule level. An integral part of the
activities include the introduction of interdisciplinary science bridging
physics, chemistry and engineering to middle-school, high-school, and
undergraduate students, in order to instill a desire to pursue careers in
science. Both PIs' laboratories are bridged thus K-12 school students can
experience, first-hand, life in interdisciplinary research environment at
Columbia University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: There is a
strong need to understand and use the environment around molecular junctions to
control charge transfer characteristics and enable creating functional
molecular-scale analogs of circuit elements. Most past research efforts on
transport at the molecular level have focused on correlating conductance to
molecular structure, while the impact of the immediate environment around the
junction has largely been ignored. This project aims to use the molecular
environment as an external stimulus to control and alter the electronic
characteristics of single-molecule devices, exploiting electrostatic,
electrochemical and supramolecular interactions. The goals of this project are
two-fold: (1) to understand the effects of the environment on the conduction
properties of molecular junctions; and (2) to design and measure materials that
respond to the environment in a controlled manner. This interdisciplinary
research project goes beyond studying the fundamental components in molecular
junctions - contacts, molecules, and electrodes - to establish an understanding
of the interface between the junctions and the environment. It uses the scanning
tunneling microscope based break-junction technique to study solvent/encapsulant
effects, redox responsive systems, and supramolecular interactions in a large
number of single-molecule devices.