* 1507986
* Nanosphere Synthesis and the Impact of Curvature on Molecule Adsorption
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Petra Reinke, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 322,305.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Petra Reinke at the University of
Virginia to develop novel, ultrasmall catalyst particles that consist of carbon
(carbides) chemically bound to a metal. These particles, with diameters of less
then a few billionths of a meter, havea wide range of potential applications,
from catalysis, where carbide-based particles can substitute for expensive noble
metals, to molecular electronics. The project addresses two challenges, which
are critical bottlenecks for the use of carbide-based nanoparticles: First, the
synthesis of stable carbide-based nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution,
which can be adapted to maximize performance, and second, understanding the
impact of geometric and electronic structure on chemical reactivity. Outreach
activities, and the development of a web-based, student-designed nanotechnology
resources are integrated with the research program.

Nanoparticle curvature, as a control parameter for molecule adsorption geometry,
has the potential to function as a powerful tool in driving bottom-up assembly.
The present proposal targets the size regime where molecule size becomes
comparable to the diameter of a metallic or semiconducting nanoparticle on which
it is adsorbed. The proposed work targets two areas, first, the synthesis of
stable ultra-small nanoparticles (nanospheres) as model systems, and, second,
the study of molecule adsorption. The nanospheres are formed by a solid-state
reaction between fullerenes, which serve as the carbon scaffold, and a metal
substrate. The mechanism of nanosphere formation will be studied to control
composition, bonding and surface structure. The mechanisms of nanosphere
synthesis, and the adsorption of coronene on these nanospheres will be studied
mainly with scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy. Synchrotron-based
photoelectron spectroscopy will be applied to elucidate bonding, and adsorption-
induced changes in the molecule. The experimental work will be integrated with
(i) statistical image analysis, (ii) simulation of tip convolution for curved
surfaces, and (iii) simulation of metal-molecule interaction and nanosphere
formation with DFT (density functional methods).