* 1507711
* Influence of Small Molecule Additives on Gemini Dicarboxylate Lyotropic Liquid Crystal Structure and Stability
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Mahesh Mahanthappa, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James Lisy
* 03/31/2016
* USD 441,931.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Mahesh Mahanthappa of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison is studying how small molecule surfactants, in which a water-
soluble headgroup is attached to a water-insoluble tail, self-assemble in water.
At high surfactant concentrations in water, these molecules spontaneously form a
variety of structurally periodic soft materials known as liquid crystals.
Certain liquid crystal structures are particularly useful in practical technical
applications, yet these structures are difficult to access and their properties
are limited. This project addresses these problems by investigating how adding
salts and oils to water/surfactant mixtures enables the formation of these
useful liquid crystals. A subset of the resulting materials may find long term
application in fields such as therapeutic drug delivery. Another aspect of this
project focuses on converting these liquid crystals into useful polymer
membranes for energy efficient separations of complex chemical mixtures and for
the generation and use of renewable fuels derived from solar energy. The broader
impacts of this work include mentoring graduate and undergraduate students in
research projects at the boundary between fundamental science and technological
innovation, which will is expected to lead to useful materials for future
healthcare and renewable energy applications.

This project investigates how small molecule additives control the water
concentration-dependent self-assembly of gemini ("twin tail") dicarboxylate
surfactants to form lyotropic liquid crystals (LLCs). A special emphasis in this
project is placed on identifying methods for stabilizing network phase LLCs with
interwoven, periodic, and percolating 3D-networks of aqueous and hydrophobic
domains. The influence of various hydrophilic, hydrophobic, and amphiphilic
molecular additives on LLC structure formation and stability are being evaluated
by polarized light microscopy and temperature-dependent X-ray scattering. These
studies are informing the development of mixtures of reactive surfactants and
molecular additives that spontaneously form network phase LLCs for subsequent
polymerization into functional, nanoporous polymer membranes. Professor
Mahanthappa is translating related research results into public outreach
demonstrations that showcase the utility of simple "soaps" in hydraulic
fracturing applications ("fracking") for oil and gas recovery, to engage the
public in broader discussions of energy harvesting technologies and global
energy demands.