* 1507609
* GOALI: A Novel Flux Switching Permanent Magnet Machine for Emerging and Renewable Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Vladimir Blasko, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 440,000.00

Using energy more efficiently provides major economic advantages, reduces our
consumption of limited resources, and mitigates climate change. About 45% of all
energy is used through electric motors and a majority of world's energy is
generated using electric generators. Permanent magnet motors and generators play
a critical role for energy conversion and are used in many applications
including appliances, industrial, automotive, aerospace, oil and gas, and
medical equipment. Permanent magnet generators are used in renewable energy
applications including wind and ocean wave derived power. Because of their
relatively high efficiency, permanent magnet electric machines play a key role
compared to other electric machines. One developed machine class, the flux
switching permanent magnet (FSPM), has gained significant interest in the
scientific community because of its inherent advantages in terms of high
efficiency, high power density, and high-speed capability; however, it has yet
to become commercially viable. The main challenge of this machine is the
requirement of very high fundamental frequency, especially in medium to high-
speed machines, as current power electronics are unable to provide such
frequency. In addition, high fundamental frequency causes additional losses in
the motor, reducing its efficiency. This university-industry research
collaboration proposes a novel flux switching permanent magnet machine topology
to mitigate this issue and reduce the frequency requirement by 60%, to increase
efficiency, and to promote further research on FSPM machines and applications.
The research will focus on developing theory as well as designing and testing an
experimental machine prototype. In addition, this project aims to provide
continuing education for practicing engineers. Research results will be
incorporated into future short courses and seminars, with dissemination to
practicing engineers. Through this and with enhanced classes for undergraduate
and graduate students, the workforce skill set will be prepared to develop more
efficient electric machines. Also, demonstrations will be created to promote
engineering and efficient energy practices for pre-college students, including
underrepresented groups, during campus visits. These programs will aim to
inspire current and future engineers to continue to further sustainable
engineering practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flux switching permanent magnet
machine has a very simple rotor structure, which is a promising candidate for
low cost and high-speed operation. It provides an excellent opportunity to
achieve higher power density and improved efficiency. The current FSPM machine
being extensively studied is the 12 stator slot / 10 rotor pole (12/10)
topology. This relatively high number of poles, in addition to high-speed
applications, is the primary cause of the high fundamental frequency
requirement. It has long been thought that the 12/10 has the smallest number of
poles needed to create sinusoidal back-EMF and acceptable torque
characteristics. However, this research proposes the study and development of a
novel 6/4 FSPM topology, utilizing a dual stator structure. The reduced number
of rotor poles results in a 60% reduction in fundamental frequency requirements,
which reduces the core and permanent magnet losses, improving efficiency in
these areas by 33% for the same rotor speed. These improvements result in more
efficient and higher power density machines. Thus, the development of the novel
6/4 topology will aim to enable other permanent magnet machines to replace
current low efficiency machines in various applications. Through the course of
this project, sizing equations and other scientific techniques will be developed
to quantify the benefits of the proposed machine compared to current technology.
A proof of concept machine and a higher power prototype will be developed to
validate the theoretical results.