* 1507735
* Degradable trehalose polymeric materials for protein stabilization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Heather Maynard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 515,342.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Heather Maynard at UCLA to
conduct research to create polymeric materials that protect proteins to heat,
and break down into non-toxic components, to release fully active proteins.
Proteins have important biological functions and are useful as tools in
scientific research, as reagents in various industries including those that
produce chemicals and home care products, as additives to enhance food
production, and as therapeutics for a wide variety of diseases. However, for a
significant fraction of proteins, instability to heat and other stressing
conditions, limits their application. For example, isolated purified proteins
often lose activity if stored at room temperature and may be unstable to
shipping or storage without refrigeration, increasing costs. As a result, there
is interest in polymeric materials that can stabilize proteins to conditions
that normally inactivate them, such as changes in temperature. It is also
critical for most applications that these materials are degradable, non-toxic,
and can release active proteins when and where desired. Through this research,
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will be trained
in interdisciplinary research, with a particular effort increase the
participation of female and under-represented minorities in chemistry research.
In addition, outreach activities are directed at K-12 students from
underprivileged and diverse communities, to expose these students.

In this research, Maynard's research group will be preparing polymer conjugates
and nanoparticles of trehalose glycopolymers that protect proteins, degrade into
non-cytotoxic components and release proteins by relevant triggers.
Specifically, her group synthesizes and studies end functionalized trehalose
glycopolymers that conjugate to proteins, stabilize the biomolecules, and
degrade into non-cytotoxic components. The research also aims to prepare
degradable trehalose polymer nanoparticles that stabilize and release proteins.
This project teaches students valuable synthesis, structure-property
relationships with regard to protein stability, and is expected to yield
information on cytotoxicity and release of proteins. Since proteins are used in
a wide range of practical applications, from the use of antibodies as
diagnostics and as therapeutics, to the use of enzymes in the food industry, to
the use of proteins as pharmaceutical therapeutic agents, the fundamental
discoveries relating to protein stability from this research are expected to
impact many different fields.