* 1507048
* Spin Transport in Metals and Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Christopher Leighton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 380,348.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Magnetism in thin layers or films of
materials, and at interfaces between multiple layers, has attracted attention
for many years. This is due to basic scientific interest, but also technological
importance, as magnetic films enable such devices as the hard disk drives that
now power cloud storage. Despite the maturity of such "spintronic" technologies
there remain surprising gaps in the understanding of such materials, as well as
major obstacles to next generation devices. One example is the manner in which
magnetism can be induced in otherwise non-magnetic metals by injecting electrons
across an interface with a magnetic metal. This is termed "spin injection", the
subsequent motion of the electrons enabling "spin transport". Despite the fact
that working technologies rely upon these effects, many fundamental questions
remain unanswered, including what limits how far injected spin currents can
persist. The goal of this project is to understand exactly this, focusing on the
all-important role of imperfections in the materials. In addition to elucidating
the poorly understood basic physics, this also contributes to the development of
next generation hard drive read heads. This project does this not only with
conventional magnetic metals, but also in the new realm of conductive oxide
materials. In addition to impact in both science and technology, these
activities train undergraduate and graduate students in an active,
interdisciplinary research field, directly contributing to a skilled US
workforce. Outreach to the public is also achieved, primarily through an
educational program developed by the principal investigator that can impact up
to 500 school students a year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the separation of charge and spin
currents enabled by the nanoscopic lateral non-local spin valve to dramatically
improve the understanding of spin injection and relaxation in metals and oxides.
The goal is to develop a general physical understanding of the factors that
limit spin diffusion lengths and lifetimes in non-magnetic metals and oxides,
thus directly contributing to the exploration of low resistance-area product
sensor technologies for next generation hard disk drive read heads. The factors
inducing spin relaxation in non-magnetic metals are being systematically
deconvoluted in this work, providing a full understanding of the role of
magnetic impurities, spin-orbit scattering centers, grain boundaries, surfaces,
interfaces, and phonons. The research additionally includes novel experiments
aimed at understanding the role of local magnetic moments, Kondo physics, and
even magnetic interactions and fluctuations on spin transport in metals with
magnetic impurities. The work will gradually move from conventional metals to
conductive oxides, exploring the opportunities provided by highly spin polarized
complex oxide spin injectors, the prospects to understand the fundamentals of
spin injection, diffusion and relaxation in oxide metals, and the potential for
fascinating new physics combining spin transport with electronic phase
transitions.