* 1507500
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of a Decontamination Process for Powders for Transparent Ceramics
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Martin Harmer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

A novel purification process has been developed and patented to reduce unwanted
impurity content in ceramic powders. This process removes impurities such as
sulfur and chlorine which have largely been neglected and cannot be removed by
traditional purification processes utilized commercially. As a result, even the
'ultra-high purity' powders that are commercially available often contain
significant amount of such impurities. The proposed purification process has
been successfully applied to magnesium aluminate spinel (MgAl2O4), a material of
choice for NASA and DOD for various defense and aerospace applications for which
highly transparent and high strength materials are required. In comparison to
the ballistic glasses, which are currently utilized for such applications, an
improved ballistic performance at half the weight and thickness can be
potentially achieved utilizing spinel. This will have a significant beneficial
effect in various ways such as reducing the cost of maintenance and increasing
the life-time of the components, energy/fuel savings and increase payload
capacity of vehicles/spacecraft where spinel parts can be utilized. The proposed
patented process has been successfully utilized in laboratories to consistently
produce powders with impurity content that is sufficiently low for further
processing, irrespective of impurity content in the starting powder. It is
believed that the patented process will invigorate the commercialization of
spinel by providing a cost-effective, scalable solution for the mass production
of large monolithic bodies of spinel and other ceramics. This would benefit a
large number of industrial manufacturers serving this market.

The novel purification process involves treating as received powders in ultra-
high vacuum with or without concurrent heating for extended periods of time. The
process does not modify the physical characteristics of the powders such as tap
density or particle size distribution that are already optimized for specific
applications. Utilizing the processed powders, it is possible to achieve near
theoretical density and transparency in the spinel samples by hot-pressing only
without the addition of any sintering aids. Current processing strategies
involve use of sintering aids to achieve theoretical density and transparency
that invariably lead to degradation of mechanical properties because of abnormal
grain growth. Another processing step in the current processing strategies
involves a post hot-pressing hot-isostatic pressing step at high temperatures to
remove residual porosity. Although this step produces near theoretical
transparency in the parts, it results in abnormal grain growth at the processing
temperatures and significantly increases the production cost of the spinel parts
significantly. The patented process can potentially avoid such complicating
factors, but needs further evaluation to be efficient and viable at a commercial
scale.