* 1507775
* New Directions for Organic Spintronics: Organic-Based Magnetic Heterostructures and Microwave Magnetodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Ezekiel Johnston-Halperin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 05/31/2018
* USD 399,883.00

Nontechnical Description:

The push towards "ubiquitous computing," the inclusion of small-scale and low-
power computing devices in everyday objects ranging from appliances, to
clothing, to packaging, has emerged as a new driver that is pushing information
technology off the desktop (or the laptop) and into every aspect of our world.
The study of organic electronics is playing a major role in this new paradigm
due to the mechanical flexibility, low cost, and ease of manufacturing enabled
by these materials. Early signs of the success of this approach can be found in
the commercial development of flexible display technologies based on organic
light-emitting diodes and organic thin film transistors. However, this new
technology is currently limited by the lack of non-volatile organic memory
elements, i.e. the ability for a device to remember what it has been doing once
the power is turned off. This project focuses on addressing this gap through the
development of organic-based magnetic materials and the devices enabled by them.
It is focused on developing the new materials, new devices, and new fundamental
understanding necessary to translate the potential of these organic-based
magnets into a realistic complement to the optical and electronic functionality
already demonstrated for organic electronics. In addition, this project serves
as training ground for the next generation of young researchers that will drive
this evolving technical revolution. Recent graduates of the PI's group have
moved on to positions at Samsung, Intel and science policy institutes, and
current training has been integrated with Ohio State University's Masters to PhD
Bridge Program to enhance the diversity of our future STEM workforce. In its
first two years of operation this Bridge Program has already increased the
students from underrepresented minorities in the Department of Physics by 400%.

Technical Description: This project extends the boundaries of organic
electronics to include magnetic and spintronic functionality. This effort
exploits recent scientific and technical breakthroughs to explore the growth of
all-organic magnetic heterostructures and investigate the dynamic excitation of
organic-based magnetic materials in two independent but correlated thrusts. In
Thrust 1, work focuses on determining the structure-function relationship
between the growth of organic-based magnets and their static and microwave-
frequency magnetic properties. This work includes the growth of ferromagnet/non-
magnetic bilayers, ferromagnet/non-magnet/ferromagnet heterostructures, and
corrugated films with shape-induced in-plane magnetic anisotropy. Thrust 2
focuses on exploring dynamic excitations of these systems, including the
investigation of electrically detected ferromagnetic resonance, ferromagnetic
resonance driven spin pumping detected both via ferromagnetic resonance
linewidth changes and inverse spin-Hall effect generated voltages, and spin-
transfer torque based on the spin-Hall effect in high spin-orbit metals for
ferromagnet/metal bilayers. Taken together, these two Thrusts are laying the
foundation for a new conception of microwave-frequency organic spintronics and
magnetoelectronics.