* 1507210
* Developing Highly Luminescent Materials for Low-Cost and Energy-Efficient Lighting Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Jing Li, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this project intends to
address the cost and supply issues of rare-earth element (REE)-based phosphors
currently used in solid state lighting technologies through the development of
alternative highly luminescent materials. These inorganic-organic hybrid
materials are cost-effective, solution-processable, and 100% free of REEs. They
show strong promise for general lighting and illumination applications. The
ultimate objective is to achieve high luminous efficacy and color quality
comparable to commercial products in the lighting market. Successful
implementation of this project can contribute significantly to reducing
dependence on REEs. This project also serves as an excellent platform for the
research and training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, as
well as an opportunity to develop other educational and outreach activities
within and beyond the Rutgers community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Two types of REE-free hybrid phosphor materials will be the
focus of this study: the MX(L) family (M = Cu, Ag; X = Cl, Br, I; L = N-ligand)
built on strongly-luminescent MX cluster modules, with an emphasis on cuprous
iodide hybrid structures; and the Zn(FP) family constructed from highly-emissive
molecular fluorophores (FPs). The research team aims to gain a better
understanding of the optical behavior of the two hybrid material families and
specifically of the origin of photoluminescence, the nature of atomic and/or
molecular interactions at the inorganic-organic interface, and the effect of
such interactions on the absorption and emission efficiency, color quality,
structural integrity, and moisture and thermal stability of these materials.
This is achieved through a truly integrated and synergistic approach that
combines state-of-the-art theoretical methods and experimental spectroscopic
techniques to guide design, synthesis, and structure modification, and to
evaluate and understand the photophysical properties. This approach allows the
PI to optimize and enhance the targeted functionality in a systematic manner and
to conduct an in-depth study to correlate the relationship between observed
optical properties and structure, composition, and chemical bonding of the
hybrid systems.