* 1507432
* Photoelectron Emission at Diamond-Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 473,801.00

Non-technical Abstract Diamond surfaces, including inexpensive thin-films and
industrial-grade diamond powders, have the usual ability to emit electrons
directly in to water and other liquids when illuminated with ultraviolet light.
Electrons in water are a potent chemical reducing agent, able to induce very
difficult chemical transformations such as the conversion of dinitrogen to
ammonia and the reduction of carbon dioxide, but they have not been well studied
because of the absence of convenient and efficient methods of preparation. The
ability to directly emit electrons into water using inexpensive, reusable
industrial-grade diamond provides a number of opportunities for inducing novel
chemical transformations not accessible with conventional photochemical or
electrochemical methods. With support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the objectives of this project
are to understand the fundamental materials properties that influence electron
emission from diamond into water, to use this understanding to create
photoelectron emitters that function with good stability in water and other non-
vacuum environments, and to identify whether diamond can be modified to allow it
to easily emit electrons using visible light. If successful, the ability to
easily produce electrons in water using visible or near-ultraviolet light would
enable new, energy-efficient chemical transformation pathways not currently
possible. Graduate students are being trained in state-of-the-art
electrochemical methods and receive extensive professional development
opportunities. The principal investigator and students are also mentoring
undergraduate students and high school students on summer research projects as
part of a broader effort to increase the number of students who have the
opportunity to engage in state-of-the-art scientific research. The principal
investigator and students are actively participating in several programs
targeted specifically toward enhancing the diversity of the scientific
workforce.

Technical Abstract This renewal project is an outgrowth of research from the
principal investigator demonstrating that diamond surfaces are able to emit
electrons into water when illuminated with ultraviolet light, thereby allowing
inexpensive diamond thin films and even industrial powders to be used as solid-
state sources of electrons in liquids. While electron emission into vacuum has
been studied previously, little is known about electron emission into water and
other liquids. The primary goal of is project is to investigate the factors that
control the photoemission of electrons from diamond into adjacent liquids, and
to use this information to create photoelectron emitters that function with good
stability and efficiency in non-vacuum environments. The project has three
primary components. One is to understand how the electronic structure of the
diamond-liquid interface influences the emission of electrons into adjacent
liquids, by characterizing how variables such as the surface terminating layers,
solution-phase ions, and externally applied potentials influence electron
emission. A second is to determine whether metal-semiconductor junctions and
plasmonic structures are able to increase the optical absorption of diamond
and/or provide alternative pathways to exciting electrons to the conduction
band. A third is to determine whether mid-gap states introduced by
substitutional nitrogen or other dopants can provide a pathway to achieving
electron emission using visible light. A wide range of experimental methods are
being employed. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopies are being used to characterize the chemical composition and
electronic structure of diamond surfaces. Electrochemical methods including
Mott-Schottky Analysis and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy are being used
to characterize the interfacial electronic structure and band alignments in
aqueous media. Solvated electrons are being directly characterized using
transient absorption spectroscopy and via chemical probes. Together, these
methods are providing a comprehensive understanding of electron emission into
liquids and providing insights into how to design interfaces that are most
effective in enabling diamond to be used as a solid-state source of electrons in
non-vacuum environments.