* 1507749
* Design, Self-Assembly and Characterization of Three-Dimensional Metamaterials in the Infrared Region
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Jacob Khurgin, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The micro- and nano-structured metamaterials with
periodic patterns in all three dimensions can enable novel optical properties
that are not attainable in naturally occurring materials. However, these
metamaterials are very challenging to fabricate at micrometer length scales
required to engineer the optical properties in the infrared region. This project
involves the design, assembly and characterization of three-dimensional
materials composed of periodic units of 0.1 to 10 micrometer in size with
polyhedral geometries and precisely patterned surfaces. These metamaterials are
designed to display a variety of previously unrealized properties in the mid-
infrared region with potential applications for environmental monitoring,
sensing, and biomedical engineering. The research results are integrated into
educational curricula such as Infrared, Micro and Nanotechnologies at Johns
Hopkins University. Through a number of educational activities, the project
incorporates research experiences and participation of K-12 students and
undergraduates including those from under-represented groups in the local
Baltimore community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project
aims to design and characterize 3D infrared metamaterials by the self-assembly
of microsized self-folded units with polyhedral geometries. The research
includes the development of novel concepts such as "photonic metalattices,"
which combine the attractive features of metamaterials and photonic crystals,
and reconfigurable metamaterials. The latter explores metamaterials that feature
a chemically induced metal-insulator transition. Experimental methods include
state-of-the-art nano- and micro-scale lithographic patterning, origami inspired
and aggregative three-dimensional self-assembly. Furthermore, characterization
using optical and electron microscopy and spectroscopy is carried out in order
to investigate structural and optical properties. Simultaneously, theoretical
research, based on the recently developed coupled mode methods is performed, and
augmented by numerical methods to model experimental results.