* 1507266
* Conductance Variability in Non-Conjugated Polymers: Memristors for Neuromorphic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Stephen Foulger, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The common computer memory uses digital 0 and 1,
solely depending on electric voltage. In contrast, a human has the neuromorphic
response capability and can alter the decision-making process based on past
experiences. Recently, scientists are exploring various materials, particularly
oxides, in order to fabricate a man-made computational system with neuromorphic
response capability. This research project investigates organic polymers with
electrical resistance that depends on geometry factors, expanding the class of
materials that can be used as the basic building blocks for neuromorphic
computing. Graduate students are trained in this project for interdisciplinary
research bridging the fields of polymer science, electronics, and neuroscience.
In addition, research opportunities are provided to high-school and
undergraduate students through the Center for Optical Materials Science and
Engineering Technologies (COMSET) Summer Fellows Program and in collaboration
with Montessori School of Anderson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
This project focuses on the investigation of non-conjugated polymers with
pendant aromatic heterocyclic moieties that exhibit conformationally dependent
conductivity and emulating synaptic behaviors. A long-term goal of the project
is to develop a polymer-based memristor technology that can be employed in a
neuromorphic computation system. The research includes three major tasks: (1)
Development of molecular design rules for creating a memrisitor using non-
conjugated polymers with pendant carbazole and oxadiazole moieties, as well as
monomer and polymer synthesis. The goal is to create a polymer-based memrisitor
with a conductive function depending on both voltage and a structural parameter,
particularly the rotational aspects and trapping properties of the pendant
groups; (2) Measurement of the charge transport properties of the memristors,
with the results used to refine the molecular design rules and to improve
synthesis methods; (3) Emulation of a series of synaptic behaviors using the
polymer-based memristors.