* 1507612
* CDS&amp;E: Computational and Experimental Studies on Dynamic Interactions With Soft Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Balakumar Balachandran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

Locomotion on soft soil is important for many navigation and exploration
operations, including explorations for coastal, petroleum, and fresh water
resources, extraterrestrial terrain navigation, mapping operations for mine and
radiation detection, and search and rescue operations. In general, motions on
soft or loose soil require high energy expenditures compared to motions on
packed surfaces. Through support of this award, fundamental research will be
pursued to gain further understanding of locomotive interactions with different
granular media. This research will draw upon knowledge from various areas,
including soil modeling, numerical simulations, vehicle dynamics, and data
mining. A salient impact is expected to be the advancement of our understanding
of vehicle maneuverability in granular media and related strategies for energy
efficiency. The cross-disciplinary research will provide exceptional learning
opportunities for the researchers involved and also usher in new generation of
researchers trained in computational modeling and sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by the team's prior efforts in computational and
experimental dynamics, nonlinear phenomena, and fluid-structure interactions,
this research effort will be pursued with a focus on understanding granular
media interactions associated with wheeled and legged locomotion on soft soils.
Original experiments will be conducted by using photo-elastic granules to
examine inter-granular force chain development in response to local surface
disturbances generated by external loading. These experiments are expected to
generate data for simulations of granular interactions based on discrete element
models. These simulations will leverage GPU computing. Continuum, geomechanical-
hydrodynamic simulations will be used to associate observed force chains with
specific soil types. The research effort will help answer basic questions such
as the following: i) Can force chains be used to predict slipping in soft-soil
interactions? ii) Does an optimum gait speed exist at which soil slipping is
minimized? iii) Can spheres, combined with complex friction models, accurately
simulate interactions of sand grains and other non-spherically shaped bodies in
a statistically averaged sense? and iv) Can one apply statistical distributions
such as the Tracy-Widom distribution to interactions with granular media? The
findings are expected to provide a unique means for interrogating granular
reactions to locomotive interactions in a way not tractable through
experimentation alone. The outcomes are expected to be useful for developing
efficient propulsion strategies for robot platforms that span a range of
different sizes, weights, speeds, and energy consumption targets.