* 1507550
* Collaborative Research: Excited State Dynamics of Structurally Precise Metal Nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Kenneth Knappenberger, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 03/31/2018
* USD 320,000.00

These awards by the Macromolecular/Supramolecular/Nanochemistry Program in the
Division of Chemistry to Christine Aikens (Kansas State University), Ken
Knappenberger (Florida State University), and Chris Ackerson (Colorado State
University) develop the ability to predict how metal particles with dimensions
on the order of one-billionth of a meter (i.e., nanoparticles) interact with
light. Such metal nanoparticles may, in the long term, become functional
components in solar-to-electric energy conversion devices, optical sensors, and
medical diagnostics and therapeutics, among others. Currently, the lack of
understanding how light provokes energy flow through these materials limits
their applications. The collaborative team combines cutting-edge theoretical and
experimental spectroscopy along with precision nanoparticle synthesis and
characterization. They facilitate their multi-disciplinary research project by
developing graduate student training courses focused on modeling, measurement,
and preparation of structurally precise photonic nanoparticles. The team is also
strongly engaged in outreach to K-12 students and educators; is actively
involved in incorporating research into the undergraduate curricula at each of
their respective universitie;, and is committed to the involvement of
underrepresented students in scientific research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary thrusts of this effort are to
determine how electronic energy relaxation affects the nanophotonic properties
of structurally precise metal nanoparticles in the 1-2 nm size domain. The
research features an emergent class of nanophotonic materials: monolayer-
protected clusters (MPCs), which can be synthesized and isolated with atomic
precision. These materials represent an intermediate class of materials between
bulk metallic materials and smaller photo-excited molecules. The program of
study provides nanoparticle-specific descriptions for fundamental processes
involved such as electron-phonon coupling, which are critical for determining
the functional properties of nanophotonic materials. The research investigates
the interplay between MPC structural parameters and electronic relaxation. The
specific objectives are: 1) to determine the mechanisms of electron-phonon and
electron-vibrational coupling and their influence on the electronic relaxation
dynamics of Au25(SR)18 MPCs, where SR is an alkanethiol; 2) to understand the
effects of metal doping on MPC dynamics; 3) to describe how electron-phonon
coupling changes with increasing MPC dimensions; and 4) to investigate the
influence of MPC ligand band structure on electron dynamics.