* 1507980
* Stiff chains in tight spots:  confinement and semiflexibility in semicrystalline polymers and entangled melts
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Scott Milner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 341,045.00

Nontechnical Abstract The most common plastic polymers, polyethylene and
polypropylene, are made from simple molecules obtained from refining and natural
gas feed stocks. These polymers are inexpensive, lightweight, versatile, and
ubiquitous - and yet, given their molecular structures, their material
properties are still far from optimal. One reason there is room for improvement
is that our understanding of the molecular origin of plastic properties is very
incomplete. A key property of plastics is that when you pull on them, they
"give", rather than snapping in two. To the hand and eye, that is what makes a
plastic plastic. But how does a solid material manage to "give" rather than
snap? To find out, the PI's group will use computer simulations to look inside
the crystals that make up common plastics, in which the long polymer molecules
pack together like pencils in a box. There can be defects in the crystal packing
- trapped twists, called "twist solitons", that can move along the length of the
molecule, like a bump under a rug. Understanding how polymer crystals change
shape in response to stress without snapping may give insight into how to tailor
inexpensive, weight-saving polymer materials for a wider range of uses.

Designing new polymer molecules is expensive. Molecular simulations can be used
to predict key material properties of molecular structures, to guide which new
molecules to try. A key property of polymers is how they flow when molten,
because polymers are often made into finished products by melt processing.
Modern theory does a good job of predicting polymer flow behavior, if one knows
two key parameters: how "entangled" a polymer is, and how "slippery" it is. To
predict these parameters for a given molecular structure, the PI's group will
model a dense melt consisting of a single long self-entangled ring molecule.
With these parameters, flow behavior of real polymers can be predicted, and used
to guide design of new molecules.

Technical Abstract Confinement of polymer chains by the repulsive potentials of
neighboring molecules plays an essential role in the physics of semicrystalline
polymers and entangled melts. The elementary excitations that remain active in
the constrained geometry are a key common element in these disparate systems. In
entangled melts, these excitations are motions within the "tube". In the
crystalline lamellae of semicrystalline polymers, the excitations are twist
solitons. Chain stiffness intensifies the effects of confinement, narrowing the
tube and increasing the soliton energy. This proposal exploits molecular
dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations combined with topological methods to
characterize the most important motions in these highly constrained systems.
These results will enable predictions for key material properties, including
nucleation barriers, entanglement length and friction factor for melts, and the
amorphous rubberlike modulus in semicrystalline polymers.

The first part of this proposal builds on success of using atomistic molecular
dynamics simulations to characterize twist solitons in polyethylene. Twist
solitons permit chain motion in lamellar crystallites, enabling the deformations
that make plastics plastic. Solitons proliferate in disordered "rotator" phases,
which play a key role in nucleation of semicrystalline polyethylene.
Polypropylene is the second most common polymer worldwide after polyethylene. It
crystallizes in a packing of single-chain helices instead of all-trans ribbons.
Are twist solitons and rotator phases in polyethylene a fluke, or a paradigm?
Simulations will be used to discover if twist solitons and rotator phases also
play a key role in polypropylene.

The second part exploits PI?s group expertise in entangled polymer melts. New
methods will be applied to problems of fundamental importance: dynamical regimes
for long entangled chains, structure of "hairpins" formed as branched polymer
arms relax, and the rubberlike modulus of the amorphous region in
semicrystalline polymers.

Understanding crystallization in polyolefins could lead to advanced products in
a competitive global marketplace. Trapped entanglements in the amorphous region
are little understood, yet critical for large-strain plastic deformation without
failure. This key material attributes enables environmentally friendly
"downgauging" of plastic films, doing the same job with much less material.
Efficient methods to determine fundamental materials parameters from small scale
simulations could unleash a new era in computer-aided materials design.