* 1507141
* Topological Phases and Correlation Phenomena in Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Joel Moore, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2018
* USD 429,643.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
new kinds of solid materials and the surprising phenomena that emerge from the
repulsion between their electrons. Idealized free electrons that interact with
the positive nuclei of the solid but not with each other can already give
surprising effects: the differences between metals, electrical insulators, and
semiconductors can already be understood at this free-electron level. One part
of the proposed work is concerned with newly discovered materials in topological
states that can be analyzed using the branch of mathematics known as topology.
Some topological phases can be understood in terms of free electrons, while
others require strong interactions between the electrons. The PI will
investigate both kinds of topological phases. Both can support atomically thin
conducting layers at the surface of a bulk insulator, which have potential for
technological applications. The PI will pursue a major new research direction to
understand topological effects in metals and in optical properties such as light
reflection and transmission, building on recent success in insulators and for
transport properties such as conductivity.

Interactions between the electrons are crucial in allowing systems to reach the
steady state of thermal equilibrium, or put another way, to have a well-defined
temperature. The second focus of the research is to understand quantum matter
far from the steady state of equilibrium, like certain semiconductor devices.
There are indications that numerous new states and phenomena emerge when quantum
effects are particularly strong.

This award also supports broader impacts with a common goal. This project will
contribute to the training of graduate students in important fields of condensed
matter physics, some of which have the potential to yield practical
technologies. The PI will continue mentoring at the undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral levels with special attention to members of groups currently
underrepresented in the physical sciences, including service as physics faculty
advisor to a new UC Berkeley program. An accessible book on topological phases
of matter, including the quantum Hall effect, spin liquids, and topological
insulators, will be co-authored with an international collaborator. Occasional
lectures to the lay public and K-12 classes will help spread enthusiasm for
physics and materials science. The PI will continue to organize conferences and
a focused seminar at Berkeley in order to propagate research developments, and
will also seek to contribute to the condensed matter community through other
forms of service.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on new
kinds of order that emerge has a consequence of interactions in quantum systems.
Strongly interacting quantum systems can exhibit new kinds of order and show
many different kinds of temporal evolution. The research has three thrusts on
understanding:

1. how the same geometric properties that underlie topological phases in gapped
systems have observable consequences in gapless systems (metals) ranging from
free-electron band metals to strongly correlated states arising in high magnetic
fields.

2. quantum dynamics in one dimension in both translation-invariant systems and
disordered systems through a combination of numerical matrix-product-state
methods and analytic theory. The two main goals are to understand anomalous
transport in strongly correlated, translation-invariant, non-integrable models
and to develop connections between many-body localization, entanglement, and
quantum chaos.

3. how fractional particles such as Majorana fermions modify non-equilibrium
dynamics in topological phases.

Research on these projects involves a combination of advanced analytical and
numerical methods and will impact many areas of condensed matter physics,
including experiments.

This award also supports broader impacts with a common goal. This project will
contribute to the training of graduate students in important fields of condensed
matter physics, some of which have the potential to yield practical
technologies. The PI will continue mentoring at the undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral levels with special attention to members of groups currently
underrepresented in the physical sciences, including service as physics faculty
advisor to a new UC Berkeley program. An accessible book on topological phases
of matter, including the quantum Hall effect, spin liquids, and topological
insulators, will be co-authored with an international collaborator. Occasional
lectures to the lay public and K-12 classes will help spread enthusiasm for
physics and materials science. The PI will continue to organize conferences and
a focused seminar at Berkeley in order to propagate research developments, and
will also seek to contribute to the condensed matter community through other
forms of service.