* 1507535
* Development and Maintenance of Asteroid Lightcurve Databases
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Brian Warner, MoreData!, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2018
* USD 193,536.00

Our Solar System has an extensive population of asteroids, and two of their more
fundamental properties are their rotation periods and sizes. From analysis of
just these two traits in relation to one another scientists can learn about the
evolution of the asteroids as a group, as well as use them as test beds for
theories of the formation of the Solar System. In order to determine the
rotation periods and sizes of asteroids, scientists measure the changes in light
from an asteroid over time, known as making lightcurve observations. This
proposal supports the continued maintenance of a database of these lightcurve
observations. The database is freely available to scientists to use to address
questions about the characteristics of the asteroids and determine what that
implies about the formation and evolution of the Solar System.

Broader impact activities actively engage backyard astronomers and
school/college students, allowing them to make a direct contribution to science
while learning the basics of scientific investigation and analysis and building
their skills in math and physics. This is accomplished in part by the PI's
maintaining observation planning tools and web sites and editing/reviewing
papers for the Minor Planet Bulletin that are resources for those communities.

Lightcurve observations are important and productive research projects for those
with modest aperture (D < 0.5-m) telescopes and high-end commercial CCD cameras.
From these observations, it is possible to determine the rotation rate of an
asteroid, and with several years of data, it can be possible to model an
asteroid's shape and spin axis orientation. This proposal will allow the
continuing maintenance of the asteroid lightcurve database (LCDB). The LCDB has
become a widely-used and heavily relied-upon tool for those involved in asteroid
research. The data from the LCDB will be used for a wide range of research
programs such as determining rotation rates among objects of specific size,
orbital group, or taxonomic class; the evolution of asteroid rates due to non-
gravitational, e.g., thermal, forces; and the population of binary asteroids
among different groups. In addition, the PI will provide a central database of
raw time-series photometry using the Asteroid Lightcurve Data Exchange Format
(ALCDEF) and a web site to be hosted by the Minor Planet Center as part of a
larger database of asteroid physical parameters. The ALCDEF database will allow
researchers to develop shape and spin axis models. These results can lead to
detailed studies regarding the distribution of spin axis poles that can be
applied to broader groups of objects and, from there, to theories regarding the
evolution of the Solar System.