* 1507489
* FIB Based Tomography of Dislocation Structures using Channeling Imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Martin Crimp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2018
* USD 320,144.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Many properties of crystalline materials, such as metals,
ceramic, and electronic materials, are controlled by crystal defects.
Dislocations are crystal defects containing long lines of disrupted atomic
arrangements of their various crystal structures. The motion of these
dislocations is responsible for controlling the strength, ductility, and
fracture behavior of structural metals and alloys, while in functional materials
dislocations are often responsible for breakdown in optical and electron
properties, often leading to reduction in lifetimes. This research program is
developing a new approach to mapping dislocations. The research uses electron
channeling contrast imaging (ECCI) in scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to
image near surface dislocations. This imaging is combined with focused ion beam
(FIB) milling to cut a series of nano-scale sections through volumes of
interest. The images of each section are combined into 3-dimensional maps of the
dislocations through volumes on the scale of tens of cubic micrometers. Mapping
of the dislocations associated with nano-indentations is facilitating a better
understanding of the crystal-to-crystal dislocation motion necessary for
deformation of arrays of crystals and responsible for fracture initiation at
crystal boundaries. Combining this enhanced understanding with computer
simulations of dislocation motion is enabling enhanced prediction of material
fracture behavior and lifetimes. The research program supports the broad
professional training of a postdoctoral research associate, carried out under a
formal mentoring plan, in complement with undergraduate research. The
postdoctoral and undergraduate research support is leveraged to expose K-12
students and educators to science and engineering through the SEM Education
Program (MSU-SEMED) program at MSU, which allows K-12 students and their
teachers to be introduced to materials science though a hands-on experience with
electron microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This
research project is developing a novel approach for tomographic mapping of the
nano- to micro-scale distribution of dislocations in small volumes. The
technique combines focused ion beam (FIB) milling with electron channeling
contrast imaging (ECCI), a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique that
allows dislocations to be imaged in the near surface region of bulk materials,
to collect serial sections of dislocation images through a volume of interest,
which are then reconstructed into a 3-D map of the dislocation structure.
Mapping at this scale addresses a gap in our current technology, with smaller
volumes being assessable with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with
similar dislocation densities and x-ray tomography assessing much larger volumes
with much lower dislocation densities. The development is focused on three
technical tasks: 1) establishment of the FIB sectioning parameters necessary to
achieve an optimal combination of high quality FIB polished surfaces with a high
FIB sectioning throughput, 2) collection of serial ECCI images through deformed
volumes under optimized electron channeling conditions, and 3) development of
image recognition techniques for identifying the dislocations in the ECC images
and subsequent reconstruction of the 3-dimensional dislocation maps. The
technique is being used to map the dislocation structures in plastic fields
developed under nano-indentations in non-cubic metals in order to facilitate a
robust assessment of crystal plasticity finite element (CPFE) models of small-
scale plastic deformation. Indentations near grain boundaries are being studied
to understand the nature of plastic deformation transfer across the boundaries
in order to elucidate the mechanisms associated with grain boundary failure and
damage nucleation in polycrystals.