* 1507561
* Toward Mesoscale Order in Multicomponent Organic Thin Films via Hydrogen Bond Directed Supramolecular Topology
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ronald Castellano, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 598,649.00

With this award the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
supports Professor Ronald Castellano and his collaborators at the University of
Florida to study semiconducting carbon-based (organic) materials. For many
downstream applications - displays, lighting, solar cells, transistors, and
sensors - the three-dimensional (3-D) arrangement of organic molecules in
processed thin (10-1,000 nanometer) films dictates device performance. This
study is developing a general self-assembly approach to allow functional organic
molecules to form useful superstructures in a self-guided way. In the broadest
sense, the work contributes to a general understanding of how to control the 3-D
structure of single and multi-component organic matter at the nano-/mesoscale.
Broader impacts with respect to education and training come from (1) graduate
and undergraduate students being exposed to multidisciplinary science that
includes synthetic and physical organic chemistry, spectroscopy, computation,
materials processing/characterization, and device fabrication; (2) the student
participants, together with the UF Chemistry Club, disseminating standards-
aligned experimental modules to K-8 classrooms that embed concepts of the
chemical/materials sciences and their own research; and (3) broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is known how to tailor the electronic and optical
properties of individual pi-conjugated molecules as well as to program the
arrangements of the molecules in solution, a major bottleneck for their usage is
predicting and controlling three-dimensional morphological structure in thin
films. This research examines a hierarchical self-assembly approach based on
hydrogen bonding to create nanoscale to mesoscale order in thin films of pi-
conjugated oligomers irrespective of pi-chromophore structure. The design
involves covalently linking typical pi-conjugated components to molecular
recognition units capable of directing their supramolecular assembly into
predictably shaped aggregates. The resulting topologies are expected to uniquely
support the natural segregation of appropriately shaped additives in thin film
blends, and allow desirable optoelectronic properties to be achieved. The
proposed bottom-up self-assembly approach effectively decouples the
morphological structure of organic semiconductor thin films from the intrinsic
optoelectronic structure of the constituent pi-conjugated chromophores, allowing
these aspects to be independently optimized through rational/theory-guided
material design. The specific aims of this collaborative project include modular
design and synthesis of pi-conjugated oligomers, evaluation of optoelectronic
structure and (supra)molecular ordering in solution and in thin films, and
characterization of the optoelectronic properties of and bulk ordering within
the thin films using diagnostic devices.