* 1507170
* Charge Effects on Optoelectronic Properties of Nanorod Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Moonsub Shim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Reducing the sizes of semiconductor crystals to
nanometer length scales can lead to useful optical and electrical properties
that do not exist in large crystals. These tiny semiconductor nanocrystals are
finding innovative applications in displays, lighting, and biomedical imaging.
Important to developing such applications is the understanding of how electrical
charges affect optical and electrical characteristics as well as the ability to
control charging effects in nanocrystals. This project elucidates the effects of
electrical charges in an emerging class of solution-processed semiconductor
nanocrystals with shape, optical and compositional anisotropy, which offers
novel means of manipulating electrical charges. The students participating in
this project tackle multi-faceted challenges with ample educational and training
opportunities necessary for becoming leaders in interdisciplinary science and
engineering fields. The PI is committed to utilizing the research results
generated in this research project to enhance teaching and promoting benefits of
nanoscience to the general public.

Technical Description: Recently achieved multi-composition semiconductor
nanocrystals with complex yet well-defined epitaxial interfaces, especially
those with rod shapes (or nanorods), represent an emerging class of colloidal
semiconductor materials. Active heterojunctions and structural/optical
anisotropy designed into these nanorods provide novel means of controlling
separation, injection, extraction and recombination of charge carriers. However,
surrounding induced charges, whether intentional or not, can lead to an entirely
different behavior than one often assumed based on an intrinsic or charge
neutral material. This project examines systematically how work functions of
contacting charge transport layers and electrodes affect charging behavior and
how pre-existing charges in these multi-heterojunction nanorods influence
carrier injection, photoluminescence and electroluminescence. The project also
investigates how structural/optical anisotropy and active heterojunctions can be
utilized to control charging behavior. The knowledge gained through this project
helps to identify critical parameters and means for achieving enhanced materials
properties and device performance.