* 1507208
* RUI: Norfolk State University's Research Participation in GlueX and CLAS12 at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Carlos Salgado, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2018
* USD 135,791.00

The neutrons and protons that make up the nucleus of every atom are themselves
made up of constituent particles called quarks and gluons, and held together by
what we call the strong nuclear force. This award supports research to the study
of the strong interactions between those elementary constituents of matter. More
specifically, it is aimed at understanding the properties of the theory of the
strong force, named Quantum Chromodynamics or QCD, at energies where nucleons
are formed and it is most relevant,. To this end, the PI and the students
supported by this award will perform experiments at The Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab,) in Newport News, VA. NSU faculty
and undergraduate students will participate in the construction of hardware and
in the analysis of data from experiments in the forefront of intermediate energy
nuclear physics. Norfolk State University is one of the leading Historically
Black Colleges and Universities. NSU graduates more African-American physics
majors than all of the other Virginia universities combined. It is a goal of
this project to strengthen the national participation of undergraduate
minorities in nuclear and particle physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
recent years, numerical solutions of QCD (Lattice-QCD) have provided with a mass
spectrum of light-mass mesons. Therefore, it is time for improving our
experimental determination of the poorly known light-mass meson spectrum to
compare with predictions. Since the interaction carrier of the strong
interaction, the gluon, is sensitive to the strong interaction, it is also
possible that gluons can be externally observable in the meson spectrum as
exotic mesons (particles made of a quark, an antiquark and a gluon). One main
question in meson spectroscopy is: Can we find hints of the gluon in the meson
spectrum? The PI is analyzing data from meson spectroscopy experiments performed
with the CEBAF Large Acceptance Spectrometer (CLAS) in Jefferson Lab's Hall B to
search for those hints. He is also involved in two new experiments named GlueX
and CLAS12, at the Jefferson Lab 12 GeV upgrade. Partial Wave Analysis (PWA) is
the technique used for that analysis. The first PWA results have been published
and more PWA results are progressing in several channels. The main work is in
developing and upgrading new techniques of amplitude and partial wave analysis.