* 1507249
* Exploring Ternary-Blend Polymer Solar Cells: From Fundamental Understanding to High Efficiency
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 185,827.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The active component of a typical
polymer solar cell employs only two organic semiconductors (this is called a
"binary" system and contains a polymer and a fullerene molecule). However,
"ternary" systems (where two different polymers are blended with fullerene
molecules) are receiving increasing attention because they can maximize the
light absorption while maintaining an easy fabrication process. Though
efficiencies over 8% have been demonstrated, further fundamental working
principles are needed in order to dramatically improve the energy conversion
efficiency. The objective of this research is to conduct a fundamental study of
selected ternary blend polymer solar cells and to discover design rationales
based on new knowledge of the operating mechanisms of such solar cells, with the
intent to further improve their efficiency. The elucidated fundamental working
mechanism of selected ternary blend cells will have an impact on many fields
within organic electronics, including solar cells and transistors. Further
improving the efficiency of polymer solar cells will facilitate the
commercialization of such technologies, serving the national interest by
offering renewable energy at a low cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education,
collaboration, and outreach are key aspects of the proposed work. The
multidisciplinary, inter-institutional and internationally collaborative nature
of this project offers a special opportunity to foster educational and research
experiences at the graduate and undergraduate levels. Underrepresented groups in
science and engineering will be actively recruited into the Principle
Investigator's research group. A number of outreach programs will help the
general public to understand the importance of renewable energy and the latest
research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities in this project will
combine design and synthesis of conjugated polymers and related device
fabrication/characterization with complementary sophisticated device physics and
with comprehensive morphology characterization through appropriate
collaborations. The focus of this integrated research is the investigation of
the working mechanism for "parallel-like" bulk heterojunction (PBHJ) type
ternary organic solar cells, via this combination of molecular design, device
physics, and morphology characterization. Goals at the conclusion of this
project include the full exploration and verification of two different models to
explain the PBHJ, i.e. "parallel-like" vs. "alloy", as well as useful and
practical design rationales. The elucidated fundamental working mechanism of
selected ternary blend BHJ cells should have a direct impact on the ongoing
pursuit of novel ternary systems, aiming to dramatically improve the efficiency
of polymer solar cells. This could have significant commercial impact on the
business sector of polymer solar cells. Additionally, discovered structure-
property correlations of these conjugated polymers will provide valuable broader
insights to other sub-fields within organic electronics, for example, organic
field-effect transistors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education, collaboration, and
outreach are key aspects of the proposed work. The multidisciplinary, inter-
institutional and internationally collaborative nature of this project offers a
special opportunity to foster educational and research experiences at the
graduate and undergraduate levels. Underrepresented groups in science and
engineering will be actively recruited into the PI's research group. A number of
outreach programs will help the general public to understand the importance of
renewable energy and the latest research efforts.