* 1507840
* Supramolecular Chemistry of Amyloidogenic Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* James Nowick, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2019
* USD 465,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor James Nowick of the University of California-
Irvine to utilize chemical synthesis to create model systems that assemble in
the same fashion as the more complex biomolecules, and thereby serve as model
systems for the aggregation of proteins. Molecular assemblies known as amyloid
assemblies formed by peptides and proteins have been implicated in a variety of
diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal dementias, Parkinson's
disease, and type 2 diabetes. This project seeks to learn more about the
structures of these amyloid oligomers. The chemical model systems being
generated have the advantage that they can form crystals, allowing the
structures of the oligomers to be determined with exquisite precision by X-ray
crystallography. By determining the structures of these chemical model systems,
the researchers will gain insights into the molecular assemblies formed by
associated peptides and proteins. This project will achieve broader impact
through the knowledge gained in the research, the training of students at the
graduate and undergraduate level, K-12 educational outreach, and contributions
to STEM education. Graduate students and undergraduates who assist in the
project will receive training value cross-disciplinary training. A large number
K-12 students are being targeted through the UCI Chemistry Outreach Program. The
PI will continue to contribute to STEM education on the US and global level
through UCI's OpenChem Initiative, by teaching and creating video content for
the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nowick research group has developed a new
strategy to elucidate the structures of oligomers formed by amyloidogenic
peptides: incorporating the peptides into macrocycles and using a single
N-methyl group to prevent uncontrolled aggregation to fibrils. The resulting
macrocyclic beta-sheet peptides assemble to form well-defined oligomers, and a
sizeable fraction of the peptides form crystals suitable for X-ray
crystallography. This approach will be used to elucidate the structures of
oligomers from amyloidogenic peptides derived from the protein tau, the protein
alpha-synuclein, and the islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP, amylin). The
structures of the oligomers that form will be determined at atomic resolution by
X-ray crystallography, and the crystallographic structures of the oligomers will
be correlated with the oligomerization state in solution by size-exclusion
chromatography and other techniques such as NMR spectroscopy. The relationship
between the biological properties of these oligomers and those of natural
amyloidogenic peptides and proteins will be assessed by dot-blot assays. These
studies aim to provide a better understanding of the relationship between
oligomer sequence and three dimensional structure, and the implications of these
upon stability and biological properties.