* 1507854
* Breaking Boundaries for Evolutionary Synthesis: An Interactive and Integrative Symposium Linking Crustacean and Insect Physiology- West Palm Beach, Florida; January, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Sherry Tamone, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2015
* USD 9,900.00

Insects and crustaceans represent critical, dominant animal groups (by biomass
and species number) in terrestrial and aquatic systems, respectively. Insects
and crustaceans were historically grouped under separate taxonomic classes under
the Phylum Arthropoda, and for many years it was thought that myriapods might be
the closest relatives to insects. New genetic data have made it clear that
insects and other hexapods are nested within the crustaceans within the
arthropod tree as a clade termed the Pancrustacea. This new evolutionary
understanding provides the intellectual motivation to initiate a new focus in
evolutionary physiology aimed at understanding commonalities and evolutionary
trends in the Pancrustacea. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award will support a new
type of symposium designed to promote synthetic collaborations across taxa and
disciplines at the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology meeting at
West Palm Beach, Florida, January 2015. In this symposium, researchers who work
primarily on insects or crustaceans will work together on both their talks and
manuscripts. In addition, each researcher will address a common set of focal,
integrative questions in their talks and manuscripts. Audience participation
will be a focus of the symposium and a post-seminar workshop. Some participants,
including the trainees, may even contribute to the manuscripts as a result of
their participation. This explicitly integrative approach to a symposium is
novel at SICB and will hopefully galvanize further innovations that promote
interdisciplinary synthesis. In addition, this award will support mentoring and
scientific development of a large number of diverse junior investigators and
trainees.