* 1507054
* Order-by-frustration: emergent condensed states of frustrated magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Oleg Starykh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2019
* USD 306,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on new states of magnetic insulators, in which there is a
competition between different kinds of interactions between localized spins, the
microscopic magnetic components that contain electrons orbiting around atomic
nuclei. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interactions between spins can drive them into
magnetically ordered states, such as ferromagnetism, in which the spins of the
electrons are aligned along the same common axis, or anti-ferromagnetism, in
which neighboring spins point in opposite directions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this research is on a wide class of materials in which magnetic order
appears to be altogether absent as a consequence of competing interactions
between spins. However, closer examination reveals a kind of "hidden" order, in
which not the individual spins but rather small groups of them are correlated
over large distances far exceeding the typical size of a small group of spins.
These types of order are known as multi-polar, and this project is devoted to
classifying and understanding their static and dynamic properties, as well as
understanding the conditions necessary for their realization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances fundamental understanding of
quantum mechanics and magnetism, particularly in materials with different
competing magnetic interactions. It may contribute to the discovery of new
states of electronic matter within a wide range materials that may have
technological application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
graduate students in theoretical solid state physics. Students involved in the
research will be trained in modern theoretical techniques. In addition, the PI
is planning to organize a department-wide Physics Olympiad for undergraduate
students. The Olympiad will consist of a set of short but non-trivial problems
which requires good understanding of general physics to solve. Its purpose is to
promote student interest in physics, to identify particularly talented students
and to provide them with early contacts with professional
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical investigation and
education focused on frustrated magnetic materials with unusual multi-particle
condensates as well as on systems with "hidden" frustration which emerges due to
strong and mutually competing spin-orbital
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research brings together several
outstanding topics of condensed matter physics - the multiplicity of competing
orders in correlated systems, quantum phase transitions among them, and
identification of the mechanism behind the appearance of "hidden"
orders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the well-understood case of the usual,
single particle, Bose condensates, the two (or more)- particle condensates are
characterized by short-ranged spin correlations and unusual nematic-type order
parameters. The case in point is represented by a frustrated ferromagnet, the
phase diagram of which is controlled by a quantum critical point of Lifshitz
type with dynamical critical exponent z=4. The PI proposes to construct a field
theory description of this critical point, and to investigate the conditions
needed for the emergence of multi-polar spin-nematic phases. In the course of
this study the PI intends to explore analogies between boson systems with two-
magnon condensates and fermion superconductors or charge density
waves.&lt;br/&gt;Metallic frustrated magnets, in which itinerant electrons are
exchange-coupled to localized spins, constitute another major research direction
which the PI intends to pursue. These materials allow for the interesting
possibility of probing magnetic phases and transitions via electron transport
measurements. The PI plans to theoretically analyze the resistivity of a magnet
undergoing a magnon Bose-Einstein condensation transition, and also to extend
this analysis to novel experimental systems with topologically non-trivial band
structures.&lt;br/&gt;The theory developed here will be applied to real magnetic
materials. By combining a field theory approach with a semi-classical spin wave
expansion, the PI plans to describe the physics of the recently discovered one-
third magnetization plateau in the kagome material volborthite, and to analyze
its possible instabilities. The PI will also study novel spin-chain insulators
with competing spin-orbit interactions, which, by forcing opposite helical
correlations in the neighboring chains, effectively promote an Ising-like
longitudinal spin-density wave state that is an insulating analogue of a charge-
density wave order in itinerant electron systems.&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support graduate students in theoretical solid state physics. Students involved
in the research will be trained in modern theoretical techniques such as
bosonization, renormalization group, quantum field and diagrammatic many-body
theories. In addition, the PI is planning to organize a department-wide Physics
Olympiad for undergraduate students. The Olympiad will consist of a set of short
but non-trivial problems which requires good understanding of general physics to
solve. Its purpose is to promote student interest in physics, to identify
particularly talented students and provide them with early contacts with
professional researchers.