* 1507846
* Design Guidelines for High Strength Multicomponent Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2022
* Diana Farkas, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 307,490.00

A new class of alloys called "High Entropy Alloys" is emerging as candidate
materials for high strength applications. These alloys have very complex
chemistries and are composed of a large number of elements. The processes by
which they deform are also complex. This award supports research to understand
deformation and fracture behavior of these alloys. The researchers seek to
understand how the complex composition of these materials can be used to
advantage the search of high strength and ductile alloys. By varying different
compositional and processing parameters, it is expected that useful criteria may
be found to optimize the combination of strength and ductility. The research
will be incorporated in curriculum development for the education of future
generations of researchers that are trained to use these computational tools in
combination with experiments. The project contributes to the education of high
school and undergraduate students through web educational modules used in
undergraduate and graduate courses, summer camps, and internships. These
instructional materials are geared particularly for female students to encourage
their participation in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort is
based on the hypothesis that by varying atomic interaction parameters, useful
criteria can be found to optimize the combination of strength and ductility.
Because of limitations in the number of atoms that can be studied using first
principle calculations, the researchers will utilize simple model interaction
potentials for various degrees of variation in atomic sizes, cohesive energies,
and chemical interaction. They will obtain trends in strength and fracture
toughness as a function of these varying degrees of complexity. These trends
will be compared with available experimental studies of the mechanical behavior
of various high entropy alloys that indicate increased ductility while
maintaining high strength. The methodology developed here for model interactions
provides a basis for future computational modeling. Most importantly, the
insight provided by this work enable more efficient design of single-phase high
entropy alloys for a variety of applications.