* 1507131
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Understanding Composition-Structure-Chemical Durability Relationships in Multicomponent Oxide Glasses: Influence of Mixed Network Former Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Ashutosh Goel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 464,324.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Advanced technical glasses are key in many areas of
our lives, and although glass is rightly perceived as a robust material, it is
nevertheless subject to corrosion due to interaction with water and the
environment thereby limiting the functionality of this highly versatile
material. A deeper understanding of glass corrosion is thus highly relevant to
industry in the development of technical glasses, in enabling applications such
as nuclear waste management, and in developing novel biomaterials. This project
aims at understanding the fundamental science governing corrosion of
multicomponent silicate glasses with mixed glass formers in aqueous solutions,
achieved through an integrated combination of experimental studies and computer
simulation approaches. Successful completion of this project is expected to lay
the foundation of new fundamental knowledge for the understanding of
composition-structure-property relationships in glass corrosion, with tangible
implications on the glass and packaging industries. By training undergraduate
and graduate students in glass science and engineering, the lacuna of talent in
the pipeline for the US glass/materials science industry is being reduced.
Students in this project are receiving part of their training at Corning,
Incorporated, a company specializing in technical glass materials, or in a
European research environment. The education activities build interest in
students at the middle and high school level, in addition to the training of
undergraduate and graduate science and engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: While glass corrosion has been
studied for a long time, it is riddled with complexity that makes a holistic
understanding deceptively difficult. The current understanding in this field is
based primarily on empirical data, and there is still no complete consensus on
the basic mechanism of glass dissolution that applies to a wide composition
space. Therefore, there is exigent need to develop solid fundamental
understanding of the connection between chemical composition, atomic/molecular
structure and chemical durability of glasses in order to address crucial and
scientifically challenging problems. Accordingly, the project aims at combining
the strengths of experimental studies and atomistic computer simulations to
understand the connection between composition, molecular structure, and
dissolution behavior of SiO2-rich multicomponent oxide glasses comprising
multiple network forming oxides (B2O3, Al2O3, P2O5). The general focus on
silicate systems helps to connect with real-world multicomponent glasses, and
provides a suitable platform for (some) known structural trends to connect with
durability properties. The project is expected to unearth the fundamental
science governing the corrosion of glasses and deliver experimental data along
with structural descriptors and energy functions that can be used to develop
theoretical models predicting the chemical durability of glasses.