* 1507278
* New Paradigms in Light-Based Measurements Using Unconventional Polarization States
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Ellis, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 489,988.00

Polarized light (light with directional vibrations whose effects can sometimes
be seen in changes in attenuation while rotating polarizing sunglasses) is
everywhere--it is in the blue sky, the reflection from a pond, in light
scattering from natural and manmade airborne particles, and in the display
screens on our smartphones. The understanding and use of polarized light is
central to both the science of light and to applications ranging from medicine
to consumer electronics. For example, some of the triumphs of the computer
information revolution have been built around manufacturing technologies that
require almost unimaginable precision in measurements--many of which are light-
based and use the polarization of light in ways that can be precisely controlled
and measured. The proposed research uses the concept of an "unconventional
polarization state" - a special form of light in which the polarization varies
across the width of a laser beam - to explore fundamentally new ways of carrying
out light-based measurements. In conjunction with some special optical devices,
it is possible to use an ordinary camera to create a visual map of the
polarization in a single image, something that ordinarily requires a sequence of
four or more images and accompanying algorithms. These measurement methods will
also spur new ways of thinking about how to execute the simultaneous measurement
of sub-nanometer process errors in microelectronics
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multiple measurements required to
characterize the polarization of an ultrafast laser pulse or individual photon
require either a time-sequential operation or explicit division of the amplitude
into different detector ports. While each of these has been used to good
success, there is a need to truly extend polarization measurements in a way that
the maximum amount of polarization information is extracted from each measured
photon (in the case of low light levels) or each pulse (in the case of ultrafast
pulse characterization). Because the method is extendable to the mapping of
polarization over a sampled image field, it is possible to extend the concept to
capture either angle- or frequency-resolved polarization information in a single
image. The investigation also applies the new physics of unconventional
polarization states to the now-famous physics of weak measurements by using
unconventionally polarized light to measure two or more physical quantities in a
single measurement. This concept will be tested by measuring nanoscale features
in a microscope equipped with a liquid crystal controller that defines a field
with arbitrary polarization, amplitude, and phase for focused beam
scatterometry. The work is expected to impact allied areas of physics (through
the introduction of new measurement methods), optical engineering (specifically,
polarization engineering and image formation), biomedical optics (in medical
imaging and spectroscopy), environmental science (through the use of
polarimetric light scattering for aerosol characterization), and semiconductor
inspection.