* 1507370
* Atomic Scale Design of Nanostructures Using In Situ Characterization-Based Kinetic Models
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Chang Lu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Atomic Scale Design of Nanostructures Using In Situ Characterization-Based
Kinetic Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials have properties that depend on
their size, shape, and composition, and have the potential to create
technological advances in applications with significant societal impacts in
renewable energy, communication and medicine. However, designing nanoparticles
with specific, desired sizes and shapes remains a grand challenge and a trial-
and-error approach is still often employed to make nanoparticles with the
appropriate size and morphology. To reduce the number of demanding and costly
laboratory trials, a fundamental understanding of the synthesis mechanisms,
coupled with predictive models, is required but currently is lacking. In this
project, Dr. Karim and Dr. Lu are developing predictive kinetic models based on
detailed chemical information obtained from "watching" metal nanoparticles grow
using microreactors and advanced characterization techniques. The work provides
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to learn advanced
characterization tools and to participate in cutting edge nanoscience research
leading to major technological advances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program funds Dr. Karim's and
Dr. Lu's research at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University where
they are developing a microfluidic nanoparticle nucleation and growth reactor
with in situ nanoparticle characterization capabilities. The unique combination
of techniques integrates thermodynamics, kinetics and advanced in-situ
characterization tools to develop a methodology for enabling the a priori design
of metal colloidal nanoparticles with specific sizes and shapes. Drs. Karim and
Lu use their microfluidics methodology to follow the nanoparticles synthesis
with millisecond time resolution using in-situ X-ray spectroscopy and dynamic
light scattering to determine the synthesis mechanisms and rates. The molecular
structures and interactions between the metal, ligands and solvent are measured
by a combination of techniques and are used along with the nucleation and growth
kinetics to develop thermodynamically consistent kinetic models capable of
predicting the evolution of precursors into nanoparticles during the nucleation
and growth. The work focuses on colloidal palladium nanoparticles and the
formulation of models used to predict the experimental conditions for specific
nanoparticle sizes, size distributions and morphologies.