* 1507377
* Metric-induced buckling and buckling-induced metrics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Christian Santangelo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 285,231.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education at the interface between physics, materials science and engineering.
Though 3D printing has become inexpensive enough for prototyping, it has
numerous drawbacks as a manufacturing technique, including speed and
configurability. Yet, there are a number of materials that can be made to
controllably grow from a flat sheet to a targeted three-dimensional structure.
The PI's group will develop understanding and design tools to optimally pattern
a thin sheet to fold and buckle into a targeted shape and study how an elastic
sheet wrinkles to accommodate curvature. Together, these projects unveil the
relationship between elasticity and geometry, and enable the development of
tools to improve manufacturing of structured materials.&lt;br/&gt;The work will
have an impact on the design of structured materials by introducing new
analytical techniques for the prediction of three-dimensional structures,
enabling applications in advanced manufacturing and soft robotics. The award
contributes to the education of graduate and undergraduate students in a
multidisciplinary field and through substantial interactions with experimental
research groups. It also supports the PI's efforts at outreach to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
studies of three-dimensional structure formation in two-dimensional elastic
sheets. Recent progress in the fabrication of polymeric structures have allowed
the development of active materials that can, through spatially non-uniform
growth, buckle into targeted three-dimensional structures. &lt;br/&gt;This
research project has two goals. First, it will extend the mathematical
foundation laid down to understand the buckling of thin films due to non-uniform
growth to allow the design of optimal pattern of growth. Second, it will explore
the related problem of how a sheet can conform to a curved surface by wrinkling.
The results of this second project will then be used to explore what happens
when a growing sheet cannot alleviate all of its in-plane stresses by buckling
smoothly.&lt;br/&gt;The work will have an impact on the design of structured
materials by introducing new analytical techniques for the prediction of three-
dimensional structures, enabling applications in advanced manufacturing and soft
robotics. The award contributes to the education of graduate and undergraduate
students in a multidisciplinary field and through substantial interactions with
experiments. It also supports the PI's efforts at outreach to the general
public.