* 1507736
* Directed Biomineralization: Designing Peptides to Control Crystal Nucleation and Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Gray, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Johns Hopkins University is in developing fundamental
materials research into the processes by which proteins control mineral
nucleation and growth. Inspired by biological organisms that have the impressive
ability to craft exquisite solid materials such as spiraled shells and internal
skeletons, the aim is to characterize and utilize biological material-building
strategies. The investigator seeks to understand crystal growth mechanisms and
their interplay with adsorbed biomolecules, such that one might eventually use
peptides to direct the growth of solid nanomaterials, for example for energy
storage applications or advanced medical or structural materials. Design of
custom materials, enabled by this basic research, will be transformative for
manufacturing, especially in nanotechnology, sensing, energy, medicine, and
anti-biofouling. The computational algorithms will be distributed broadly and
made accessible through a web gateway. The PI will train a graduate student in
cross-disciplinary studies in chemical engineering, biophysics, nanotechnology
and materials science. Protein structure prediction and design teaching modules
will be expanded to include biomineralization. Outreach will include weekly team
visits to a local elementary school for an after-school STEM program, piloting
of an intern program focused on women in computing, and the involvement of a
high school student as a summer intern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This
project will tie together thermodynamic and kinetic theories of crystal
nucleation and growth with computational and experimental methods by
experimentally testing computationally designed peptides that are optimized to
guide calcium carbonate growth. Following a design cycle that alternates
computational design and prediction with experimental observation, results will
accelerate the discovery of how proteins interact with surfaces, how peptides
can guide heterogeneous nucleation, how adsorbates affect mineral growth, and
how these phenomena can be harnessed to create atomically-assembled materials
and structures. New peptides will be tested through a progressive hierarchy of
experimental measurements probing nucleation ability, binding affinities, step
velocities, and biomineral habit. At each stage, the experiments will provide
data to inform the computational model. In effect, this work will drive a
feedback loop of computational design and experiments, narrowing the field of
possible interactions to those supported by the experimentation. The combination
of experiments and computations on dozens of related peptide designs will
provide an extensive molecular-scale picture of adsorbate-controlled
mineralization. These data will provide new benchmarks for energy functions and
new insights into protein-surface interactions and modeling in general, leading
to improvements in overall understanding of nucleation, adsorption, crystal
growth, materials synthesis, and molecular engineering.