* 1507285
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Survival of Ebolavirus in the Water Environment: Surrogate Development and Disinfection Effectiveness
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Charles Haas, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 11/30/2016
* USD 40,000.00

CBET 1508415 &lt;br/&gt;Bibby &lt;br/&gt;CBET 1507285 &lt;br/&gt;Haas
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAPID: Collaborative Research: Survival of Ebola virus in
the Water Environment: Surrogate Development and Disinfection
Effectiveness&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the fate of Ebola virus
and its survival in the environment. Infection in primates has been observed
from non-direct contact, raising further the possibility of an environmental
infection route. As an initial phase of this RAPID, Ebola virus surrogates,
based upon the published data of Ebola virus survival in liquid media, will be
developed. Second, the survival of these surrogates will be evaluated in
environmental waters (including water and wastewater) and in the presence of
water and wastewater disinfectants. This work will be valuable to the broader
environmental, public health, and risk assessment communities by providing
access to realistic surrogates with which studies (e.g. aerosol and fomite
survival studies) may be conducted. The proposed RAPID mechanism is appropriate
to inform proper waste handling in a timely manner. This work will also serve to
mobilize and inform a response to proper waste handling. Given limited BSL4
access, this approach is the most reasonable response in the near term to inform
Ebola virus survival in the water environment, and subsequent risk assessment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental work on this project will be conducted at the
University of Pittsburgh. Data and statistical analysis will be conducted at
Drexel University. The proposed research will benefit society through informing
proper handling of Ebola virus contaminated waste. The proposed work will be
disseminated broadly through journal publications and conference proceedings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will fill in an existing knowledge
gap in the survival and proper handling of Ebola virus contaminated waste. This
research will also develop and verify surrogates that may be used by the broader
environmental engineering and public health research communities for Ebola virus
survival studies.