* 1507830
* Extracting Knowledge from 100 years of Microstructural Images: Using Machine Vision and Machine Learning to Address the Microstructural Big Data Challenge
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Elizabeth Holm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The Division of Materials Research; the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation Division; and the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute
funds to this award. It supports research and education to collect, analyze, and
compare data on materials from vast sources. All solid objects - from an
airplane wing to a frying pan - have a microscopic structure that is usually not
visible to the naked eye. This structure determines the properties of the
material as a whole - whether it is strong or weak, for example. For the past
century, materials scientists have studied these structures by using microscopes
to take pictures (called micographs) of them. They then measure the important
features seen in the microscopic images and relate those measurements to the
properties of the material.&lt;br/&gt;Just as in personal photography, digital
cameras have enabled materials scientists to take more pictures and do more with
them than ever before. Moreover, older micrographs have been scanned in to
digital archives. Materials scientists are now confronted with a set of images
that is too large and too diverse to analyze manually. Fortunately, computer
scientists have developed "machine vision" computer programs that identify
similarities in large sets of images by in a sense mimicking how humans see
objects. This project will gather micrographs from many sources into an open
archive and use machine vision programs to search, sort, and classify them
automatically without significant human intervention.&lt;br/&gt;By synthesizing
microscopic image data at a previously impossible scale, this project creates a
foundation for discovering new connections between microscopic structures and
materials properties. The results will help improve current materials and even
develop new ones. The data will be made available to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research; the Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation Division; and the Division of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this award. It supports research and
education to collect, analyze, and compare data on materials from vast sources.
Over the past 100 years, materials scientists have made great progress in
acquiring, analyzing, and comparing microstructural images. Much of this effort
has been directed toward deep understanding of particular materials systems or
classes of microstructures. When the catalog of possible microstructural
features is known, imaging techniques can take advantage of well-defined feature
characteristics to analyze microstructures with high precision. However, when
the features of interest are not known a priori, these methods become
intractable, inaccurate, or fail completely. Thus, typically, they are applied
only to a pre-selected set of micrographs, chosen by a human expert. In
contrast, the goal of this effort is to develop a general method to find useful
relationships between micrographs without assumptions about what features may be
present. Such an approach can leverage the explosion in digital data over the
past two decades to survey the breadth of available microstructures efficiently
and without significant human intervention.&lt;br/&gt;Capitalizing on recent
advances in computer science, this project applies a subset of data science
concepts - including data harvesting, machine vision, and machine learning - to
advance the science of microstructure. The result will be a framework for
finding connections between microstructural images within and across material
systems, which will support outcomes ranging from computational tools to
discovery science, including:&lt;br/&gt;- New open source tools for extracting
micrographs and associated metadata from various digital archives, including the
internet, PDF documents, and local storage media.&lt;br/&gt;- A comprehensive
database of publicly available micrographs with traditional text-based search
and novel image-based search functions. &lt;br/&gt;- Optimized, high throughput,
automatic machine vision techniques to identify microstructural features that
are salient to image analysis and microstructural science.&lt;br/&gt;- Automatic
and objective machine learning systems that find relationships between
microstructures in order to discover new structure-property and structure-
performance connections.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of microstructural science is to
understand the connection between microstructural features and materials
properties. By developing an open-access, automatic, and objective machine
learning system for finding relationships between microstructural images, this
project creates a foundation for discovering new connections that may inspire
deeper understanding or predictive capabilities.