* 1507806
* Spectroscopic Studies on Layered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Mildred Dresselhaus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 12/31/2018
* USD 410,000.00

This project is supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program (EPM)
and Condensed Matter Physics Program (CMP), both in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR).

Nontechnical Description: This research project aims to significantly expand the
knowledge on important topics in a nanoscience research field, including
nanocarbon materials, transition-metal dichalcogenides in the form of ultrathin
layers with thicknesses of only a few atomic layers, and the newly discovered
few-layered phosphorus material called phosphorene, which has a novel layered
crystal structure and promising electronic, optical, and spectroscopic
properties. The research results are published in major scientific journals and
presented at national and interternatinal scientific conferences by the
principal investigator and participating students and postdoctoral researchers,
thereby providing valuable educational experiences for them. In addition, the
principal investigator gives colloquia at universities and invited talks in
scientific conferences, furthering the nanoscience research field.

Technical Description: The project is on a comprehensive and comparative study
of nanocarbons, graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides, and phosphorene.
Raman spectroscopy is the main experimental method. The graphene research
studies take advantage of the large present knowledge base of the electronic
properties of graphene to study new aspects of Raman resonance windows, twist
angle phenomena, and electron-phonon interaction phenomena. These studies also
can be best carried out in graphene because of its special properties, such as
the large isotope effect provided by the carbon 12 and 13 isotopes, which is
advantageous for studying electron-phonon interactions quantitatively.
Similarly, the role of substrate effects in enhancing Raman spectroscopy signals
and symmetry-breaking phenomena produced by external perturbations have been
extensively studied in graphene, which now can be used for metrological
purposes. In this context, similar physical properties can now be studied
productively in few-layer transition metal dichalcogenides and phosphorene
individually and on a comparative basis.