* 1507067
* Actions on cube complexes and homomorphisms to families of groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Groves, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,721.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1507067, Principal Investigator: Daniel
Groves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A group is an algebraic object which encodes the
symmetries of a geometric object. This connection between geometry and algebra
implies that the study of groups provides an algebraic language and a set of
techniques for studying problems throughout geometry. In recent years, some of
the most important problems in three-dimensional geometry (such as the Virtual
Haken Conjecture on the structure of spaces that cover three-dimensional
manifolds) have been solved by a combination of group theory and geometric
properties of two-dimensional submanifolds of these spaces. Some of the names
associated to this line of work are Agol, Wise, Kahn, Markovic, Haglund, Hsu,
Bergeron, and Manning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of the first half of
this project is to broaden the range of applications of the available theory,
and to apply these new tools to many more problems in geometry and group theory.
In the second half of this project, techniques will be developed to study
problems about maps between families of groups. Again, problems from three-
dimensional geometry will give key motivation. Due to the work of Agol and many
others, the objects in this setting are now quite well understood. However,
there are many fundamental questions about the maps between these objects, and
this proposal will tackle some of these problems, as well as building a general
toolkit for studying questions such as these. In the first half of the project,
we study hyperbolic groups acting cocompactly on CAT(0) cube complexes. In the
case that the cell stabilizers are finite, Agol's famous theorem implies that
such a group is "virtually special" (an important concept introduced by Haglund
and Wise) which implies many strong properties, such as linearity and strong
residual finiteness properties for such a group. In the case of a one-
dimensional complex (a tree), if the cell stabilizers are infinite but quasi-
convex and virtually special, then Wise's Quasiconvex Hierarchy Theorem implies
that the hyperbolic group is again virtually special. The main goal of the first
half of this project is to prove a simultaneous generalization of these two
theorems: If a hyperbolic group G acts cocompactly on a CAT(0) cube complex with
quasi- convex and virtually special cell stabilizers, then G is virtually
special. This will have many applications to relatively hyperbolic and
hyperbolic groups acting on cube complexes. In the second half of this proposal,
we will develop a quite general framework for studying the set of a maps from an
arbitrary finitely generated group into natural families of groups. Examples of
such families which will be studied include: Kleinian groups, arbitrary three-
manifold groups, relatively hyperbolic and acylindrically hyperbolic groups, and
others.