* 1507946
* ABR: Functional Biomimetic Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Kent Kirshenbaum, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2019
* USD 444,960.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division is funding Professor Kent Kirshenbaum at New York
University to extend recent discoveries of synthetic polymers that mimic
biological macromolecules. The underlying hypothesis is that synthetic polymer
systems can be imbued with a "folding code" a predictable relationship between
the sequence of the units in the polymer and a unique three-dimensional
structure. The study will yield new families of functional folded molecules that
can be used to create advanced materials and will lead to innovative strategies
for drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The focus will be investigations of
peptoids, which are sequence-specific polymers composed of diverse N-substituted
glycine monomer units. Previous studies have demonstrated that certain peptoids
exhibit a propensity to adopt discrete stable conformations, resembling the
helical and turn motifs found in polypeptides. The goals for this renewal are to
move beyond rudimentary peptoid secondary structures to create synthetic peptoid
macromolecules that resemble the complex tertiary structures of proteins and
consequently allow the design of new functional capabilities. The long-term
objectives are to establish a predictable relationship between the sequence, the
structure and the function of peptoid polymers. A collaboration with York
College in New York City will provide research opportunities for students in
under-represented groups. In addition, the project will continue science
outreach programs by the "Experimental Cuisine Collective" at NYU, which
introduces concepts in macromolecular sciences through the popular context of
food and cooking. The broader impacts feature societal benefits attained through
training the next generation of polymer scientists, along with addressing unmet
needs in molecular pharmacology and synthetic biology.