* 1507238
* Spatially Patterned Nano/Microparticles to Traverse Biological Barriers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Todd Sulchek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 445,037.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research is to create and study novel multifunctional particles which
mimic bacterial processes for beneficial purposes such as drug delivery. The
biomaterial is based upon a newly created form of Janus particle, which displays
biological ligands on a particle in a spatially distinct manner, for example
with a right and left hemisphere. Since the particle ligands are clustered and
polarized, highly effective biological reactions can be harnessed by the
particle to enter cells and translocate within cells. Interactions of the
particles with a model of the blood brain barrier will be studied to understand
the efficiency of particle delivery to the brain. This project will provide
interdisciplinary training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students
on biomaterials, microtechnology, and neuroscience. The research activities will
also promote the recruitment and mentoring of diverse students in cutting-edge
scientific techniques through outreach in the Atlanta public high schools.

Technical: Particles that can actively traverse biological barriers, such as
the blood-brain barrier, would be highly beneficial for a variety of basic
science and applied purposes. Traversing biological barriers is routinely
demonstrated by some pathogens. For example, the bacterium Listeria
monocytogenes can asymmetrically express specific proteins to efficiently
internalize into cells, escape a phagosome, and actuate within the cell cytosol
via nucleated actin polymerization to escape the cell. However, designing
biomaterials that can accomplish these tasks is a challenge. This study aims to
create new, multifunctional particles which mimic pathogenic mechanisms to enter
an epithelial cell layer and actively transport within the cell to exit on the
basal side. Janus particles will be designed as a new class of multifunctional,
topographically distinct particles that can autonomously transverse an
epithelial barrier. These particles will be created with micropatterning
technologies to produce chemically-distinct regions on the particle surface to
which effector proteins are linked to mediate each step of transcytosis. The
investigators hypothesize that high density of effector ligands through
topographic separation will engineer particles with potent and coordinated
ligand-mediated processes characteristically achieved by biological organisms.
Interactions of the particles with a model of the blood brain barrier will be
studied to understand the efficiency of particle delivery to and within the
brain. The proposed program will help inspire graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse disciplines and backgrounds to study how microfabrication
technologies can harness bio-inspired effectors to create new biomimetic
materials to widely impact the biosciences. Additionally the program will
develop new curriculum for engineers and scientists to design multifunctional
particles, which will further include the recruiting of high school students and
teachers to contribute to research studies.