* 1507621
* Correlated Electron Systems with Strong Spin-orbit Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Gregory Fiete, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education to predict interesting new phases of electronic matter.
The electronic and magnetic properties of materials underpin many modern
technologies. Understanding materials that present unusual electronic states
helps to lay the knowledge foundation for new technologies, in this case new
electronic devices and possibly devices that can exploit not only the charge but
also the spin of the electron for their operation. Spin is an intrinsic quantum
mechanical property of an electron; the electron can be loosely thought of as
spinning. The PI aims to explore materials in which the electron's spin
interacts strongly with its motion while at the same time electrons interact
strongly with each other giving rise to correlations in their motion. Materials
that combine both strong electron correlations and strong spin-orbit coupling
present opportunities for the discovery of new states of matter. The PI aims to
study such materials with an eye towards predicting unusual properties and
phases that may appear. A graduate student will receive training in theoretical
condensed matter and materials physics through this project, and the PI will
engage in outreach activities to the general public and high school students,
including historically underrepresented groups in physics, notably women and
Hispanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on materials with strong electronic correlations and strong spin-orbit
coupling. The main goals of this project are to: (i) Make specific material
predictions for topological phases with correlations, (ii) Study the two-
dimensional to three-dimensional crossover in correlated thin-film systems with
strong spin-orbit coupling, and (iii) Investigate the physics of light-matter
interaction, such as when a correlated thin-film with strong spin-orbit coupling
is placed in a photonic waveguide or microcavity. The PI will focus on
transition metal oxides with heavy transition metal ions, such as those from the
4d and 5d series. Electronic correlations in some of these materials may be
intermediate between highly correlated and weakly correlated. A variety of
techniques will be used including: exact diagonalization, first principles
methods, and density functional theory combined with dynamical mean field
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student will receive training in
theoretical condensed matter and materials physics through this project, and the
PI will engage in outreach activities to the general public and high school
students, including historically underrepresented groups in physics, notably
women and Hispanics.