* 1507540
* Design of RNA-triggered Disassembly Mechanisms in Multi-responsive Polymer Nanocapsules for Personalized Physiological Profiling and Tailored Therapeutics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will develop new methods to
identify specific genetic profiles in diseased tissues and subsequently release
"personalized" drug cocktails or diagnostic molecules only within the targeted
tissues. One way to locate and treat diseased tissues is by injecting drug-
containing nanoparticles that will circulate through the body until they come
into contact with diseased cells. Nanoparticles can be designed to fall apart
inside of cells and release encapsulated drugs; however, to protect healthy
cells from receiving the drug, it is necessary to design nanoparticles that only
fall apart in diseased cells. This research will design and produce polymer
nanoparticles linked together by DNA "duplexes" whose sequences are partially
complementary. The duplexes will be designed to unbind only in the presence of a
fully complementary strand of DNA or RNA, leading to the disassembly of the
nanoparticles and the release of any encapsulated compounds. The PIs will
produce DNA-linked nanoparticles designed to disassemble in the presence of
breast cancer-specific RNA molecules, and will test whether these nanoparticles
will selectively release model drugs (dyes) only within cancer cells.
Educational efforts, internships and workshops are aimed at increasing
participation and enrollment of underrepresented students in research activities
at the University of
Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the National Academy of Engineering's Grand Challenge to engineer
better medicines by developing new approaches that will ultimately allow rapid
assessment of the genetic profiles in patients and the release of personalized
drug cocktails. The PIs approach is to incorporate DNA "strand displacement"
biosensing designs within polymer nanocarriers such that the DNA interface
controls nanocarrier stability. Recognition of specific RNA or DNA sequences
will result in a strand displacement reaction that destabilizes the nanocarrier
and allows the release of encapsulated drugs or diagnostics. The major
milestones in this work include the design of DNA strand displacement designs
sensitive to breast cancer-specific RNAs; incorporation of these DNA duplexes
within block polymer micelles; establishment of the specificity and efficacy of
RNA-mediated nanocarrier disassembly; addition of cancer cell-targeting peptides
on the surface of the nanocarriers; and establishment of selective cellular
uptake and efficient cargo (dye) release in breast cancer cells. Educational
activities will include high school internships, graduate recruitment workshops,
and mentoring efforts targeted at underrepresented groups, facilitated through
the PIs involvement in programs including ACS SEED, SWE, Women in Engineering,
and the ACS Scholars Program.