* 1507230
* Heterogeneous Catalysts Tailored for Parahydrogen Induced Nuclear Spin Polarization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Clifford Bowers, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Bowers and Hagelin-Weaver and their groups at the
University of Florida will combine state-of-the-art catalyst synthesis,
characterization, and reaction studies to identify and mitigate the processes
that reduce pairwise hydrogenation during Parahydrogen Induced Polarization
(PHIP). PHIP is a robust and inexpensive method used for sensitivity enhanced
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and magnetic resonance imaging. In
addition to potential biomedical utilization, PHIP is a powerful method for the
study of hydrogenation catalysis and new insights gained during this proposed
research may well have a major impact on the field of catalytic reactions,
beyond hydrogenation. Students will receive interdisciplinary training in
catalysis, reactor design, materials characterization, and surface chemistry.
The PIs also propose to reach out to teachers from rural and urban schools
serving 50% or more students from socio-economically underserved homes by
coordinating with UF's CPET programs for teacher recruitment. The proposed
outreach efforts will provide an innovative and productive linkage between
cutting-edge research and secondary school STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to identify
correlations between catalyst properties, activity and pairwise selectivity. The
proposed research plan will be the first to combine state-of-the art
nanoparticle fabrication strategies with precision atomic layer deposition
(ALD). Interpretation of PHIP data will be guided by spin density matrix theory.
Development of unique PHIP NMR instrumentation is another key element of the
project. Pairwise selectivities obtained with oxides and oxide supported metal
particles are currently limited to a few percent. Attaining substantially higher
pairwise selectivity using engineered oxide-supported metal nanoparticle
catalysts would be a transformative outcome of the project. This low pairwise
selectivity problem will be addressed through fundamental kinetic and
mechanistic studies. The proposed studies also aim to broaden the variety of
targets that can be hyperpolarized by this class of catalyst.