* 1507607
* Imaging Local Stress Anisotropy and Determining Its Role in Driving Defect Mobility in Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2019
* Itai Cohen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 10/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Non Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The ease with which materials like metals
bend, stretch and deform depends on the defects inside the crystals. Learning
how such defects interact with one another is difficult since there aren't any
experimental tools for imaging the three dimensional interactions of these
defects with one another at the atomic scale. This project entails looking at
tiny particles called colloids that are suspended in a fluid and ordered into
crystals. Crystals made from these particles exhibit many of the same defects
and defect interactions found in their atomic counterparts, but the particles
are big enough and slow enough to examine using microscopes. This project will
use a new computational technique developed by the principle investigator and
the co-principle investigator to determine the forces that crystal defects exert
on one another through these particles. In addition, the forces these defect
interactions produce on a large scale will be measured using equipment developed
by the principle investigator. The defects being investigated include vacancies,
where single particles are missing from the crystal, dislocations, where an
entire plane of atoms is missing, grain boundaries, where crystals with
different orientations meet, and cracks, where particles lose contact with one
another. Comparison of the forces driving these defects to move and interact
with one another on different length scales is enabling the design and
manipulation of crystals to determine their large scale mechanical properties.
The combination of basic research involving fundamental issues in condensed
matter physics with practical issues in experiment development provides an
excellent training ground; students working on this project will recieve
training in state-of-the-art experimental and theoertical techniques which will
provide them with an excellent preparation to enter positions in academia,
government laboratories, and high-tech industry, given their background in both
basic and applied work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
dominant mechanisms for creating large irreversible strain in crystals is the
nucleation and dynamic evolution of defects including vacancies, dislocations,
and grain boundaries. Such defects are central to our understanding of yield,
work hardening, fracture, fatigue, and time-dependent elasticity in atomic
crystals. A major hurdle faced by the materials science community is to
understand how the spatially heterogeneous and history dependent local stress
environment created by such defects further affects their evolution and
determines the bulk mechanical properties of the crystal. Using a newly
developed technique called Stress Assessment from Local Structural Anisotropy
(SALSA) this project is mapping out stress inhomogeneities that arise from such
defects and their interactions in colloidal crystals. Crucially, SALSA allows
for mapping out these stresses at the single particle scale. A triaxial confocal
rheometer is being used to measure bulk properties and determine how the local
stress inhomogeneities lead to the macroscopic response of the crystal. The
project focuses on several major defect mediated phenomena found in crystals. A
nonlinear dynamics theory of vacancy interactions with other defects is being
developed. In addition these techniques are being used to study the interaction
of dislocations with vacancies, other dislocations, stacking faults and grain
boundaries. A combination of bulk compression and shear will determine how the
mechanical response of polycrystalline domains under shear varies as the film
thickness approaches the length scale of a single grain. Finally, depletion
interactions is being used to form attractive crystals in order to measure the
stresses arising from crack propagation in such crystals. This research is
enabling a fundamental understanding of the connection between the stress fields
driving defect mobility and the resulting bulk mechanical response of the
crystal. The projects chosen reflect the crucial roles played by vacancies,
dislocations, grain boundaries, and cracks in mediating these properties.