* 1507572
* Intensity Frontier Physics Studies with b and c Quarks at LHCb
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Sheldon Stone, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 3,195,000.00

Overview&lt;br/&gt;One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th
century was the development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This
model succeeded in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time
into a hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of
this model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at
the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists, leaves open many questions about the universe. These include why matter
dominates over anti-matter in the Universe (CP violation), the values of the
masses of the fundamental constituents, the quarks and the leptons, the size of
the mixings among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the
properties of dark matter. Most explanations require the presence of new forces,
which we call Beyond the Standard Model Physics (BSM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
LHC is the premier High Energy Physics particle accelerator in the world and is
currently operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland. It is one of
the foremost facilities for answering these BSM
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LHCb is the first experiment designed
specifically to study the decays of hadrons containing b or c quarks at a hadron
collider. The goal of LHCb is to identify new physics in nature by examining the
properties of hadrons containing these quarks. New physics, or new forces, are
manifest by particles, as yet to be discovered, these particles would modify
decay rates and CP violating asymmetries, and thus allow new phenomena to be
observed indirectly. In direct searches for new particles, the accelerator's
energy must be high enough to allow the particle to be produced. In indirect
searches effects of new particles can be seen even if they have a much higher
mass than can be seen directly, because the effects are quantum in nature, and
appear in Feynman diagrams where the particles are "virtual", so they are
emitted and absorbed over short times. LHCb has operated very successfully
starting in late 2010. The data are being analyzed and published. The experiment
has shown many results, but none so far have clearly demonstrated new physics.
LHCb has proposed an upgrade to be completed in the 2018-2019 time-frame when
the LHC accelerator will not be running. This upgrade will allow LHCb to collect
an order of magnitude more data in decay modes that will either show new physics
or severely restrict the allowed mass range. LHCb is comprised of about 10
different sub-detectors or sub-systems. The Syracuse group has the
responsibility of upgrading a part of the charged particle tracking system
currently called the "TT." The intent is to significantly enhance the
capabilities of this system above and beyond the requirement that data can be
taken at an order of magnitude higher
luminosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this award lies in the leading role the Syracuse group plays in the
physics analysis that it is part of LHCb. This analysis sheds light on important
aspects of our understanding of the Standard Model, including Charge Parity
asymmetry which could explain the preponderance of matter in the universe as
opposed to antimatter. In addition, the upgraded LHCb detector will allow a much
more sensitive search for BSM physics. The main deliverable will be a new inner
tracking device, the UT. This device will increase the data throughput over the
current tracking device by an order of magnitude, allowing the LHCb experiment
to probe BSM physics. The UT, which replaces the current tracker, will consists
of four planes of single-sided 250-micron-thick silicon strip detectors, read
out by a custom-made front-end electronic integrated circuit. With its reduced
material budget and optimized segmentation as a function of the distance from
the beam line, it plays a crucial role in reducing the rate of fake tracks and
in providing fast momentum measurements in the residual field of the dipole
magnet. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work span several areas.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be direct participants in the
construction and testing of the detector that will be constructed. For many
years a steady stream of undergraduates have been working in the PIs
laboratories, where it is a tradition to ensure that graduate students have both
hardware experience as well as data analysis capabilities. The upgrade work will
be integrated into the Syracuse Quarknet program to involve high school teachers
and some of their better students as well. Test results from this detector will
be discussed at conferences and published. This detector is an integral part of
the LHCb Upgrade and is essential for LHCb to continue to produce cutting edge
physics results.