* 1507047
* BaSnO3 as a Transparent Mixed Ionic-Electronic Conducting Material - Utilizing Novel In Situ Methods to Advance Understanding of Structure-Processing-Property Relations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Harry Tuller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 563,989.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Barium tin oxide (BaSnO3) is a remarkable new
material and a prime candidate for the much-needed replacement of low-abundance,
but presently critical indium-based transparent electrodes for solar cell and
display technologies. Additionally, this material, when appropriately chemically
modified, is well-suited to serve as a model system for studying the role of
defects in influencing the performance of mixed ionic-electronic conducting
electrodes in, for example, solid oxide fuel cells, noted for their high
chemical-to-electrical energy conversion efficiencies. Novel in situ high
temperature measurements are being employed to explore defect formation and
transport and the effects of microstructure on the electrical, electrochemical
and optical properties of barium tin oxide, as well as exploring and optimizing
its thin film growth. Insights gained will aid in developing more robust
transparent and mixed conductive electrodes for solar and fuel cell applications
and generally provide critical insights into how variations in growth parameters
impact the chemistry and morphology of functional thin films and thereby their
properties. A science, technology, engineering &amp; mathematics (STEM) project-
based course for high school students, drawn from both inner city and suburban
schools, with a focus on minority and female students, is developed and
implemented, in conjunction with a high school teacher/ teacher-training faculty
member, on the topic of clean energy and environmental technologies, to improve
their scientific understanding of pressing global issues and stimulate them to
consider STEM careers. Research internships, are offered to undergraduate
students from the science and engineering disciplines, to provide them with the
opportunity to experience research in action. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The electrical, electrochemical and optical behavior of acceptor- and
donor-doped barium tin oxide, a prime candidate for the much needed replacement
of low-abundance transparent electrodes for solar cells, are being investigated
over a wide range of temperature and oxygen partial pressure. Novel in situ
characterization methods allow for development of quantitative defect and
transport models for donor- and acceptor-doped materials, vital steps towards
their practical utilization as a transparent or mixed ionic-electronic
conducting materials. A novel method for monitoring film growth in situ will
allow for the efficient optimization of film growth, microstructure and
properties of these, and ultimately all physical vapor deposited films, with
respect to deposition conditions. Additional focus is placed on quantifying and
explaining the significant impact of grain boundaries on the effective electron
mobility of transparent conductive barium tin oxide. This research approach
provides an excellent opportunity for the designated graduate student to learn
cutting edge experimental and modeling techniques and gain a broader
appreciation of how materials research can address society's major challenges.