* 1507205
* Efficient, Robust and Soluble Electron Transport Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Elsa Reichmanis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 05/31/2018
* USD 320,486.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust, reliable and flexible
devices/circuits could be transformational for industries ranging from
healthcare and environmental quality to energy and security. To attain this
vision, new materials that can effectively transport charges are needed. In this
regard, polymers that transport electrons are especially challenging. This
proposal aims to design and synthesize new molecular structures that will not
only readily transport electrons, but also be compatible with low-cost
fabrication techniques. The research will impact a range of electronics
technologies that are the mainstay of our society. Also, students will realize
benefits from the multidisciplinary nature of the program. All students
participating in this program will be cross-trained and, where necessary, will
further expand their knowledge and experience through additional collaborations.
They will develop leadership skills and have access to professional development
workshops through participation in the Georgia Tech Polymer Network-Student
Association. The PI is committed to diversity in her recruiting, education and
training activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric semiconductors have a number of
advantages that derive from their inherent flexibility, solubility, and low
temperature processability. Such competitive characteristics allow for the
implementation of pi-conjugated polymers in low-cost, light-weight and large-
area flexible optoelectronics. The application space ranges from simple
transistor devices to photovoltaics for energy conversion, to light emitting
diodes, to thermo-electrics and sensors. Ubiquitous availability of such devices
will contribute the nation's needs in healthcare, environmental quality, energy
and security. To enable the range of envisioned devices, both hole and electron
transporting materials are required. Among these, polymers that exhibit electron
transport characteristics are much more limited in their availability due to
poor oxidative stability and high sensitivity to moisture. This study will
identify polymer architectures having extended pi-conjugation to maintain a low
bandgap, a low HOMO level for enhanced stability, and effective pi-pi
intermolecular interactions to improved charge transport performance. The
investigation will explore alternative alkyl side chains for their ability to
solubilize targeted polymers in common organic solvents, synthesize both
homopolymers and donor-acceptor architectures to tune HOMO/LUMO energy levels,
characterize targeted materials via spectroscopic, microscopic and electrical
methods to identify significant materials structure-processing-property
parameters, and fabricate field effect transistor, photovoltaic and thermo-
electric devices to evaluate the impact of the proposed approach. Key,
synthetically accessible molecular components will be identified that will
provide for an extension of semiconducting polymer pi-conjugation length
allowing for the orientation and alignment that are an imperative for charge
transport. The studies will identify efficient, robust, soluble electron
transport polymer materials for flexible electronics applications.