* 1507233
* Investigation of Strongly Correlated Itinerant Magnets and Potential Quantum Spin Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,11/30/2018
* Mykhailo Shatruk, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 11/30/2018
* USD 410,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Advanced magnetic materials are crucial to a
number of current and upcoming technologies that are critical to our nation's
energy security. Among these are electric vehicles, wind turbines, magnetic
refrigerators, and high-density data storage devices. The improvement of such
technologies relies on our ability to discover new and optimize existing
magnetic materials by developing fundamental understanding of correlations
between crystal structure and magnetic behavior. With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
this research project targets the exploration of materials whose magnetic
properties are highly sensitive to subtle changes in the crystal and electronic
structures. Such solids will demonstrate abrupt changes in the magnetic behavior
upon minor external perturbations (e.g., temperature or pressure) and can offer
pathways to devices that operate at lower powers and exhibit higher energy-
conversion efficiencies. The project will provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students in solid state chemistry, materials synthesis,
crystallography, magnetism, and energy-conversion technologies. The research
team will also develop a comprehensive open-access online database for strongly
correlated magnetic materials. The PI has a proven track-record of involving
underrepresented groups and undergraduate students in research endeavors, and
will continue to maintain this practice in his research and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Itinerant magnetism
provides the foundation for high-performance permanent and soft magnetic
materials. This research project focuses on the investigation of two classes of
magnetic materials, both of which leverage strong correlations in the electronic
band structure that translates into unconventional magnetic behaviors. Ternary
arsenide and boride intermetallics will be investigated vis-a-vis the
sensitivity of their magnetic properties to peculiarities of crystal and
electronic structures. The latter will be perturbed via judicious changes in
chemical composition or application of external pressure. Both chemical and
physical perturbations can induce valence fluctuations that will translate into
strong changes in magnetism demonstrated by these materials. A close attention
will be paid to the nature of 3d-4f magnetic exchange to formulate general
expectations for the type of interlattice magnetic coupling in each group of
materials. The research team will also investigate ternary selenides with low-
dimensional structures that result in strong magnetic frustration. Such
materials are predicted to avoid long-range magnetic ordering, thus leading to
exotic quantum states, e.g., spin liquids or Haldane-gap systems. The proposed
research activities will provide versatile training to graduate and
undergraduate students in materials synthesis, investigation of structural and
magnetic properties, and studies of the electronic band structure.