* 1507304
* High-sensitivity elemental ionization for quantification of organohalogens
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kaveh Jorabchi, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professor Kaveh Jorabchi at Georgetown University to
develop high-sensitivity detection and quantification techniques for halogenated
organic compounds. These compounds, known as organohalogens, have broad
applications as pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and fire retardants, and are also
found among food contaminants. They are typically present at low concentrations
but have significant environmental and health impacts. Therefore, it is vital to
develop highly sensitive analytical methods to detect and quantify these
compounds. The proposed research, if successful, will substantially enhance the
efficiency of organohalogen characterization methods for many biological and
environmental applications. The supported research will also strengthen
collboration between Professor Jorabchi's group and an industrial partner and
facilitate rapid translation of academic research into applied technologies.
This research project will provide graduate students with interdisciplinary
training opportunities. Professor Jorabchi will continue his outreach activities
to local high school students,with particular effort to reach members of
underrepresented groups and promote the pursuit of studies in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halogen atoms can serve as intrinsic tags for absolute
quantification of organohalogens by elemental mass spectrometry. However,
existing elemental mass spectrometric methods suffer from low halogen detection
sensitivity, limiting these methods for trace analysis of organohalogens.
Professor Jorabchi's research aims to significantly improve elemental detection
sensitivity for fluorine, chlorine, and bromine by developing a plasma-assisted
reaction chemical ionization (PARCI)approach centered around efficient
generation of negative ions. Specifically, Professor Jarobchi will (i)
characterize electron capture ionization of halogens in GC (gas
chromatography)-PARCI-MS (mass spectrometry) with a sufatron cavity,(ii)
characterize proton transfer reactions for halogen ionization in GC-PARCI-MS,
and (iii) study electron capture and proton transfer ionization in atmospheric-
pressure PARCI-MS for analysis of compounds eluting from the LC (liquid
chromatography). The successful conduct of the proposed work will enable online
and high-sensitivity detection of organohalogens separated by liquid and gas
chromatography, and could provide quantitative information without compound-
specific standards, a critical analytical capability for characterizing
degradation and metabolic products of organohalogens in environmental and
biological samples.