* 1507938
* Near the onset of rigidity in living and nonliving matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Schwarz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;Have you ever played a game of "Pick up Sticks"
and wondered how an entire structure of randomly arranged sticks can collapse
with the removal of just one stick? And have you ever wondered how a skin cell
changes shape to crawl towards a wound to heal it? The notion of the onset of
mechanical rigidity in both living and nonliving matter will help answer both of
these seemingly disparate questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore the
emergence (and destruction) of mechanical rigidity in nonliving matter, the
proposed modeling will be based on a collection of frictionless, repulsive soft
spheres; while in living matter, it will utilize a disordered spring network.
The PI's group will test both models by investigating what properties -
friction, particle/filament shape, type of crosslinking between filaments, local
mechanical stability - affect the nature of the rigidity transition. These
models will be used to describe mechanical stability of two- and three-
dimensional systems including granular systems, filamentous cytoskeletal
networks, and biological tissue in the brain. The proposed work, therefore,
extends the reach of materials science to living systems to help drive the
emerging field of quantitative biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
proposed research will be used for development of a new course material on
rigidity in both living and nonliving systems at undergraduate and graduate
levels. The proposed collaborations with Syracuse Museum of Science and
Technology and the YWCA will educate the public about the intrigue of soft
matter. The PI will use her knowledge and experience to recruit women to the
physical sciences by presenting scientific advances used to decouple the
biological clock and the tenure clock to senior graduate students and post-docs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;How does a
collection of randomly packed frictional particles at the threshold of
mechanical rigidity destabilize with the deletion of just one contact? And how
does a collection of cytoskeletal filaments attain mechanical rigidity to extend
the reach of a cell? In nonliving matter, the model will be based on a
collection of frictionless, repulsive soft spheres; while in living matter, it
will utilize a disordered spring network. The PI's group will test the
robustness of both models by investigating what properties - friction,
particle/filament shape, type of crosslinking between filaments, local
mechanical stability - affect the nature of the rigidity transition. To test for
this robustness in nonliving systems, the local properties of mechanical
stability at the onset of rigidity for frictionless, repulsive soft discs in two
dimensions will be studied by using concept of jamming graph. Armed with the
information of constraint counting, geometry, and force-balance, the PI's group
will develop a model for the onset of rigidity in frictionless, particulate
matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence (and destruction) of rigidity
abounds in living matter as well. The actin filament cytoskeletal network
adjusts its morphology to support the cell structurally. The proposed research
will narrow the existing theoretical gap between morphology and mechanics by
building disordered spring network models that encode more of the network
morphology, such as anisotropy and angle-constraining crosslinks, to determine
which aspects are more relevant to the onset of rigidity than others. Moreover,
quantitative modeling of biological tissue in the brain will be developed using
vertex models, which are related to disordered spring networks. The PI's group
will investigate the interplay between morphology and mechanics to determine how
glial cells structurally support bundles of neurons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of the proposed research will be used for development of a new course
material on rigidity in both living and nonliving systems at undergraduate and
graduate levels. The proposed collaborations with Syracuse Museum of Science and
Technology and the YWCA will educate the public about the intrigue of soft
matter. The PI will be involved in the recruitment of women to the physical
sciences by presenting scientific advances used to decouple the biological clock
and the tenure clock to senior graduate students and post-docs.