* 1507739
* Microenvironments Fit for Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Martin Gruebele, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

NonTechnical This research program will address the grand challenge of
identifying material properties that preserve or even enhance the stability of
immobilized protein components in devices or materials. Many biological
macromolecules have unique, useful properties that are exploited in applications
ranging from biosensors to drug carriers that seek out diseased cells in the
body. But these applications typically require incorporating proteins into non
biological materials in ways that completely alter the protein environment and
often destroy the very properties sought. In this research, the PIs will address
the grand challenge of determining how to engineer material properties to
preserve (or shut down) these unique protein functions. Results from this
research will have broad impact, by uncovering guidelines for how to engineer
material microenvironments that are fit for proteins. Because of the widespread
use of immobilized bio-macromolecules in industry and in research, the PIs
findings will have broad impact across a range of disciplines. Through several
outreach activities, the PIs will also expose middle school girls and minority
students to this exciting research and the many ways our discoveries can have a
positive impact on society.

Technical To address the challenge of preserving immobilized protein stability,
this program will use two powerful, complimentary experimental approaches.
First, molecular force measurements will identify the nanoscale surface
properties associated with surface chemistries that determine how materials
interact with proteins. Next, the PIs will establish how those nanoscale
properties alter protein stability, by using novel temperature-jump measurements
to measure the folding rates of immobilized proteins. The use of nanoscale force
measurements and temperature-jump measurements at submicron resolution will
uniquely identify causal relationships between molecular scale interfacial force
fields and the surface chemistries that protect or shut down protein function.
This program extends prior investigations of thermally responsive
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) to zwitterionic coatings, which display exceptional
protein-resistant properties and apparent protein/bio-compatibility, despite
significant differences in composition and architecture. Molecular force
measurements and transformative surface-specific temperature-jump measurements
will reveal physical chemical coupling between the surface microenvironment and
protein folding stability. These studies will bridge the gap between nanoscale
surface chemistries and immobilized protein folding stability, and identify
transformative new design rules for engineering protein-protective
microenvironments.