* 1507907
* Collaborative Research: Defect-free nanofabrication of plasmonic structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mario Marconi, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 236,355.00

In the last decades the impressive development of photonic technology made
possible new revolutionary devices with unthinkable capabilities. Now it is
possible to conceive high-resolution sensors capable of single molecule
detection, or powerful microscopes capable to surpass the previously accepted
resolution limits, or even a clear path towards the realization of a fully
photonic computer that will use light instead of electrons. All these
accomplishments have a common denominator: all make use of the unique properties
of meta-materials. Meta-materials are nano-scale structures fabricated in
metals, semiconductors or in a mixture of them that combined with laser pulses
had opened a whole new research area that enabled new innovative applications.
Instrumental to the implementation and broad dissemination of these new devices
is the rapid access to a reliable nano-fabrication technology. This project
proposes the development of a new fabrication approach for nanoscale structures
that due to its simplicity, lower cost, robustness and efficiency can make a
significant contribution in facilitating the broad utilization of meta-
materials. It promises the realization of a tabletop patterning tool that could
easily be integrated with other processing tools in a small business or a
laboratory environment, and will have the potential to simplify the operation of
small companies dedicated to high tech and nanotechnology with the consequent
benefit to society. It will also impact the education through the training of
students in an innovative technology that combines optical engineering and
metrology, laser design and material science.

This research project will demonstrate a compact (tabletop) nano-fabrication
tool capable of printing defect-free arbitrary structures with sub-50nm feature
size, over large areas (millimeter square), with short exposure times (typically
less than one minute). The approach will use interferometric lithography and
Talbot self-imaging in combination with a highly coherent tabletop extreme
ultraviolet laser to optically replicate nanostructures defined in a mask over
multiple samples. The novelty of the method resides on the utilization of highly
coherent extreme ultraviolet table-top lasers that combined with classical
optical effects will make possible a nano-fabrication method with the following
distinctive characteristics: - Defect free. This is a unique characteristic. Any
defect on the original lithographic mask is averaged over the entire imaging
field and the resulting print is essentially defect-free. - Compact (tabletop)
system that can bring nano-patterning capabilities to small size companies or
university research laboratories. - Scalable. With the adequate illumination, it
is possible to print de-magnified replicas of the original master. - Robust.
Because the mask is not in contact with the sample, it is not damaged nor
degraded with usage. - Simple to implement. The working distance between the
mask and the sample is very large, typically few millimeters, which facilitates
the experimental set up. - Trivial alignment. The set up consists of only the
diffractive mask and the sample.

The mature technology of compact extreme ultraviolet lasers now opens a window
of opportunity to demonstrate a nano-fabrication method that was not feasible
before due to the lack of sufficiently large average power coherent sources.
With the proposed lithography approach, it will be feasible to print, in a few
minutes, patterns with arbitrary motives and sub-50nm critical size. Since the
pattern's smallest feature is mainly controlled by the wavelength of the
illumination (the laser's wavelengths range from 47nm to 13 nm) it is
conceivable that this method will allow the fabrication of nanostructures with
feature size in the few tens of nanometers.