* 1507013
* Topological Framework for Analysis and Visualization of Atomistic Materials Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* David Srolovitz, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2019
* USD 440,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational research and education to
develop computational tools to advance computer simulation of atoms that obey
Newton's laws. Atomistic simulation is a very important and widely applied
approach for understanding the behavior of solids and liquids, organic and
inorganic materials, and living and inanimate systems. With the rapid advance of
modern computation, it is possible to track the motion of over a trillion atoms
in such simulations. A key challenge to scientists is determining how to extract
meaning from such rich data. One widely applicable approach is to characterize
the local arrangement of atoms. This is notoriously difficult to do in a
meaningful way. Consider the example of cooling a liquid through the
crystallization temperature. How do the atoms in the disordered liquid organize
to form a crystal? Automating this type of structure analysis in an efficient
and meaningful manner challenges the rapid growth of computational modeling of
physical, chemical and biological systems. A useful solution would have wide
ranging impact from designing materials with desired properties to understanding
how they fail.

The PIs will develop a novel approach to identify structural arrangements around
every atom in a simulation. Building on mathematical ideas from topology, they
will develop practical software tools for local structure determination that is
robust, accurate and sufficiently computationally efficient to analyze even the
largest simulations. In contrast to others, the PIs' approach can be applied
without cooling the structure to absolute zero as is usually done in dynamic
simulation. This procedure can be computationally very costly and obscure the
signatures of interesting or sought phenomena. The software will be made open
source to allow free access to all scientists, and compatible with visualization
codes that are already widely used in the field. This project will train the
next generation in developing algorithms and software infrastructure that will
enable scientific discovery and advance the frontiers.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational research and education to
develop software for the analysis of local structure in atomic environments that
arise in atomistic simulation in support of theoretical and computational
studies of defects, phase transitions, and deformation in condensed matter.
Traditionally, continuous "order parameters" are used to characterize and
identify structure in large systems of point-like objects; data sets of this
kind include particle coordinates as obtained through, for example, molecular
dynamics simulations and discrete particle experiments. Continuous order
parameters are routinely used to identify defects in crystal structures or to
measure disorder in liquids and glasses. The PIs will develop a novel
mathematical framework centered on Voronoi cell topology. This will allow
researchers to study atomic mechanisms at high-temperature without quenching.
This provides both computational and scientific advantages over currently
available methods.

The PIs will focus attention on three research goals. First, the development of
a mathematical framework suitable for analyzing local structure in large point
sets. In particular, Voronoi topology provides a coarse-grain subdivision of the
configuration space of possible particle arrangements. The geometry and topology
of this configuration space will provide insight into possible arrangements of
neighbors that is especially valuable in imperfect systems. Particular attention
will be paid to finite-temperature structure of defects in crystal structures.
Second, open source software will be developed and distributed to allow other
researchers to apply this automated approach for their own studies and further
method development. The software will be designed to work with other software
packages that are widely used in computational materials science and applied
physics. The basic algorithms are efficient on parallel computers enabling their
use in studying large-scale systems. Finally, applications in computational
materials science and applied physics will be investigated using the theoretical
and computational tools developed. In particular, the PIs will focus on the
dynamics of high-temperature phase transformations, the migration and evolution
of defects in crystalline environments and to the understanding of "disorder" in
liquids and glasses.

This award supports training the next generation in developing algorithms and
software infrastructure that will enable scientific discovery and advance the
frontiers.