* 1507115
* The Viscosity of Lipid and Protein Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Raghuveer Parthasarathy, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Oregon is to apply recently developed
methods for measuring membrane fluidity to several basic issues involving the
nature of two-dimensional flows in membranes, the relationships between
viscosity and membrane tension, and the dependence of viscosity on lipid
structure. Membranes are critical components of all living cells that provide a
flexible framework in which lipids and proteins build structures, perform
chemical reactions, and spatially reorganize. These tasks are made possible by
the physical properties of the lipid bilayer, the two-molecule-thick structure
that forms the basis of all cellular membranes. The two-dimensional fluidity of
lipid bilayers is essential to their function, as it enables the mobility of
membrane molecules. Characterization of bilayer viscosity, however, remains
minimal, which limits our ability to develop quantitative, predictive models of
important processes such as intracellular cargo trafficking and signal
transduction. The proposed experiments will also enhance educational and
outreach activities. For example, discussions of membrane behavior and
biophysical modes of inquiry will illuminate a course for non-science majors
developed by the PI that explores the physical properties of organisms and
biological materials, with the broad aim of promoting scientific literacy.
Regarding outreach, the PI initiated and co-runs a week long Physics Day Camp
for high school students from low socioeconomic backgrounds that provides an
exposure to science as well as, more broadly, a greater familiarity with the
nature of higher education. The PI and his group lead activities related to
biomaterials and microscopy. These studies also provide opportunities for
training undergraduates and graduate students in methods of membrane biophysics,
optics, and computational image analysis.

Technical: The two-dimensional fluidity of cellular membranes is essential to
their function, as it enables the mobility of constituent lipids and proteins as
well as the spatial reorganization of lipid domains, protein complexes, and
other larger-scale structures. Though the existence and importance of membrane
fluidity are well established, characterizations of the material properties
underlying it remain crude. Specifically, the viscosity of lipid bilayers has
proven challenging to measure due to membranes' fragility and small size, and
also due to the intrinsic complexity of two-dimensional hydrodynamics. Our
incomplete understanding of membrane viscosity frustrates models of membrane
dynamics. In the proposed experiments, the investigator will build on techniques
that have recently developed in making use of both single- and two-point
rheological approaches to address various fundamental questions of membrane
biophysics. The researcher will examine whether standard hydrodynamic models are
applicable at short length scales, where they have not been rigorously tested.
Relationships between viscosity and membrane tension, and between viscosity and
out-of-plane fluctuations will also will be studies with this project. The
dependence of lipid bilayer viscosity on acyl chain length, temperature, the
presence of proteins that insert into the bilayer, and the density of membrane
inclusions, all of which will provide a rich picture of membrane material
properties will be characterized with this research study. The proposed studies
will impact educational work, most notably related to a general education
biophysics course for non-science majors, outreach work, related especially to a
day camp for high school students from low socioeconomic backgrounds, and
training of students in a range of methods related to membrane biophysics,
optics, and computational image analysis.