* 1507670
* Science of Electron-conducting Filaments in Ion-conducting Chalcogenide Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* David Drabold, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 498,958.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This proposal aims to address a fundamental question
of charge and mass transport in ion-conducting glasses: how does an electric
field create an electron-conducting path in metal-doped glasses (that contain S,
Se or Te)? Under a strong external electric field, an electron-conducting path
is created or annihilated inside the solid electrolyte depending on the
direction of the electric field. The observed reversible creation/annihilation
of electron-conducting paths by external fields mimics 0 and 1 states of a
binary system and is the basis underlying conductive bridging random access
memory (CBRAM), a novel non-volatile memory technology based upon bipolar
resistive switching. The goal of this project is to understand the destruction
and formation mechanism of the conductive filaments through integrated
experiment/theory approaches. Success of this project provides fundamental
understanding of the emerging CBRAM technology and promises transformation of
electronically insulating glasses to electronically conducting glasses. The
impact of this research is broadened further by engaging students typically
underrepresented in science and engineering to participate in the research
project. Summer internships are offered to undergraduate students through the
on-campus Research Experience for Undergraduates program. Outreach to children
with autism spectra disorder in Appalachian Ohio is offered through science
demonstrations, workshops and summer camp activities.

TECHNICAL DETAILS: Fast-ion conductors based upon solid electrolyte glasses have
many advantages over their crystalline counterparts. For example, Ag doped
chalcogenide glasses exhibit extremely high ionic conductivity. An interesting
twist for these materials is that under a strong external electric field, an
electron-conducting path is created inside the solid electrolyte. It is widely
speculated that formation of metal filaments through field-driven
electrochemical reactions is responsible for the enhanced electronic
conductivity. However, this view leads to an erroneous prediction that superfast
motion of both the metal ions and the solid electrolyte host occurs
simultaneously under the external field. A hypothesis of this grant is that the
electron-conducting filaments created by the external electric field are not
made simply of metal, but complex semiconducting compounds that involve
concentrated ions trapped by the ion-trap centers in the solid electrolytes.
Prototypical metal-doped chalcogenide glasses (i.e., Ag and Cu doped Ge-Se and
Sb-Te) were selected for study. Advanced experimental and theoretical techniques
are applied to understand the charge and mass transport in the solid
electrolytes under external fields. A novel simulation technique called
experimentally constrained molecular relaxation (ECMR) is used to ensure maximal
coincidence between theory and experiment. Structure, properties and dynamics of
the electron-conducting filaments generated by the electric field are studied
through the integrated experiment/theory approach. This project provides
atomistic insight into the dynamics of filament formation and structure-property
relations of the electron-conducting filaments. Undergraduate and graduate
students participating in this project are trained on cutting-edge research
facilities such as those in Advanced Photon Source and Center for Nanoscale
Materials at Argonne National Lab and the Ohio Supercomputing Center. Outreach
to children with autism spectral order is offered to enhance their interest in
college education and careers in information technology.