* 1507045
* Manipulating Interfacial Structure of Liquid Crystalline Block Copolymers to Stabilize Full-Spectrum Light Reflecting Stimuli Responsive Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Rajeswari Kasi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Stretchable, color-changing,
cross-linked polymers are very useful for actively tuning optical response in a
reproducible and continuous way by applying mechanical force or changing
temperature. These types of materials are used to develop sensors and switching
devices. New polymers and hybrid materials, which present better and more
efficient sensing performances and durability, are targeted in this research
project. These new materials will be designed by precisely manipulating
synthesis methods and thoroughly characterized for purity, structure and
properties. Particular attention will be paid to color-changing properties of
these polymer films upon application of heat and deformation. Scientific
principles learned from these materials will be integrated and expanded for use
in stretchable batteries and wearable optoelectronics, leading to societal
benefits related to energy and electronic technologies. This project will also
offer broader societal benefits through human resource development and
scientific education at various academic levels. Outreach programs offering
hands-on laboratory training targeted towards middle and high school students
will be developed using materials and ideas developed in this project.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Polymers
containing liquid crystals are widely used in many technologies including
displays, sensors, photonic materials and smart devices. Photonics, mechanical
and elastomeric properties are key parameters that will determine ultimate usage
of these materials. Block copolymers containing liquid crystals present self-
assembly at multiple length scales resulting in unique nanostructures and is a
very versatile platform to create new materials with unique photonic and
mechanical characteristics. Different strategies to manipulate architecture,
composition and hierarchical morphology of these block copolymers containing
liquid crystals will be explored including interface manipulations, inclusion of
various functional groups and structure-forming units. Detailed compositional,
structural and morphological characterization of these materials will be
performed. Particular attention will be paid to optoelectronic and mechanical
properties, which will be helpful to tailor performance of mechanochromic and
thermochromic sensors. The fundamental science and technological aspects of
these materials will also impact their use in batteries and renewable energy
applications.