* 1507753
* Characterization of Atomic Diffusion during Ion Exchange Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Richard Robinson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2021
* USD 593,834.00

In this research program, Dr. Richard Robinson of Cornell University is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) program
to investigate the fundamental chemical principles governing chemical
transformations of nanoparticles using advanced experimental methods including
in-situ x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). When scientists study materials
that are very, very small (so-called "nanoparticles") they find that the
properties are radically different from bulk properties. One of the surprising
differences in nanoparticles is that the atoms can rearrange themselves much
faster and easier than expected. Chemists have taken advantage of this effect to
modify nanoparticles through chemical transformation reactions. These chemical
transformation reactions have opened up exciting new opportunities because they
offer the ability to independently manipulate the size, shape, atomic structure,
or chemical composition in nanoparticles, overcoming limitations of conventional
synthesis techniques. In this project, Dr. Richard Robinson is investigating one
type of chemical transformation, the ion exchange reaction, by using an advanced
experimental method called x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). XAS enables the
precise measurement of the local environment around an atom and thereby helps
discover how the atomic lattice changes during the ion exchange reaction. To
understand why the ion exchange process is orders of magnitude faster in
nanomaterials than in bulk materials, Dr. Robinson is investigating key
phenomena such as the size dependence of diffusion in nanoparticles and the
stoichiometry and stability of the atomic phase (crystal lattice) during
transformation. By learning how to manipulate nanoparticles through chemical
transformations, this project is benefiting society by creating a toolkit to
tailor nanoparticles for advanced applications in areas such as electronics,
catalysis, and photovoltaics. The project broadly impacts chemistry by spurring
new synthetic approaches to nanoparticles with novel composition and structure.
Dr. Robinson is developing an outreach module that teaches students about
nanomaterial properties. Dr. Robinson is training high school teachers to use
the "nano demo" kit and is making the kit available through a lending library.
Dr. Robinson's local and regional outreach efforts include mentoring graduate
students through the Sloan Diversity Fellows Program, and involving
undergraduates in research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion exchange
reactions, a subset of the chemical transformation reactions, are a powerful
method to atomically restructure the composition and phase of first-generation
(as-synthesized) nanoparticles. What is currently unknown is how ion dynamics
behave differently at the nanoscale than at bulk scales. The key challenges to
understanding the ion exchange process include characterizing the size
dependence of diffusion in nanoparticles, the influence of reaction kinetics on
the ion dynamics, and the stoichiometry and stability of the atomic phase
(crystal lattice) during transformation. To investigate these challenges, Dr.
Robinson is performing in-situ and ex-situ XAS of nanoparticles during cation
and anion exchange, and mapping the movements of the ions and the atomic
structure. By combining time-resolved XAS, long-range order characterization,
and elemental analysis, Dr. Robinson is characterizing the governing atomic
dynamics, the dynamic changes in oxidation states, and the coordination
chemistry that occurs during ion exchange in nanoparticles. Dr. Robinson is
exploiting these reactions to create advanced nano-heterostructures, metastable
phases, and doped nanoparticles. By understanding how to manipulate
nanoparticles through chemical transformations, this project benefits society by
creating a toolkit to tailor nanoparticles for advanced applications in areas
such as electronics, catalysis, and photovoltaics.