* 1507730
* Collaborative Research: Viscoelasticity of Biomaterials to Modulate the Immune Response
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Helim Aranda-Espinoza, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

Non-Technical: These awards supported by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to University of Massachusetts Amherst (lead) and
University of Maryland College Park (non-lead) of these collaborative proposals
are to study the interaction of cells with their physical environment that is a
key part of different conditions such as inflammation, wound healing, cancer
metastasis, etc. Study of this interaction will improve our understanding of
basic cell biology and potentially lead to new disease interventions or improved
implants. The goal of this project is to examine the interaction between
macrophage cells and polymeric materials having tunable mechanical properties.
The investigators will fabricate and characterize the polymeric materials, and
subsequently measure cellular respones at the single-cell level. The
investigators are also involved in the educational training and outreach
components of the project: (1) graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in cutting-edge materials science and bioengineering techniques and they
will be trained in communication skills; (2) the development of educational
videos targeting middle school students on the scientific concepts underlying
this award, to be called "Kitchen Sink Science". These videos will feature
experimental demonstrations and illustrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
The objectives of this project are to examine the behavior of macrophage cells
in contact with tunable viscoelastic substrates. Macrophages are a key component
of the immune system. An improved understanding of their interaction with
materials will ultimately lead to better implants, sensors, and drug delivery
devices. At the same time, these investigations will shed light on basic cell
processes such as inflammation and the foreign body response. The investigators
hypothesize that materials with time-dependent mechanical properties will give
new perspectives into the relationship between material properties and cell
behavior. To that end, this research will use self-assembly methods to fabricate
a series of polymer films covering a range of viscoelastic properties. The films
will be characterized by several techniques such as fluorescence and
microrheology. The behavior of macrophages will subsequently be examined at the
single-cell level, with attention being focused on structural intracellular
proteins (e.g., actin) and secreted cytokines (e.g., IL-4). As part of this
proposal, our educational and outreach efforts will include: (1) the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in materials science and bioengineering
techniques, the design and execution of scientific experiments, and in technical
writing and oral communication skills; (2) the creation of videos illustrating
many of the concepts underpinning this proposal: hydrophobicity, surface
tension, amphiphile spreading, and interfacial films, targeted at middle school
students.