* 1507538
* Dynamics of quasiparticle formation in structurally tunable materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Susan Dexheimer, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 423,000.00

Non-technical abstract: Quasiparticles are collections of particles, such as
atoms or electrons in a solid, that act together as if they were a single
composite particle. Our understanding of many of the materials that are
important in modern day devices depends on the idea of quasiparticles and we
have a good understanding of the behavior of quasiparticles once they have been
created. However, our understanding of the process of creation of
quasiparticles, which plays a critical role in determining the properties of a
wide range of materials, is much more limited. The polaron is one example of a
quasiparticle, formed from localized charge carriers, which has a profound
impact on the conductivity, optical properties and energy transport in modern
semiconductor materials. This project will utilize a variety of experimental
probes to study the dynamics of quasiparticle formation and the influence of
electronic, vibrational, and structural dynamics. This project supports the work
of two Ph.D. students and an undergraduate student. The combination of basic
research involving fundamental issues in condensed matter physics with practical
issues in experiment development provides an excellent training ground; students
working in ultrafast spectroscopy of electronic materials are well-prepared to
enter positions in academia, government laboratories, and high-tech industry,
given their background in both basic and applied work.

Technical abstract: Localized quasiparticle states play a critical role in
determining the properties of a wide range of materials: polaron formation has a
profound impact on the charge transport properties of electronic materials, and
formation of self-trapped excitons, or exciton-polarons, dramatically changes
optical properties and energy transport mechanisms. While the equilibrium
properties of quasiparticles are well-established in many systems, a full
understanding of the dynamics of the process of quasiparticle formation has yet
to be achieved. In addition to its fundamental significance, such knowledge
promises a means to understand, and thereby exploit, the fast electronic and
optical response of materials. This project is comprised of systematic studies
of the coupled electronic and vibrational dynamics inherent to quasiparticle
formation. The studies are carried out in quasi-one-dimensional materials in
which the relative strengths of the electron-electron and electron-phonon
interactions that drive the localization dynamics can be systematically tuned
via their composition. The studies use a combination of femtosecond time-
resolved techniques that are sensitive to electronic, vibrational, and
structural dynamics, allowing observation of changes in the electronic charge
distribution and local structure as the system evolves to form the quasiparticle
state, and the role of specific vibrational modes in creating the final
stabilized structure. Experimental studies are complemented by theoretical
modeling.

