* 1507979
* UNS: Transform Municipal Wastewater Treatment Systems into Community Enteric Disease Information Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Tao Yan, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2021
* USD 385,277.00

1507979 Yan

Enteric and diarrheal diseases are a major cause of human illness in the United
States and around the world. Major challenges in effectively combating
infectious enteric diseases include the lack of real-time information about
disease outbreaks and the incapability of quantifying baseline community disease
burdens using traditional clinic-based approaches. A novel approach is proposed
to transform municipal wastewater treatment systems into community enteric
disease information networks, taking advantage of the unparalleled capability of
municipal wastewater treatment systems in collecting accurate and real-time
enteric disease information from the communities. Preliminary data demonstrated
the utility of using molecular tools to quantify and study enteric bacterial
pathogens in municipal wastewater, and also showed the possibility of
establishing real-time correspondence between pathogen strains in wastewater and
in health clinics.

The research goal of this project is to firmly establish the feasibility of
using municipal wastewater treatment systems for community disease monitoring.
The research hypothesis is that enteric pathogens in municipal wastewater are
reliable, quantitative, and real-time indicators of enteric diseases in a
community. To test the hypothesis, three specific research objectives, each
corresponding to one desirable feature of the hypothesis, will be achieved: (1)
determine the decay rates of target bacterial pathogens and reference fecal
indicator bacteria in wastewater, (2) determine the quantitative relationship
between wastewater pathogen concentration and community enteric disease burden,
and, (3) verify real-time detection of community disease outbreaks using
Salmonella in municipal wastewater. Overall, this project will investigate the
feasibility of a novel approach to address major challenges in community disease
monitoring by using existing wastewater infrastructure. This novel approach has
the potential to transform the landscape of community disease monitoring,
providing game-changing capabilities in understanding the origin, transmission,
and evolution of enteric diseases as well as in protecting the public from
disease outbreaks. If proven feasible, this will greatly expand the role of
wastewater infrastructure in public health protection and provide strong impetus
for upgrading and adequately maintaining the wastewater infrastructure. This
project will also test and optimize a new high throughput microfluidic qPCR
technology for simultaneously quantifying multiple pathogens in municipal
wastewater. This will also be the first attempt to determine the quantitative
relationships between pathogens in municipal wastewater and corresponding
community diseases. Finally, DNA fingerprinting technologies will be used to
establish real-time detection of clinically relevant pathogens in municipal
wastewater at the strain level. The project proposes a comprehensive plan that
will (1) involve Native Hawaiian students in environmental research, and (2)
conduct outreach activities to local high school students.