* 1507496
* Quantitative elucidation of the Role of Natural Organic Matter on the Redox Reactivity of Iron Oxide Minerals
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2019
* R. Lee Penn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2019
* USD 435,852.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Lee Penn and Bill Arnold of the University of
Minnesota study how iron oxide mineral particles participate in chemical
reactions with organic contaminants, with particular focus on how natural
organic matter (NOM) affects these reactions. NOM is found in surface water and
ground water. It is formed from the decomposition of plant material and produced
by algae and other microorganisms, and little is known about how the presence,
concentration, and nature of NOM impacts reactions at surfaces. The
collaboration between Professors Penn and Arnold improves the ability to predict
fate and transport of common organic contaminants. Results are expected to lead
to a fundamental, mechanistic understanding of how iron oxide surfaces mediate
important reductive degradation reactions in the presence of organic
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on elucidating how natural
organic matter impacts the nature of reactive surface area and thus the kinetics
of reductive (and oxidative) reactions involving organic contaminants at the
mineral-liquid interface. Rates of contaminant degradation are quantified and
solid materials characterized using advanced materials characterization methods
before, during, and after reactions. Experiments are performed with and without
the addition of model NOM molecules (e.g., catecholates and carboxylates), NOM
isolates obtained from the International Humics Substances Society (IHSS), and
NOM samples collected from the environment. A particularly novel aspect of the
proposed work is direct imaging of the particles in reaction media by way of
cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) to evaluate aggregation
state and quantify in situ accessible surface area. The solid-state (i.e.,
mineralogical) changes and changes in the aggregation state of suspended mineral
particles are quantitatively linked to the observed contaminant degradation
kinetics, which enables the development of an integrated model of iron oxide
reactivity. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits
via improved understanding of the role of abiotic attenuation of contaminants in
natural and engineered systems as well as the development of a program aimed at
middle and high school students to teach important concepts of water and
environmental chemistry.