* 1507702
* SusChEM: Lewis Pair Polymerization: A Powerful Synthetic Strategy for Sustainable and Functional Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2019
* USD 540,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry, is supporting Professor Eugene Chen from Colorado
State University to conduct research to significantly expand the scope and
utility of Lewis Pair Polymerization (LPP), especially for the synthesis of
polymers from biomass-derived renewable feedstocks. Synthetic polymers are
important components of a wide range of products including clothes, electronic
devices, furniture, and household products. Professor Chen conducts research to
develop novel catalysts and synthetic methods for the preparation of advance
functional polymeric materials from biomass-derived renewable feedstocks.
Important goals of this research are to develop efficient processes for the
synthesis of polymers with desired properties and to reduce societal dependence
on petroleum-based raw materials. This project also provides opportunities for
teaching and training students in the use of a wide range of techniques
important for catalyst development and polymer research.

Lewis pair polymerization is a powerful polymerization method, that was
substantially developed in the Chen lab under support from the National Science
Foundation. The specific objectives of this research are: 1) to develop
stereoselective LPP for the synthesis of stereoregular or optically active
chiral polymers from biomass-derived monomers; 2) to perform chemoselective LPP
of biomass-based multi-vinyl monomers to yield functional polymers; and 3) to
apply the LPP method for the synthesis of donor/acceptor (D/A) graft copolymers
that are potentially useful for organic photovoltaic (OPV) applications.