* 1507010
* SusChEM: Biobased Platform for the Sustainable Molecular Design and Controlled Synthesis of Block Polymers from Renewable Feedstocks
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Thomas Epps, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 497,089.00

Under the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professors Thomas H. Epps, III and Michael
T. Klein of the University of Delaware and Professor Joseph Stanzione of Rowan
University will collaborate to develop synthetic pathways and computational
tools for converting lignin-based bio-oils to polymers. This research aims to
address the grand challenge of manufacturing new plastic materials from natural
and renewable resources, without depleting food or other commercial resource
production. The lignin-based polymers to be produced through this research have
potential uses in paints, surface coatings, and other composite materials. This
project provides research opportunities to students-including underrepresented
undergraduate and economically-disadvantaged high school students-in
acollaborative laboratory setting and exposes students to modern concepts for
making new 'biorenewable' plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
developing efficient and cost-effective approaches to generate 'designer
plastics' from a renewable resource based on lignin, an inexpensive and natural
waste product of pulp and paper industry. The main tasks of this project
include: 1) computational modeling of lignin-based bio-oil composition as a
function of pyrolysis conditions and variability in wood composition/source; 2)
functionalization of the major components of bio-oils separately or collectively
to generate versatile monomer libraries from lignin waste streams; 3) synthesis
of homopolymers (from a single type of lignin-modified monomers) or
heteropolymers (from lignin-modified monomers in bio-oil mixtures); 4) kinetic
studies of the heteropolymer formation by free-radical polymerization; and 5)
design and preparation of tunable nanostructures of block copolymers that are
potentially useful as thermoplastic elastomers and pressure-sensitive adhesives.