* 1507325
* Thermal Transport in Large Unit Cell Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Alan McGaughey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2019
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education aimed at achieving a fundamental
understanding of how thermal energy is transported in crystals with large unit
cells. In a crystalline material, the arrangement of atoms can be described in
terms of a unit cell which periodically repeats in all directions to make up the
bulk crystal. In some crystals such as gold and silicon, the unit cell contains
only a few atoms, while in others, the unit cell may contain upwards of hundreds
of atoms. Examples of large unit cell crystals include "zeolites", which have
application in catalysis, molecular separation, and gas storage, and
"fullerenes", which have applications in molecular electronics and solar energy
conversion. Understanding thermal transport in these materials is critical for
predicting how they will respond to temperature fluctuations in their
surroundings and how they can dissipate excess heat generated during device
operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The way that heat flows through a crystalline
material depends on its unit cell. Conventional understanding of thermal
transport is based on theory developed for small unit cell crystals.
Experimental evidence, however, suggests that these theories are not suitable
for modeling thermal transport in large unit cell crystals. The objective of
this project is to use atomic-level computational tools to develop a framework
for predicting the thermal conductivity of large unit crystals and apply it to
zeolites and fullerenes. The results will be of direct importance to scientists
and engineers using these materials in everyday applications. The computational
tools developed will be suitable for modeling other large unit cell
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, the research team will
integrate nanoscience into the undergraduate engineering curriculum at Carnegie
Mellon University through a lecture series and distribute the materials through
the National Science Foundation-supported nanoHUB. Outreach activities related
to large unit cell crystals will be developed and presented to middle school and
high school students in Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education aimed at achieving a fundamental understanding of how
thermal energy is transported in crystals with large unit cells. Crystalline
materials with large unit cells are relevant in a wide range of energy-related
challenges and opportunities, such as in catalysis, molecular separation, gas
storage, thermoelectric energy conversion, and solar energy conversion. In many
of these areas, thermal transport plays a critical role, but has received
minimal attention. The central hypothesis of this project is that not all
vibrational modes in a large unit cell crystal propagate and that energy
transport mechanisms at length scales smaller than the lattice constant are
important. The overarching objective is to uncover the underlying physical
mechanisms and to suggest strategies for the design of materials with tailored
thermal properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two distinct materials systems will be
considered using a suite of atomic-level computational tools including molecular
dynamics simulations and lattice dynamics calculations. First, zeolites, where
all atoms are strongly bonded due to covalent and electrostatic interactions
will be investigated. Anharmonic and harmonic effects on thermal transport will
be rigorously modeled to quantify the contributions of different types of
vibrational modes to thermal conductivity. The effects of framework aluminum,
non-framework cations, and adsorbed species on thermal conductivity will be
quantified. Second, fullerene-based molecular crystals, where the intramolecular
interactions are strong but the intermolecular interactions are weak due to van
der Waals forces, will be investigated. At low temperatures, a reduced-order
model will be developed, while at higher temperatures a network model based on
the thermal conductance between molecules will be explored. The modeling
predictions will be validated through collaboration with experimental research
groups. The methods and tools developed will translate to studies of thermal
transport in other large unit cell crystals, such as clathrates, skutterudites,
Zintl compounds, gas hydrates, and metal-organic
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, the research team will
integrate nanoscience into the undergraduate engineering curriculum at Carnegie
Mellon University through a lecture series and distribute the materials through
the National Science Foundation-supported nanoHUB. Outreach activities related
to large unit cell crystals will be developed and presented to middle school and
high school students in Pittsburgh.