* 1507400
* Quantum from Classical: Creation of Quantum States of Motion in Nanomechanical Resonators
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Alexander Rimberg, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2019
* USD 682,568.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well understood that the
physical behavior of macroscopic objects like baseballs or planets is described
very accurately by the laws of classical physics developed by Newton and
familiar to many from a course in freshman physics. It is equally well
understood that the behavior of microscopic objects like atoms and molecules is
described by the much more mysterious and counterintuitive laws of quantum
physics. What is not clear is exactly where the boundary between classical
behavior and quantum behavior lies. In order to investigate this question, this
research will examine the behavior of mechanical systems that would normally
behave classically, with the goal of causing them to instead behave quantum
mechanically. This will be accomplished by using a superconducting device to
cause very strong coupling between light and a mechanical resonator; the light
will be used to both induce and read out the quantum behavior. Investigations of
this sort will better delineate the border between classical and quantum
physics, and help us understand the influence of quantum phenomena on the
everyday world around us. Two graduate students will be supported by this
project, and will be trained in such experimental techniques as microwave
measurement, nanoscale fabrication and low-temperature physics that are widely
used both in academia and in high-technology industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this grant will investigate the nature of the boundary between
classical and quantum physics by study of systems consisting of a small
mechanical resonator strongly coupled to a superconducting microwave cavity.
Coupling between the two will be mediated by a single Cooper pair transistor (a
superconducting device that transfers Cooper pairs one by one). The presence of
the Cooper pair transistor will allow a very strong, nonlinear coupling between
photons in the cavity and quantum lattice vibrations (phonons) in the mechanical
resonator. This coupling will be so strong, in fact, that it should be possible
to measure or influence a single phonon with a single photon. By making use of
this strong, nonlinear coupling, it should be possible to use photons in the
microwave cavity to induce highly quantum mechanical states of motion in the
mechanical resonator. A detailed study of this interaction could lead to a
better understanding of the interface between quantum and classical behavior.
Two graduate students will be supported by this project, and will be trained in
such experimental techniques as microwave measurement, nanoscale fabrication and
low-temperature physics that are widely used both in academia and in high-
technology industry.