* 1507357
* Multiplexed Mass Spectrometry of Modified RNAs
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Patrick Limbach, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2021
* USD 885,213.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Patrick Limbach and his group at University of
Cincinnati are developing instrumental approaches based on mass spectrometry for
the identification, sequencing and analysis of an important class of
biomolecules, namely transfer ribonucleic acids (tRNAs). Because tRNAs are
involved in the fundamental process of protein translation, it is important that
new tools and approaches be developed that enable the sensitive and accurate
determination of tRNA population and extent of modifications to the original
tRNA sequence. This research will significantly advance the field of tRNA
characterization by establishing the techniques required for multiplexed
characterizations of tRNA populations. The advantage of multiplexed
characterization is that significantly more information on tRNA identity and
sequence modification can be obtained in a shorter time period and from less
sample, as compared to current methods that analyze one tRNA at a time. This
research project is multidisciplinary, involving the areas of chemistry,
biochemistry and molecular biology, thus undergraduates and graduate students
working on this project will gain key instruction and insights into the field of
modern biological mass spectrometry. These activities continue a long-standing
emphasis of Professor Limbach on expanding the number of engaged
underrepresented minorities in science, in general, and mass spectrometry, in
particular.

During the award period, Professor Limbach and his group will develop two
enzymatic approaches for tagging RNase digestion products with mass unique
labels, which allow sample identity to be differentiated. These labeling
strategies will overcome the limitations of existing 16O/18O-labeling
approaches, are directly compatible with automated data analysis, and offer
flexibility in sample purification or other sample manipulation steps. The
labeling strategies include T4 RNA ligase, which will use nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide as the tag, and polyadenylate polymerase, which will use unmodified
and modified dideoxynucleoside triphosphates as the tag. For each labeling
approach, up to a four-plex comparative analysis assay is possible, which will
enable information-rich investigations into a variety of biological processes.
This new enzymatic labeling strategy for multiplexing our comparative analysis
assay will be ideal for moving tRNA modification pattern analysis from bacteria
into archaea and eukaryotes, including mammals. Because tRNA modification is
known to be important in tRNA structure and function, these advances will
provide researchers with a routine method for examining biological effects of
hyper- and hypomodified tRNAs.