* 1507654
* Quantum Confined Electron Systems in Coherently Strained Si-Ge Nanowire Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Emanuel Tutuc, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 363,770.00

Non-technical description: Semiconductor heterostructures play an important role
in many scientific discoveries and technological advances. While the majority of
research has focused on planar heterostructures, non-planar heterostructures,
particularly nanowires, have recently gained significant interest. This research
project addresses fundamental questions regarding the processing and
characterization of non-planar semiconductor heterostructures, particularly
silicon-germanium core-shell nanowires. The research activities are designed to
advance knowledge in materials synthesis and characterization, and thus assist
in the design of future high-speed, low-power electronic devices. The research
activities are well integrated with students education and training in cutting-
edge research. More specifically, this effort educates graduate and
undergraduate students in semiconductor growth, fabrication and characterization
techniques, and the research results are integrated into course material and
outreach lectures to high-school students to encourage careers in science,
technology, and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
Semiconductor nanowires provide a versatile platform to realize epitaxial, non-
planar heterostructures, with relevance for fundamental science and
technological applications. The main objectives of this research project are (1)
to advance the growth of group IV nanowire heterostructures by combining band
engineering and modulation doping, (2) to characterize their structural and
electronic properties and (3) to realize and explore quantum confined electron
systems in coherently strained Si-SiGe core-shell nanowires. More specifically,
these nanowire heterostructures are grown pseudomorphic using a combination of
the vapor-liquid-solid growth for the Si nanowire core, and the ultra-high-
vacuum chemical vapor deposition for epitaxial SiGe shell. The strain
distribution in Si-Ge core-shell nanowires is experimentally probed using micro
Raman spectroscopy coupled with lattice dynamic theory, and compared with
calculations. Nanowire heterostructures-based field-effect transistors with low
resistance contacts are fabricated and characterized under low temperatures, in
order to determine the electron mobility and correlate it with the nanowire
heterostructure design. Band engineering and radial modulation doping are
combined to enhance the mobility of one-dimensional electrons in Si-SiGe core-
shell nanowires. Using self-consistent density simulations and the experimental
nanowire conductance dependence on density, the band offset between the core and
the shell in Si-SiGe core-shell nanowires is extracted. The magnetotransport
properties of high mobility one-dimensional hole system in Ge-SiGe core-shell
nanowires are investigated experimentally, with an emphasis on spin splitting
and spin-orbit interaction in order to assess if helical states with the aligned
spin and momentum can be experimentally observed.