* 1507977
* Multi-functional Polymer Structures for Promoting Neurite Extension and Myelination
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Shanfeng Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2018
* USD 304,921.00

Non-Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Each year in the U.S., several million people suffer
from peripheral nerve injuries that occur with accidental trauma or during the
course of surgery. Failure to restore damaged nerves leads to the loss of muscle
function, impaired sensation, and painful neuropathies. Autologous nerve graft,
the "gold standard" in surgery, has disadvantages such as limited source,
additional surgery, and mismatch between injured nerve and donor nerve.
Synthetic nerve conduits are thus needed for bridging the long gap between
injured peripheral nerve stumps. Polymers used for fabricating suitable nerve
conduits should have capability of resisting tear, suturability, and ease of
incorporation with support cells and nerve growth factor (NGF). There only exist
a few crosslinkable and biodegradable ones for microfabrication of nerve
conduits and it is largely unknown how to achieve optimal material environment
to maximize neuronal and glial cell functions and axonal growth. The PI proposes
an innovative and unique solution to manufacture biodegradable polymer nerve
conduits with complex multi-component structures and multiple functionalities.
By performing comprehensive, systematic studies using a wide range of
physicochemical and structural characteristics of polymers, the PI will achieve
both fundamental understanding and practically useful medical devices for
fostering the synergistic transfer of know-how among research communities of
materials, biomedical engineering, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to integrate photo-reactive, biodegradable polymers
synthesized from poly(ethylene glycol), poly(epsilon-caprolactone), and
poly(L-lysine), and bioactive reagents (e.g., NGF and cell-adhesive peptides),
via solvent-free processes into multi-component, multi-functional structures
with a wide range of physicochemical properties and structural features for
promoting peripheral nerve repair. Using these polymer structures, the PI
proposes to achieve fundamental understanding how polymer physicochemical
properties regulate the behaviors and functions of both neuronal (e.g., dorsal
root ganglion neurons) and glial cells (e.g., conditionally immortalized Schwann
cell precursor line cells), and then optimized to maximize neurite extension and
myelination. As well as the materials and processing parameters, the optimized
polymer structures will guide more precise micro-fabrication of nerve conduits,
and their in vivo animal implantation and histological analysis. The proposed
fabrication method and drug delivery systems can also be applied to other tissue
engineering applications. The PI proposes to provide an open access of
scaffolding and cell regulation; curriculum on Biomaterials Fabrication and
Processing; summer research experience for undergraduates, minorities, and
underrepresented groups; disseminate discoveries to K-12 students through
outreach programs; and develop lab/course modules for public high-school
teachers and students through Pre-collegiate Research Scholars Program and
distance education.