* 1507274
* Quantifying Spin-Orbit Coupling in Rare-Earth Metals via Inverse Spin Hall Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Fengyuan Yang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 365,026.00

Non-technical description: Rare earth metals and alloys are strategically
important materials for several technologies that have significantly impacted
society, including electric and hybrid vehicles, permanent magnets, catalysts,
energy-efficient lightings, and lasers. The unique characteristics of rare
earths arise from their electronic structure and properties. Understanding
special aspects of these in rare-earth metals can provide guidance for future
transformative technologies based on rare-earth materials. In addition, yttrium
iron garnet (YIG) is an important magnetic material widely used in microwave
applications such as telecommunication and radar technologies, and recently in
spin pumping. The YIG films with state-of-the-art quality grown in the principal
investigator's group improve the spin pumping efficiency and therefore the
probability for future application of pure spin transport devices. The ability
to produce top-quality materials is essential for enhancing the global
competitiveness of the United States. This project also includes an effort
toward improving diversity in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
fields, including: advising an underrepresented minority student in the American
Physical Society Bridge Program at the Ohio State University, promoting
participation of a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students in
cutting-edge research, and building superconductor magnetic levitation
experiments for a local high school in encouraging young students to pursue a
career in the STEM fields.

Technical description: The objective of this research project is to investigate
the inverse spin Hall effect and spin-orbit coupling in the lanthanide rare-
earth metals and understand the systematic behavior of spin Hall physics in this
group of fundamentally intriguing and technologically important materials. One
major focus of the spintronics field is the pursuit of materials with large spin
Hall effect as characterized by the spin Hall angle. This has led to
quantitative determination of spin Hall angles in a broad range of materials,
including the systematic measurements on the 3d and 5d transition metals by the
principle investigator?s group. In fact, transition metals exhibits some of the
largest spin Hall angles due to the large orbital moment of the d electrons,
which points toward the possibility of finding even larger spin Hall effect in
rare-earth metals due to their giant f-orbital moments and large atomic numbers
as predicted by theory. However, the spin Hall effect in rare-earth metals is
essentially unexplored to date. Ferromagnetic resonance spin pumping of pure
spin currents from YIG thin films into metals is a versatile and reliable
technique for characterizing the inverse spin Hall effect and extracting spin
Hall angle. This project has the following goals: (1) understand the intrinsic
inverse spin Hall effect in pure lanthanide rare-earth metals and uncover the
role of 4f electrons in spin Hall effect; (2) investigate the extrinsic inverse
spin Hall effect arising from rare-earth impurities in copper and gold; (3)
characterize the interfacial spin conductances between the rare earth metals and
other materials to understand spin transfer efficiency across interfaces. The
expected outcome of this research is the systematic and quantitative
understanding of the spin Hall physics in rare earth metals, which, in
principle, possess all the attributes for the emergence of exceptionally large
spin Hall effect.