* 1507069
* UNS: RUI:  Reactions, Mechanisms, and Intermediates in Hydrocarbon Fuel Oil Produced from Brown Grease:  Important Information for Scale Up to Commercial Production.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Lawrence Pratt, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 239,364.00

PI: Lawrence M. Pratt Proposal Number: 1507069

Brown grease is a semi-solid mixture of fats, oils, and greases that collect in
the sewage system and sewage treatment plants, and which must be collected and
removed to prevent blockages, overflows, and damage to equipment. The volume of
this waste, somewhere between one and two billion gallons per year, is
sufficient to consider its recycling into liquid transportation fuel as opposed
to incinerating it, which produces greenhouse gases. This goal of this project
is develop a process to convert brown grease into a fuel similar to kerosene
using a process called low-temperature pyrolysis, where the brown grease is
heated up in absence of air. The research suggests that trace metals such as
iron that are present in brown grease may promote the reaction process, and so
the research plan will focus on determining which reaction steps in the overall
process are catalyzed by these metals. The proposed research will be carried out
by a team of undergraduate students at the Medgar Evers College of the City
University of New York (CUNY), which is a minority serving institution. Benefits
of this research include increasing the supply of non-fossil fuels, reduced
greenhouse gas emissions, elimination of brown grease disposal problems, and
training of underrepresented minority students in chemistry, energy, and
environmental science. This project also has international collaborators from
Malaysia and Vietnam that are interested in using the new technology to solve
similar waste steam problems in their respective countries.

Unlike triglycerides extracted from vegetable oils, brown grease is
predominantly free fatty acids, and so cannot undergo the homogeneous
transesterification to biodiesel. The overall goal of the proposed research is
to develop a fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanisms for the low-
temperature pyrolysis of brown grease to linear hydrocarbons. It is hypothesized
that the reaction scheme proceeds by a two-step process were fatty acids in the
waste stream are decarboxylated to ketone intermediates and then deoxygenated to
hydrocarbons. Furthermore, it is hypothesized that soluble iron or copper
present in the waste matrix catalyzes some of these reactions. The research plan
has three objectives. The first objective is to elucidate the major reaction
pathways from brown grease and model mixtures of the waste matrix to hydrocarbon
products. The second objective is to determine how the principal metals found in
brown grease catalyze these reactions. The third objective is to develop a
continuous reaction process and assess the energy return on energy invested for
sustainable energy concepts based on recovery and conversion of brown grease to
fuel. The experimental approach will employ gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and thermogravimetric analysis
to characterize the reaction system. Computational quantum chemistry will also
be used to elucidate the reaction mechanisms and to help determine whether some
compounds observed in the reaction mixture are byproducts or intermediates.
Although the research focuses on brown grease, the research outcomes have
potential to develop new routes and fundamental understanding for the chemical
conversion of free fatty acids to fuel. The proposed research will be carried
out by a team of undergraduate students at the Medgar Evers College of the City
University of New York (CUNY), which is a minority serving institution.