* 1507155
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Ion Mobility Spectrometry Radiative Ion-Ion Neutralization for gas-phase ion transduction
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Eric Davis, Azusa Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2019
* USD 157,951.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Davis at Azusa Pacific University APU) and Professor
Clowers at Washington State University (WSU) are pursuing a new approach for
detecting and characterizing chemicals at trace levels using a technique termed
Radiative Ion-Ion Neutralization (RIIN). Under the guidance of Drs. Davis and
Clowers, a combined team of undergraduate and graduate researchers advance an
innovative approach to chemical detection that has the potential to directly
benefit a number of existing technologies routinely used for environmental
monitoring, medical diagnostics, and threat detection in both the civilian and
military domains. Current methods for detecting trace chemicals in the field
often rely upon technology that not only ignores diagnostically-useful
information, but restricts the chemical detection limits that may be reached.
Successful characterization of the Radiative Ion-Ion Neutralization (RIIN)
mechanism enhances the levels of information provided from rapid chemical
measurements and impact fields from preliminary security screening to
biochemistry. Through the implementation of this project, students from APU have
the opportunity to travel to WSU during the summer academic months to work with
Dr. Clowers and his students in a graduate-level research environment while
students from WSU have the opportunity to travel to APU during the academic year
to gain experience leading research and mentoring undergraduate research
assistants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing approaches for ion detection at high
pressure are inherently limited by the signal-to-noise performance
characteristics of analog circuitry. At present, no compatible ion amplification
technology is capable of single ion-counting under atmospheric conditions. This
has constrained the growth and development of ion mobility spectrometry as a
trace analytical tool. Radiative Ion-Ion Neutralization (RIIN) provides a new
means of recording gas-phase ion signals that also integrates optical
spectroscopy with traditional ion mobility measurements. The development and
characterization of the RIIN detection platform is pursued across three
objectives: 1) Development of RIIN as a quantitative gas-phase ion-transduction
mechanism; 2) Determination of the RIIN photon release mechanism; and 3)
Leveraging wavelength resolved RIIN signals for chemical identification. The
unique signal transduction provided by the RIIN system directly benefits
platforms focused on characterizing atmospheric pressure gas-phase ions and adds
a highly informative second dimension of information that can more precisely
assess the chemical content of complex mixtures. An equally important goal of
this work is the integration of RIIN-informed gas-phase spectroscopy into the
ion mobility experiment. The resulting multidimensional platform represents both
a new analytical methodology and means of directly probing the chemical
functional groups for gas-phase ions.