* 1507169
* Collaborative Research: Bone as an interpenetrating composite material
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Iwona Jasiuk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: This collaborative project award by the Biomaterials
program in the Division of Materials Research to University of Illinois Urbana-
Champion and University of California San Diego is to investigate a new model of
bone as a material that the two phases in bone, proteins and minerals, are
interpenetrating (continuous), and to explore what implications this hypothesis
has on bone's mechanical properties, including strength and resistance to
fracture. Bone is made of collagen and other proteins, nano-sized minerals and
water, all hierarchically self-assembled. Bone has excellent properties due to
its complex hierarchical structure; it is strong, stiff, tough and light weight.
However, factors contributing to these superior properties are still not well
understood. This fundamental and interdisciplinary study will include state-of-
the art experiments and multiscale modeling, and will focus on porcine
developing bone (0-48 months) which exhibits significant changes in its
structure and composition with age. Results from this research will lead to
better predictions of bone quality in humans, which is still an outstanding
clinical issue, and will guide in the design of novel synthetic composite
materials with superior mechanical properties for applications in biomedical,
transportation and energy fields. Students from diverse backgrounds will
participate in this cutting-edge research. New courses will be developed and
short courses and other presentations will be given to technical and lay
audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Bone is a
biological nanocomposite material made of collagen and other proteins,
hydroxyapatite minerals and water, all hierarchically assembled. This complex
structure gives bone its superior properties (strong, stiff, tough and light
weight). However, the contributing factors are still not well understood. In
this collaborative project, researchers will test two hypotheses: 1) bone is a
composite material made of interpenetrating organic and mineral phases; and 2)
synthetic bioinspired composites with interpenetrating phases will have superior
mechanical properties, compared to composites with a dispersed reinforcing
phase. More specifically, these investigators will determine if the
interpenetrating model is valid for bone with varying degrees of mineralization
and different microstructures via multiscale experiments and modeling.
Developing porcine bone (0-48 months old), which exhibits a range of
microstructures and mineral contents will be studied as part of this project.
Strains at the collagen/mineral level as a function of applied stress, using
high energy x-rays diffracting at small- and wide-angles, will be compared with
those obtained theoretically. In addition, synthetic bioinspired materials with
interpenetrating phases will be designed and tested, and their properties
compared to those of composites with a dispersed reinforcement. This project is
expected to provide fundamental understanding of bone's hierarchical structure,
which will lead to better predictions of bone quality and will guide the design
of new bioinspired synthetic composites for different applications. Students
from diverse backgrounds are expected to participate in this cutting-edge
research, including the students from Title V Hispanic-serving high schools. New
courses will be developed, and presentations will be given to technical and lay
audiences.