* 1507096
* Networked Battery System Management and Control for Active Diagnosis, Observability and Resilient Operation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Le Yi Wang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 425,000.00

Batteries are one of the most critical enabling technologies for achieving
clean, efficient and sustainable energy development in the transportation and
power sectors. Advanced vehicle and power grid battery systems consist of
networked battery modules of diverse types and characteristics. System-level
performance can be interrupted or completely disabled by subsystem abnormality.
Beyond typical battery management systems (BMS) for individual battery modules,
this project will develop a novel resilient battery management system (RBMS) for
reliable operations of networked battery systems. This RBMS will be capable of
detecting and locating abnormality, prevent them from propagating, and of
reconfiguring the battery system for sustained operation. This critical and
transformative technology will support electric vehicles for extended battery
life, sustain military missions under limited energy resources, and maintain
smart electricity grids without interruption. Beyond its direct technological
advance in battery characterization, control and management, this project will
have significant educational, societal, and economic impact. It will also help
advance technology and workforce development in these energy storage and the
many associated fields of application. Within this project, the team will
integrate findings into battery technology curricula in the existing Electrical-
Drive Vehicle Engineering programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels at
Wayne State University. Courses and training seminars on advanced battery
management systems will be developed for students, engineers, and technicians to
enhance workforce training in vehicle electrification, sustainable energy
development, and smart grids. The success of this project will help achieve
cleaner, more efficient, and more reliable transportation, power grids, and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Battery abnormality conditions include potential
health deterioration indicated by drifting of characterizing variables into
unacceptable regions, faults that must be cleared by timely remedy actions, and
failures that are not recoverable. Networked battery systems introduce unique
and daunting challenges, including sensing limitations for prompt fault
diagnosis and localization, fast and accurate joint estimation of state of
charge and characterizing parameters, and advanced power electronics for system
reconfiguration. Current battery systems and their management do not include
such functions. Employing methodologies from discrete event systems, system
identification and state estimation, stochastic analysis, and advanced power
electronics control, this project will introduce a new RBMS framework for
integrated control, active diagnosis, and sustained operation of networked
battery systems. &lt;br/&gt;Collaborating with industry leaders in battery
technology, electric vehicles, and smart grids, the team will develop a new
theory of active network observers, real-time active diagnosis and localization
of abnormal conditions, reconfiguration, and adaptive BMS strategies. The
proposed methods represent a transformative technology for managing different
types of batteries and structures, including new or old batteries, for vehicle
and grid applications. The main approaches of this project have some distinctive
and novel features: (1) Discrete event system (DES)-based diagnosis strategies
and control decisions. By using systematic DES strategies, fast diagnosis and
localization of abnormal conditions can be achieved; (2) Real-time battery
characterization for module-level diagnosis. A battery's states and parameters
will be jointly estimated for characterizing batteries in real time; and (3)
Active system reconfiguration to accommodate resilient operation and adaptive
battery management systems. Hardware reconfiguration will prevent local
abnormality from spreading to other parts of battery systems. The battery
management systems then self-adjust to sustain operation under the new
configuration.