* 1507456
* Understanding the roles of conformational constraints in functional phosphotyrosine mimics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joshua Kritzer, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Joshua Kritzer of Tufts University to explore the
structures and functions of molecules that affect phosphotyrosine signaling. In
all higher organisms, important signals for cell growth and function are
mediated by phosphotyrosine. While some of the proteins involved in
phosphotyrosine signaling can be inhibited using small molecules, most are
difficult for chemists to target. In this project, the Kritzer group will use
new, structurally complex molecules to attempt to modulate the activity of
phosphotyrosine-signaling proteins in vitro and in living cells. Understanding
the structures and functions of these molecules is expected to advance our
ability to design molecules with useful function, and our knowledge of how such
molecules interact with living systems. Graduate students and undergraduates
participating in this project will also participate in grade school workshops
focused on teaching the scientific method using microbes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there are many useful and selective inhibitors
available for blocking tyrosine kinases, there are almost no useful inhibitors
for the other components of phosphotyrosine signaling, namely SH2 domains and
tyrosine phosphatases. Traditional approaches to inhibiting these proteins use
phosphotyrosine isosteres, which improve affinity at the cost of low selectivity
and poor cell uptake. By contrast, successive constraints within a non-
phosphorylated peptide produce molecules that mimic phosphotyrosine via their
conformation. This produces inhibitors with simultaneous improvements in
affinity, selectivity, metabolic stability, and cellular uptake. Small, highly
constrained peptides are a promising source for inhibitors of SH2 domains and
tyrosine phosphatases, which would have direct applications in many aspects of
cell biology. If the findings can be generalized, it may be possible to target a
range of protein-protein interactions with this strategy.