* 1507813
* Redox Photochemistry of Oxidized Bases in DNA and RNA
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Cynthia Burrows, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2019
* USD 467,025.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Cynthia J. Burrows at the University of Utah to
investigate the redox photochemistry of oxidized bases in DNA and RNA. Most
chemical reactions inside the cell are catalyzed by proteins (enzymes), yet the
naturally occurring amino acids are not very redox-active. To conduct reduction
or oxidation reactions, enzymes rely on co-enzymes such as vitamins B2
(riboflavin), B3 (nicotinamide) or B12 (cobalamin). Interestingly, these co-
enzymes are all derivatives of RNA, usually dinucleotides comprising adenosine
plus a redox-active heterocycle. The project being supported will examine the
hypothesis that simple oxidized derivatives of naturally occurring DNA or RNA
bases can perform as redox cofactors to catalyze electron-transfer reactions.
These modified bases will be components of minimal ribozyme or DNAzyme
structures, and reactions will be initiated with light. Experiments conducted in
the Burrows laboratory will be complemented by ultrafast spectroscopic
measurements and computational work performed in collaboration. Graduate,
undergraduate and high school students trained on the project will therefore be
engaged in research at the interface of modern bioorganic and biophysical
chemistry while testing hypotheses about potential ways in which life emerged
from simple biopolymers on Early Earth or other planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, researchers will use organic synthesis and oligonucleotide
assembly to study catalytic redox reactions mediated by flavins and flavin-like
heterocycles including 8-oxoguanine. Minimal oligomers that can self-assemble
into G-quadruplexes containing binding sites for nucleotide cofactors will be
designed and synthesized. Biophysical measurements (NMR, CD, UV) will determine
folded structures and stabilities, and will be complemented by single-molecule
investigations of G-quadruplexes in nanopore cavities to provide kinetic
stability and population studies. The photophysics of electron-transfer
reactions within these purine-rich complexes will help in understanding why the
present-day heterocyclic bases were chosen for DNA and RNA, while others have
been fine-tuned as redox ribonucleotide cofactors. The work will provide
insights into how a systems chemistry approach to chemical evolution might help
explain the emergence of early life.