* 1507810
* Statics and Dynamics of Spatially and Dimensionally Constrained Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 478,236.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The past couple decades have witnessed
remarkable advances in nanostructured and multifunctional ceramic oxides to
harness their unusual non-linear properties. Ferroelectric (FE) and
ferromagnetic (FM) oxides, in particular, have received considerable attention
due to their technological prospects for non-volatile memories and storage
media, respectively. However, there remain many open questions in term of the
detailed understanding of FE and FM phenomena as a function of their dimensional
parameters and the nature of the interfaces. This project addresses innovative
patterning approaches for creating nanoscale architecture of multifunctional
oxides, and the role of spatial and dimensional confinement. The research is
expected to provide predictive strategies and design rules for nanopatterned
oxides for harnessing their useful properties. The project also involves
experiential and immersion opportunity for journalism students to follow the
process of creativity in scientific pursuits, and for science and engineering
students to learn about the process of reporting and communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;The scientific underpinning
of the research revolves around understanding of the decisive role of spatial
and dimensional constraints on microstructural evolution, localized
characteristics of interfaces, and size/shape-specific properties/phenomena in
FE/FM oxides. Embedded in the scientific quest are nanopatterning techniques for
complex oxides. Innovative hybrid approaches based on beam-pen lithography (BPL)
are coupled to soft chemistry (sol-gel) to generate large area oxide
nanopatterns. This approach is necessary to address critical scientific issues
associated with phase transformation (crystallization) and phase separation
under confinement. Advanced techniques of X-ray scattering and electron
microscopy are expected to unravel, down to atomic scale, the nature of
interfaces between substrate and nanopattern and the dynamics of
ferroelectricity and magnetism as a function of nanopattern parameters and
substrate constraints. The research students, including graduate students and
undergraduate interns, are trained in advanced microscopy and characterization
tools and techniques which are essential for modern materials developments.