* 1507508
* GOALI: Stable Nanomechanical Oscillators with Large f*Q Product
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 06/30/2018
* USD 410,000.00

'1. Proposal Title: GOALI: Stable Nanomechanical Oscillators with Large f*Q
Product 2. Brief description of project Goals: Nanoscale electro-opto-mechanical
systems will be fabricated in diamond, and their applications in precision
measurements (e.g. mass, force) will be explored. 3. Abstract: a) Nontechnical
Abstract: Diamond is a fascinating material with many remarkable properties. In
fact, in many ways it is the ultimate engineering material - the engineer's best
friend! For example, diamond has high mechanical hardness and is one of the best
thermal conductors. It is optically transparent from the ultra-violet to far
infra-red and has a high refractive index (n = 2.4). Finally, it is
biocompatible and chemically inert. These properties make diamond a highly
desirable material for many applications, including those in life sciences, oil
discovery, and industrial sensing. Many of these applications require
realization of high-frequency (f), high quality factor (Q), stable, nanoscale
electro-mechanical and opto-mechanical systems (NEMS and NOMS). These systems
could lead to realization of stable oscillators and sensitive mass measurements,
and could operate in both harsh environments (due to diamond's chemical
inertness) and in bio-medical setting (due to diamond's bio-compatibility).
Despite its unique properties, however, single-crystal diamond has not found
many applications in NEMS and NOMS yet! Why? All NEMS/ NOMS platforms have an
important feature in common: they consist of a device layer typically a thin
film supported by a substrate of a different material that can be sacrificially
removed. Single-crystal diamond is one example from an extensive list of
materials many with attractive material properties for which such thin film
platform does not exist. To overcome this obstacle, the team will leverage
angled-etching fabrication technique (pioneered by Loncar group) that allows for
realization of functional devices in bulk diamond substrates, and state of the
art materials and material expertise provided by industrial partner (Element 6).
b) Technical Abstract: The goal of the proposed experimental program is to
investigate the potential of single crystal diamond as a NEMS/ NOMS material.
The program will address many fundamental questions that pertain to crystalline
NEMS, including material synthesis, nanofabrication, performance limits, and so
on. In particular, potential for realization of high f*Q product mechanical
oscillators in diamond and their applications in precision measurements (mass,
force) and as a stable timing reference will be explored. This will be
accomplished using angled-etching technique to realize cantilevers, contour
resonators, acoustic-wave whispering gallery mode resonators, and optomechanical
crystals (photonic-phononic lattices) in single crystal diamond substrates.
Angled-etching technique, recently demonstrated by Harvard team, is based on a
combination of top-down etching, where ions in the RIE chamber impinge
vertically on the diamond surface, with subsequent angled etching, where ions
are directed at an angle on the etched features. In the later etch step, the
sample is inserted in a Faraday cage, whose geometry defines the angle of
incidence of ions on the etched substrate. Collaboration between academic
research lab and industrial partner is mutually beneficial: industrial partner
(Element Six) will provide state-of-the-art diamond substrates, bulk diamond
processing (including polishing and annealing), and when appropriate support
commercial development; on the other hand, Harvard team will provide insight
into cutting edge NEMS and NOMS research, and develop novel nanofabrication and
characterization techniques of interest to industry. The program has strong
theoretical and experimental component, addresses both fundamental and
engineering aspects of nanoscale mechanics and optics, and represents a unique
research and educational opportunity for undergraduate, graduate and post-
graduate students. Collaboration with industrial partner will enable internship
opportunities for students. The team will continue giving public lectures at
local schools and Museum of Science (Boston), and mentoring high school students
interested in science and technology.