* 1507803
* Femtosecond Microscopy of Charge Transport in Perovskite Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Libai Huang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 429,940.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Charge transport in semiconductors is an
important process that determines efficiency for devices such as solar cells and
light emitting diodes. Perovskite materials, a new class of semiconductors, are
very promising alternatives to silicon because of their extreme low cost and
ease of fabrication with abundant starting materials. In the past 5 years,
perovskite solar cells have demonstrated efficiency approaching 20%, surpassing
other technologies including organic and amorphous silicon solar cells. A major
research challenge is an incomplete understanding of the relationship between
charge transport properties and film structure, which prevents a rational
approach in material design. This research addresses this challenge by
unraveling limiting factors for charge transport in perovskite thin films by
directly imaging how charges move in space and in time to enable design
principles for achieving efficient charge transport. The interdisciplinary
nature of the project provides a perfect platform for training K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students to gain experience at the frontiers of
nanotechnology and renewable energy research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Perovskite thin films are highly promising for next
generation solar cell applications. A major difficulty in unraveling mechanisms
controlling charge transport relevant for device efficiency lies in the complex
and heterogeneous morphology of these perovskite thin films. A comprehensive
understanding of how charge carrier dynamics and transport are affected by
morphology is required for the design of optimal devices. Addressing this
challenge requires experimental tools that are capable of mapping morphology-
dependent dynamics and transport directly with simultaneous spatial and temporal
resolutions. In this project, femtosecond transient absorption microscopy
provides first-of-a-kind measurements of charge transport in space and time and
across grain boundaries in perovskite thin films. Charge populations and
dynamics following photoexcitation are imaged with simultaneous ~200 fs temporal
resolution and ~50 nm spatial precision. To gain understanding of how morphology
such as crystallinity, domain size, and grain boundary affect transport,
transient absorption microscopy is correlated with atomic force microscopy and
X-Ray scattering measurements. This research unravels the relationship between
charge transport and morphology to provide rational design principles for
efficient devices.