* 1507066
* UNS: Developing Pupillary Light Reflex Technologies for Early Screening of Neurodevelopmental Disorders in Infants
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Gang Yao, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,026.00

1507066(Yao)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neurodevelopmental disability affects more
than 12% newborns. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) alone develops in 1 in 68
children in US. The only effective treatment available is through early
therapeutic intervention. Early identification of children at risk for
neurodevelopment disorders is critical to ensure affected children receive
prompt treatment. However, the current standard screening methods are based on
parent reporting and behavioral observation, which cannot reliably identify
neurodevelopmental disorders at a young age. As a result, many affected children
cannot receive intervention in a timely manner. Therefore, there is an urgent
need for more effective ways to monitor normal neurodevelopmental progress in
infants and toddlers. In this project, the investigators aim to address this
unmet need by developing technologies based on pupillary light reflex (PLR) for
early screening of neurodevelopmental disorders in young children. PLR is a
simple, fast and non-invasive test that can reveal a multitude of information
about the brain. Recent studies have revealed that PLR is abnormal in children
with neurodevelopmental disorders. The investigators will first develop an
advanced imaging system to enable precise PLR test in infants and toddlers. In
addition, new data analysis methods will be developed to obtain accurate
neurological information from the PLR data. If successful, this project will
lead to a technology that can benefit millions of children affected by
neurodevelopmental disorders to ensure they are diagnosed and treated in time.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in this highly
interdisciplinary project. The investigators will also integrate this research
into their teaching to help train next generation of scientist and engineers
with strong capabilities in solving interdisciplinary
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop an
objective neurological measure based on pupillary light reflex (PLR) for early
screening of neurodevelopmental disorders in infants. American Academy of
Pediatrics estimates that more than 12% children are born with a
neurodevelopmental disability that will require medical, educational and special
services remediation. In particular, autism spectrum disorder ("ASD", a group of
neurodevelopmental disorders) alone develops in every 1 out of 68 children in
US. Early identification of children at risk for neurodevelopment disorders is
critical for a prompt diagnosis and early intervention. However, current
screening practice relies on parent reporting and behavioral observation which
suffers from poor accuracy and sensitivity. Pupillary light reflex (PLR) is a
simple functional neurological test that measures the pupil size changes in
response to a short light flash. Recent studies have shown that PLR may have the
potential to be used as an objective biomarker for the early identification of
neurodevelopmental disorders. In this project, the investigators aim to develop
several key enabling technologies for applying PLR in young children. A portable
pupillary imaging system will be designed and constructed for accurate
measurement of transient PLR responses in infants and toddlers without the need
of any physical constraint or contact to the subject. The proposed system
incorporates a fast tracking component that can remotely track the subject's
movement and redirect the high resolution pupil imaging system to acquire PLR.
In addition, a physiological model of the PLR will be developed by constructing
an iris muscle model with neural inputs from different branches of the autonomic
nervous system (ANS). The specific parasympathetic and sympathetic modulations
will be extracted by numerically fitting this model to the experimental PLR
data. Such specific neurological information is important for better clinical
diagnosis and treatment because ANS dysfunction is common in neurodevelopmental
disorders. Furthermore, these new technologies will be applied in a pilot study
to evaluate the use of PLR for monitoring typical neurodevelopment in infants.
Integrated with these research activities, educational activities are proposed
to train next generation of scientist and engineers with strong capabilities in
solving interdisciplinary problems.