* 1507101
* Oxide Surfaces, From Bulk to Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Laurence Marks, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 706,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Oxide surfaces are an important frontier, with
applications in many areas of technological importance ranging from catalysis to
the emerging field of oxide electronics. Our understanding of oxide surfaces is
relatively primitive and for future commercial applications industry will demand
five-sigma controlled growth of oxides both at the large scale and at the
nanoscale, which will require quantitative understanding of how the surface
structures depends upon the conditions used to make the materials. This work
targets determining the key concepts to enable design of oxide surfaces for
specific applications in catalysis as well as to control the growth of oxide
thin films and for other applications. In addition to activities in supporting
minority and underrepresented students within Prof. Mark's group, this project
also supports work assisting users from more than 2000 groups around the world
using the Wien2k software from 84 different countries which range from developed
countries such as the USA, Spain, and Sweden to developing countries such as
India and under-developed countries such as South Sudan and
Egypt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The project poses the questions
of what is the atomic structure of the surface of more complex oxides at both
the mesoscale and in nanoparticles, how does this connect to the kinetics of
growth or thermodynamics, and what are the predictive rules for oxide surface
structures at both size scales? If we do not know the positions of the atoms at
the surface, it is impossible to explain phenomena such as different shapes of
nanoparticles on different reconstructions and how this changes their catalytic
behavior; different growth modes of technologically important materials on
different reconstructions; different chemical reactivity on different surface
reconstructions as well as the unspoken irreproducibility of oxide growth
experiments. To unravel this information the project is a combined experimental-
theoretical effort combining oxide surface science methods with higher
resolution transmission electron microscopy, density functional theory methods
and continuum based modelling. In addition to the underlying science of oxide
surfaces, the project involves training of graduate and undergraduate students
in cutting-edge research methods, assistance to scientists around the world as
users of the Wien2k density functional code and general science outreach via the
development of Wikepedia pages by graduate students.