* 1507844
* Carrier and Spin Dynamics in Large Spin-Orbit Semiconductor Nanowire Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2019
* USD 489,551.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to research the
properties of artificially grown nanostructures which have the special property
that they have very strong spin interactions. There is tremendous interest in
using such materials as a basis for using the quantum nature of spin states in
computers, because these materials allow control and manipulation of the spins
using either applied magnetic or electric fields. The research group in this
project uses ultrafast laser pulses in the mid-infrared to measure the dynamics
of these electronic states in single nanowires in order to understand what
fundamental interactions dominate their behavior. With this information the
group can optimize the physical nanostructure for specific properties which can
be used in both fundamental physics and also for new technologies. This project
involves training undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the art
techniques for fabricating and measuring nanostructures which is considered a
critical need for the future economic growth in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is to research the properties of semiconductor nanowire heterostructures
which have large spin-orbit interactions, which usually are also materials with
small band gaps. These materials are considered important candidates as a basis
for development of spintronic devices because the spin states can be controlled
and manipulated using applied magnetic and electric fields. The research group
uses pump-probe measurements of the Rayleigh scattering efficiency in the mid-
infrared from single nanowires in order to probe the electronic states and their
dynamics in applied electric and magnetic fields. The fundamental goal of this
research is to understand what fundamental interactions in the nanostructure
control their dynamics in order to find ways to design the nanostructure in
order to control these states. Such optimized nanostructures can be used as a
basis for the study of new physics and the development of new technologies. Both
graduate and undergraduate students in this project are trained in state-of-the-
art synthesis techniques as well as optical spectroscopies which provide
sensitive measure of energy states and their interactions within single
nanostructures.