* 1507488
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: A Bayesian inference/prediction/control framework for optimal management of CO2 sequestration
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Karen Willcox, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 139,614.00

1508713 (Ghattas) / 1507488 (Willcox)/ 1507009
(Stadler)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed work is on integrating
research developments in scientific computing, statistical analysis, and
numerical analysis to provide a common platform for managing CO2 storage.
Results from this work will be important to energy production in the US, an area
of National interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geological carbon storage faces two
main challenges: the risk of inducing seismicity, and leakage of the injected
CO2 into potable aquifers. The characterization of the injection site and
continued monitoring of the CO2 migration as well as stress changes in the
region of elevated pressure are therefore particularly important to maximize the
amount of CO2 that can be stored, while ensuring the long term safety of storage
sites. To address these challenges, the overall goal of the proposed research is
to (1) integrate well pressure and, where available, surface deformation data
into coupled poromechanics models by solving the inverse problem for unknown
subsurface properties; (2) to quantify the uncertainty in the inversion for the
subsurface properties, and (3) to use the resulting inferred poromechanics
models together with their uncertainty to design optimal control strategies for
well injection that optimize the amount of stored CO2 while controlling the risk
of seismicity. It is essential that this poromechanics based
inference/prediction/control framework takes into account uncertainties at every
stage, since both the observational data and the models are uncertain. However,
solving stochastic inverse/optimal control problems for large-scale PDE models,
such as those of poromechanics, is intractable using current methods, which
suffer from the "curse of dimensionality." Thus, it is proposed to overcome
these barriers by developing scalable methods and algorithms that exploit the
problem structure to reduce effective dimensionality. While the end application
of CO2 storage is quite important in itself, the framework to be developed can
be applicable to a broader set of science and engineering problems for which
large-scale uncertain models must be inferred from large-scale uncertain data,
and then used to solve optimal decision-making problems under uncertainty.