* 1507585
* Electronic Structure of Unconventional Spin-Orbit Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* M. Zahid Hasan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 393,216.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;In an ordinary insulator, such as diamond, the
occupied electronic levels are separated from unoccupied levels by a large
energy barrier known as an energy gap. The energy gap prevents current flow when
an electric field is applied. Recent research has uncovered a new class of
insulators, called topological insulators and related Dirac materials, in which
electrons can bypass the energy gap by moving out to the surfaces of the
insulator. The energy vs. velocity behavior of these unusual electrons moving on
the surface is light-like and follows Dirac equation. They exhibit many unusual
quantum properties which can be harnessed to improve spin-based electronics,
novel forms of quantum computing and energy-efficient devices in the longer run.
This project focuses on studying the details of the novel quantum behaviors of
electrons moving on the surface which will in turn not only lead to better
understanding of the mechanism for doing so but also likely discover new
pathways to applications. Students working on this project develop expertise in
vacuum and nano-technology, material characterization methodologies, and
advanced x-ray optics and electronic spectroscopy techniques preparing them for
scientific careers in industry, academia or government laboratories. Outreach
programs "Quantum Materials" and their integration with Princeton's REU and
others such as "The Leadership Alliance Program: dedicated to increase diversity
in academia" involve many minority and young students and facilitate their entry
into the exciting world of modern science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Discovering new phases of matter with useful electronic or
magnetic properties is an important goal in modern physics. In the past few
years, research has uncovered a new phase of Dirac material dubbed "Topological
Insulators". They exhibit quantum Hall-like effects without magnetic field and
can be operated at room temperatures. In a topological insulator, these effects
lead to surface states that have unusual spin textures with a linear
relationship between energy and momentum (Dirac dispersion). Such states have
been predicted to give rise to dissipationless (energy saving) spin currents,
quantum entanglements and novel macroscopic behavior that obeys axionic
electrodynamics rather than Maxwell's equations and can potentially realize
exotic particles that can be used for fault tolerant quantum computing. Angle-
resolved photoemission spectroscopy is used to study the quantum properties of
several Bi-based 2D and 3D Dirac materials and their magnetic and
superconducting doping-induced interaction and correlation effects under this
project. When new materials with similar properties are discovered they are also
studied in concert and compared with previously known materials. Students
working on this project develop expertise in vacuum and nano-technology,
material characterization methodologies, and advanced x-ray optics and spin- and
photon-polarization resolved electronic spectroscopy techniques preparing them
for future scientific careers in industry, academia or government laboratories.
Outreach programs "Quantum Materials" and their integration with Princeton's REU
and others such as "The Leadership Alliance Program: dedicated to increase
diversity in academia" involve many minority and young students and facilitate
their entry into the exciting world of modern science.