* 1507788
* Coulomb drag in ultra-clean and strongly interacting van der Waals materials: toward exciton condensation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Cory Dean, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 12/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to experimentally
study the interactions between electrons in two coupled two-dimensional (2D)
sheets. When the 2D layers are sufficiently close, interlayer Coulomb
interactions result in momentum transfer so that electrons moving in one layer
cause those in the second sheet to move in response, a phenomenon known as
Coulomb drag. This work will study layered heterostructures of atomically thin
materials -- including graphene and insulating boron nitride --to achieve atomic
control over the spacing between the conducting layers. This will allow the
exploration of Coulomb drag in the strong-coupling limit, and in high-mobility
devices where electrical transport is ballistic. These structures are made
possible by techniques developed by the Principle Investigators to fabricate
ultraclean multi-layered heterostructures by mechanical layering of 2D
materials. The primary effort will be a systematic characterization of the drag
response in monolayer graphene versus temperature, density, layer separation,
and magnetic field. Drag resistance together with inter-layer tunneling will
additionally be used to pursue signatures of a theoretically-predicted exciton
condensate phase in which spatially indirect excitons consisting of paired
electrons and holes confined to separate layers condensed into a superfluid
ground state. Careful studies of the Coulomb drag response provides a unique
tool in which to study electron-electron interactions in mesoscopic systems,
which is expected to have significant impact beyond the study of 2D systems,
since electron-electron interactions underlie the rich and complex physics of
correlated materials. If successful, this research could also enable
revolutionary new low power electronic devices. The collaborative
interdisciplinary work will provide training to a postdoctoral researcher as
well as providing research experience to high school and junior level
undergraduate students. Outreach efforts will focus on expanding long-term
relationships with teachers at two affiliated public schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is
to experimentally study Coulomb drag in high mobility double layer quantum wells
fabricated from 2D materials, such as graphene and related van der Waals
materials, in the strongly interacting limit of small interlayer separation. The
primary goal will be a systematic characterization of the drag response in
monolayer graphene heterostructures versus temperature, density and interlayer
separation, under both zero and finite magnetic field, through transport
measurements. Several outstanding questions will be addressed such as the
anomalous density and temperature dependences reported previously, origin of the
anomalous drag response at the double neutrality point, and the nature of the
Hall response in the finite magnetic field regime. Drag resistance together with
inter-layer tunneling will additionally be used to pursue signatures of the
exciton condensate phase in two regimes (i) electron-hole graphene layers at
zero magnetic field, and (ii) electron-electron graphene layers at half filled
Landau levels in the quantum Hall regime. The experimental effort will include
studies of heterostructures fabricated from bilayer graphene, and mono and few-
layer transition metal dichalcogenides where the effect of a bandgap on the
exciton binding has so far received no experimental attention. The Coulomb drag
response in graphene is not well understood at the most basic level. Theoretical
efforts to model this system have yielded conflicting results, none of which
well match the few experimental studies that have been reported so far. In this
regard the systematic study proposed here promises to lay important groundwork
for future understanding of this system, and more generally to provide
quantitative boundaries on key physical parameters necessary to accurately model
electron transport in graphene such as the strength of electron screening versus
density and the specific role of the dielectric environment.