* 1507841
* RUI: RHIC Physics at Muhlenberg College and In the Allentown Community
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Brett Fadem, Muhlenberg College
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2018
* USD 165,000.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons, protons and neutrons, are made
up of more elementary particles called quarks. The main physics program
supported by this grant is to measure the energy of particles produced at small
scattering angles from collisions of atomic nuclei at high energies, carried out
at the Brookhaven National Lab using the PHENIX particle detector. These
measurements will help to understand the new state of matter, a plasma of
quarks, that is formed from such collisions. In particular, the results of this
measurement are expected to probe the initial conditions of quarks and other
strongly-interacting particles in the nucleus before the collision. In recent
years, we have learned that the initial conditions of the quarks before the
collision result in hot-spots within the quark-gluon plasma, and how these hot-
spots spread their energy within the plasma provides information on this new
state of matter. It is worth noting that this research program is carried out at
an undergraduate institution, Muhlenberg College, and is a highlight of the
Physics Department. Most of the physics majors have participated in it by the
time of their graduation. Furthermore, almost all of the participants have
chosen to continue in STEM fields after
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theorists have suggested that measurements of
transverse energy are a barometer of a state of saturated plasma. Both studies
of existing data from a relativistic heavy ion collisions (RHIC) experiment,
called the beam energy scan, by the PHENIX Collaboration and work on transverse
energy in the forward and backward kinematic regions are testing gluon-
saturation models in ultra-relativistic heavy ion collisions. To date,
transverse energy in the forward and backward kinematic regions has not been
reported. Associated with regions of higher net baryon chemical potential on the
phase diagram of nuclear matter, these measurements, along with existing
transverse energy measurements at central rapidity for a variety of colliding
systems and beam energies, provide new insight into the strongly interacting
quark gluon plasma.