* 1507626
* Instrument Development: Development of Distance of Flight Mass Spectrometry Techniques for Chemical Measurement
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Gary Hieftje, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 02/29/2016
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurements and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry is funding Drs. Steven Ray and Gary Hieftje at Indiana
University to develop a group of chemical measurement techniques based on a new
type of mass spectrometer, known as the distance-of-flight mass spectrometer
(DOF-MS). The DOF-MS technique measures the distance each ion travels over a
specified flight period to determine the ion mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). It
offers many potential advantages, such as the determination of m/z for ions of
very high mass, increased speed of measurement, improved dynamic range,
adjustable and improved measurement resolution, and the subsequent collection of
ions for follow-on analysis by other techniques. The applicability of a hybrid
DOF-TOF MS instrument by the scientific community is expected to span across
many fields, including bioanalytical chemistry, microbiology, the energy scieces
and molecular biology. Drs. Ray and Hieftje are working with local mass
spectrometry user facilities and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) to
broaden the user basis and enhance the scientific impact of the new instrument
being developed. Postdoctoral and graduate students involved in the research
project experience valuable interdisciplinary training. Drs. Ray and Hieftje
also are engaged in outreach activities by parterning with Rose-Hulman Institute
of Technology, a local engineering-focused undergraduate institution, and a
local K- 12 science education center to promote STEM student training and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is the development of a
set of chemical measurement strategies based on distance-of-flight mass
spectrometry (DOF-MS). In this project, a combination of DOF-MS and TOF-MS is
developed as a means to realize the benefits of both approaches in a single
instrument. This DOF/TOF strategy may have the potential to significantly
improve chromatographic MS detection with extremely wide dynamic range, fast
temporal response, and wide coverage. Specifically, Drs. Ray and Hieftje couple
the spatial segregation of DOF-MS to a novel type of charge-sensitive ion
detector array known as a focal-plane camera (FPC) to simultaneously measure the
ion currents observed at every spatially discrete detector element, thus
detecting the m/z and abundance for each desired mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) with
very wide dynamic range and excellent temporal registry. In addition, Dr. Ray
and his collaborators are developing a Zoom-TOF-MS approach that uses the ion
focusing strategies of DOF-MS with a TOF-MS setup to improve the mass resolving
power of the instrument while requiring only minor functional and architectural
changes. Zoom-TOF-MS provides enhanced resolution as well as increased temporal
resolution of the mass analyzer, and improves the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N).
The supported research activities could potentially provide an enabling new tool
for a broad segment of the scientific community.