* 1507469
* CDS&amp;E: Studying Multiscale Fluid Turbulence via Open Numerical Laboratories
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 379,599.00

1507469(Meneveau)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to discover
new fundamental phenomena in turbulent flow by generating new high fidelity data
and by making these new data available to the whole scientific community of the
Nation. Basic features of turbulence that depend on the multiple time and length
scales observed in turbulent flows will be explored, and software tools that
enable such analysis will be developed and offered to the research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lagrangian chaos and transition to turbulence will be
studied using datasets arising from massive computer simulations that are
ingested into web-accessible, open numerical laboratories. It is known that the
transition to turbulence occurs through a sequence of phenomena characterized by
high spatio-temporal complexity. However, very little is known about how
Lagrangian chaos manifests itself at the multiple scales of turbulence, and how
transitional behavior of turbulence may be better characterized. Turbulence also
is known to contain vortical structures at the smallest scales, and at large-
scales. This project aims to answer fundamental questions about the hierarchical
organization of vortical structures at multiple scales and their relationship to
the energy cascade. The co-PIs have developed an open, computational data-
enabled turbulence laboratory where the entire space-time data is available to
the wider research community. The project will further develop multiscale
versions of the 4D flow datasets, effectively adding a 5th dimension (scale) to
the data. While the currently available resource at Johns Hopkins is focused on
isotropic turbulence, the proposed effort will extend the data to other more
complex cases than isotropic turbulence, like channel flow data. Availability of
data and availability of analysis tools will enable a step change in turbulence
research, possibly transforming the way researchers work in this area by
democratizing access to high-quality simulation data. Educational modules,
mostly based on Matlab, will also allow students to query simulation datasets in
unprecedented detail.