* 1507226
* Synthetic and Biological Studies of Chondroitin Sulfate Oligosaccharides and Glycopeptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Xuefei Huang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Xuefei Huang from Michigan State University to study the
synthesis and functions of chondroitin sulfate (CS) and chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycans (CSPG). Carbohydrates play important roles in many biological
processes. However, due to the lack of uniformity of complex carbohydrate
structures in nature, it has been very challenging to thoroughly understand
their function. This project will focus on one specific class of carbohydrates
referred to as chondroitin sulfate (CS) and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans
(CSPG), chondroitin sulfate that is bonded to protein. New synthetic approaches
will be developed to produce these complex molecules, which will greatly expand
the range of structures that can be accessed through chemical synthesis. With
these materials, it will be possible to establish the impact of different
structures on the interactions of CS and CSPG with, for example, amyloid beta
peptide, the precursor to the aggregates and plaques that are present in the
brains of people with Alzheimer's disease. In addition, the engagement of
graduate, undergraduate and high school researchers in this project will provide
them with opportunities to be trained in the important and challenging field of
complex carbohydrate synthesis. The results generated will provide a highlight
for the power of synthetic chemistry, and how chemical synthesis can be utilized
to address important biological problems.

Chondroitin sulfate (CS) and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPG) are
involved in many important biological events including neural development, organ
morphogenesis, inflammation, infection and beta amyloid plaque formation. The
number and location of O-sulfates in CS and CSPG can significantly influence
their biological properties. As naturally existing CS and CSPG contain
heterogeneous sulfation patterns, it is highly challenging to decipher the
detailed structure function relationship using CS and CSPG isolated from nature.
Contradicting results have been reported in the literature. In order to overcome
this problem and facilitate biological studies, synthetic methodologies will be
developed to produce CS oligosaccharides and CSPG glycopeptides with well-
defined sulfation patterns and structures. The utility of these compounds will
be demonstrated in the study of CS/CSPG interactions with beta-amyloid peptide
to investigate a potential mechanism for the formation of amyloid plaques, a
pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease.