* 1507637
* Electrokinetics in Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Qihuo Wei, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 04/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Non Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals (LCs) represent a peculiar
state of matter combining properties of solid crystals and isotropic fluids. The
subtle combination of orientational order, fluidity, and eager responsiveness to
the electric field featured by the LCs brought a revolution in the way we
present information nowadays, enabling an entire industry of portable LC
displays. The project focuses on LCs as a functional medium that enables new
forms of electrokinetics, i.e., motion of particles and fluids under an
externally applied electric field. As compared to standard isotropic fluids such
as water, the LCs offer new mechanisms of electrokinetics, rooted in
orientational order of molecules. The project explores a new approach to induce
and control the electrokinetic flows through surface-imprinted molecular
orientation of the LC. The objective is to establish a fundamental understanding
of electrokinetics in LCs, determine which new technologies and applications
might emerge from the study, and to train the new generation of researcher
(graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) in this cutting edge research of
technological significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;Electrokinetics represents a broad spectrum of phenomena associated
with a relative motion at fluid/solid interfaces caused by external electric
fields that act on suitably separated space charges, such as electric double
layers or induced charges. The project goals are to explore a new mechanism of
electrokinetics, in which the spatial charges are generated through the coupling
of anisotropic electric conductivity to the liquid crystal (LC) director
gradients and also to develop a new method to trigger the electrokinetic flows,
through the imprinted surface patterns of director gradients. The control of
surface alignment is performed locally in each point of the substrate by photo-
irradiation. The project advances knowledge of electrohydrodynamics of isotropic
fluids and electrohydrodynamics of LCs, two extremely rich scientific branches
usually considered separately. It brings a new perspective in a general area of
charge transport in organic matter which embraces photosynthesis, transport
within proteins and across biomembranes. The project uses well-tested
experimental methods such as three-dimensional optical microscopy, microparticle
velocimetry, photoalignment and electro-optics, thus ensuring that the new
knowledge is based on a solid experimental background. The research advances
discovery and understanding of electrokinetics and LCs as materials for
applications other than LC displays. The study offers new perspectives for
practical applications where highly flexible, precise and simple control of
fluid or cargo placement, delivery, mixing or sorting is needed. The research
will be conducted at the Liquid Crystal Institute, which will immediately make
the results and techniques available to numerous partners already linked
together by the Institute's Industrial Partnership Program. The project helps to
achieve the educational goals of the 5-Year Federal Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Education Strategic Plan and the Materials
Genome Initiative, by preparing the next generation of highly trained science
professionals.