* 1507191
* New Radical SAM Enzymes in Menaquinone Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Tadhg Begley, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 05/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Tadhg Begley from Texas A&amp;M University to
investigate the enzymology of menaquinone biosynthesis in bacteria. Menaquinone
is a membrane bound vitamin that plays a key role in bacterial energy generation
and human blood clotting. Recently a new pathway was discovered for how this
compound is produced in bacteria. The proposed research will focus on
understanding the details of the new chemistry involved in this pathway. This
research is significant because it will uncover new chemical reactions in
bacteria that will enable the design of new antibiotics against pathogenic
bacteria. In addition to new knowledge gained during the course of the
menaquinone biosynthesis project, graduate students and a significant cadre of
undergraduates will receive training in biological chemistry. The PI will also
revise the textbook "The Organic Chemistry of Biological Pathways" and continue
to participate in a workshop to mentor new faculty in organic and biological
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new menaquinone biosynthetic pathway was
recently discovered that uses two radical SAM enzymes (MqnE and MqnC) to
assemble the napthoquinone moiety of the cofactor. Both of these enzymes involve
radical addition reactions to aromatic rings. A set of experiments to elucidate
the mechanisms of these two enzymes will be carried out. The physical organic
chemistry-based approach will involve the synthesis and testing of substrate
analogs to trap and characterize intermediates. Sequence analysis predicts the
identity of the genes encoding the last two enzymes on the pathway. A set of
undergraduate projects, to characterize these gene products will also be
conducted. As menaquinone is an important cofactor in all living systems,
understanding this widely distributed biosynthetic pathway is an element of the
basic chemistry of life processes. In addition, in terms of long range
scientific impact, this pathway has potential for antibiotic development because
it is absent in most human intestinal bacteria and present in many pathogens.