* 1507990
* Conference and Workshop: PolyChar 23; University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Lincoln, Nebraska; May 11-15, 2015
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Li Tan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, co-funded by the
Divisions of Materials Research and Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation, is to enable 20 U.S. students and 10 U.S. new investigators to
attend the 23rd World Forum on Advanced Materials, to be held May 11-15, 2015,
at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The Forum, also known as the PolyChar
short courses and conference, is focused on polymer properties,
characterization, synthesis, and processing. The Forum is an international
meeting that is returning to the U.S. after over ten years and will be bringing
experts from around the world to the U.S. PolyChar 23 will consist of a day of 9
short courses by leading international scientists, followed by 4 days of
symposia, including 4 plenary talks by leading scientists in the field, 2
plenary talks by young scientists, and the Flory medalist talk. The funds from
NSF, and commitments from other resources, will be used to organize and attract
a diverse group of U.S. graduate students, U.S. young investigators, high school
teachers and their students, STEM students from four-year regional colleges, and
international students and young investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, co-funded by the
Divisions of Materials Research and Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation, is to enable 20 U.S. students and 10 U.S. new investigators to
attend the 23rd World Forum on Advanced Materials, to be held May 11-15, 2015,
at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The Forum, also known as the PolyChar
short courses and conference, is focused on polymer properties,
characterization, synthesis, and processing. The Forum is an international
meeting that is returning to the U.S. after over ten years and will be bringing
experts from around the world to the U.S. PolyChar 23 will consist of a day of 9
short courses covering areas in microscopy, photochemistry, wear and scratch
resistance, solid-state NMR, rheology and processing, glass transition,
scattering, dynamic mechanical properties, and micromechanics. This is followed
by 4 days of symposia, including 4 plenary talks by leading scientists in the
field, 2 plenary talks by young scientists, and the Flory medalist talk. The
funds from NSF, and commitments from other resources, will be used to organize
and attract a diverse group of U.S. graduate students, U.S. young investigators,
high school teachers and their students, STEM students from four-year regional
colleges, and international students and young investigators.