* 1507252
* New Multifunctional Transition Metal Oxides with Correlated Electronic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Martha Greenblatt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the focus of this
research is the synthesis and characterization of new transition metal oxides
with low-dimensional, strongly interacting electronic properties to discover new
multifunctional polar and magnetic electronic materials with fundamentally
important and technologically useful behavior. The emphasis of the program is
the detailed characterization of the structure and physical properties to
understand the structure-property relationships. It has been demonstrated
repeatedly that fundamental research of this type provides the basis for
discovering new materials, which lead to novel phenomena and useful
applications. The proposed work will impact the training and education of
Postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students in the PI's laboratory
in the experimental synthesis and characterization of new functional solid state
materials. Collaborative work of the PI with other scientists and condensed
matter theorists nationally and internationally provides additional broader
impact for the scientific training and education of students. These studies are
expected to yield not only critical insight for the control of the properties of
novel electronic and magnetic materials, but also to provide broader impacts for
potential applications of the discovered materials in microelectronics and
magneto-electronics for computers, sensors and communications. These are
critical areas for maintaining US technological leadership worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the experimental
program is the synthesis and characterization of new functional transition metal
compounds with strongly correlated electronic properties that are on the verge
of electronic and structural instabilities, and to fine-tune the competing
electronic interactions through the unstable region in a controlled way.
Experience shows that materials with novel behavior are likely to be discovered,
when lattice, spin, charge, orbital and other electronic interactions compete.
Such competing interactions can lead to interesting and useful properties,
including metal-to-insulator transition, magnetic ordering, spin and charge
density wave instabilities, multiferroic, magnetoelectric behavior and
superconductivity. In low-dimensional materials the interplay of competing
interactions is enhanced. Systems of interest include: (1) Transition metal
Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) layered phases, AO(ABO)n; (2) Layered double perovskites,
AA'BB'O6; (3) Quadruple perovskites AA'3B4O12; (4) AA'BB' O6 new non-
centrosymmetric corundum phases. These complex, strongly correlated electronic
materials share the common feature of an interplay between localized and
itinerant degrees of freedom, a highly variable conduction electron band-width,
which may be tuned by changing e.g., the crystal structure, chemical
composition, external strain and degree of disorder. The variability of band-
width leads to a variety of important phenomena, including metal-insulator
transitions (or sharp crossovers) driven by variation of temperature, magnetic
field, illumination, pressure, lattice distortion and other variables. We expect
that in the vicinity of these transitions the transport, electronic and magnetic
properties will also change dramatically and will be tunable. The effort is a
systematic study of unique synthetic routes including solid state, high
pressure, "chemo douche" hydrothermal for the stabilization of new and
interesting transition metal compounds. Crystal growth (essential to study
anisotropic properties) of promising new phases will be attempted by e.g., flux
growth, chemical vapor transport, and electrolysis. The characterization of
properties by a battery of physical measurements including x-ray and neutron
diffraction, electron diffraction and transmission electron microscopy,
temperature dependent transport, specific heat, dielectric and magnetic
properties measurements will be carried out.