* 1507462
* Understanding the Impact on Function of Interactions in Highly Multifuntional (and) Modular Nanocarriers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Marie Christin Daniel-Onuta, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2018
* USD 389,997.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Marie-Christine Daniel of the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County is developing and studying highly
multifunctional systems, where specific molecular species are attached to gold
nanoparticles. This work is unique in that up to five different types of
molecular species, each with its own function, can be attached with controllable
composition. These functions include the ability to be imaged, bind to a
particular biomolecular species (like a specific cell type), and release a
chemical. A system that simultaneously displays complementary and cooperative
properties can be much more effective than a mixture of single functional
species. The study aims to understand whether the property of a particular
function is affected by the proportion of that function in the nanosystem and/or
by the other function(s) present in the nanosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to study how the coexistence of diverse functionalities
onto a single nanocarrier can impact their individual properties on the entire
nanocarrier. The novelty of the proposed multifunctional nanoplatform resides in
the use of a set of specifically functionalized poly(propyleneimine) dendrons to
decorate a gold nanoparticle core in a convergent construction approach. The
dendritic structure affords a common interface between the core and the diverse
functionalities, and a higher payload. The convergent assembly facilitates a
better control over the composition of the resulting multifunctional
nanocarriers: this is used to systematically vary the composition/proportion of
five functionalities (NIR tag, MRI tag, protein, and two different cleavable
small molecule payloads) onto the nanocarrier and thus obtain information about
possible interactions between functions and their impact on the nanocarrier
properties. The broader impacts of this work include the development of
versatile nanoplatforms possibly leading to advances in a variety of fields, in
particular in cancer combination therapy. Also, in Prof. Daniel's laboratory,
high school students and undergraduates from under-represented groups have the
opportunity to participate to this interdisciplinary research and learn about
chemical synthesis, material science, nanotechnology and biochemistry.