* 1507985
* Transport Properties of Self-Assembled DNA Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Aleksei Aksimentiev, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2018
* USD 339,988.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Practical nanotechnology requires precise and
inexpensive placement of nanometer-size components into an operational unit. The
DNA nanotechnology achieves exactly that by utilizing the self-assembly property
of DNA. This project will explore the use of self-assembled DNA materials for
controlling the motion of molecules through fluid environment. Computer
simulations will elucidate the mechanism of electrical conductivity of self-
assembled DNA structures. Nanoscale objects will be designed to function as
analogs of electrical wires, pipes and transistors. Mimicking nature, membrane-
spanning DNA systems will be developed to regulate the passage of biomolecules
across a cell boundary. These research activities will be closely integrated
with education and outreach and will provide the rapidly expanding field of DNA
nanotechnology with computational methods and tools for theoretical exploration
of self-assembled DNA structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to characterize the transport properties of self-
assembled DNA nanostructures for possible applications in biosensing,
nanofluidics, and biomimetic systems. All-atom molecular dynamics simulations
will characterize the ionic conductivity of various DNA origami designs and
probe their structural integrity in an external electric field. The simulations
will explore the behavior of DNA gridirons and DNA bricks structures, and
evaluate their usefulness for nanopore sensing applications. Charged and hollow
DNA origami constructs will be designed to serve as conduits for ions and small
biomolecules in fluid environment, analogous to macroscopic wires and pipes. The
structural response of the DNA origami to electric field will be exploited to
design and demonstrate a DNA origami transistor. The physical principles of
gated and selective biological ion channels will be implemented in membrane-
spanning DNA constructs. The theoretical work will be carried out in close
collaboration with experimentalists characterizing the transport through self-
assembled DNA structures. This project is expected to provide new insights into
the physical mechanisms of charged solutes transport in fluid environment,
finding practical application in nanopore detection of biomolecules,
unconventional computing and synthetic tissue engineering. &lt;br/&gt;This
research program will have a direct impact on the development of functional DNA
nanotechnology by providing the research community with methods and tools to
build, visualize and simulate self-assembled DNA systems. The technological
knowledge and expertise acquired through this program will be made available
through step-by-step tutorials, modules of the popular computer program VMD and
as research and educational tools at nanoHUB. Material generated within this
project will be used to prepare a set of lectures and demos for the biophysics
undergraduate and graduate courses. The project will develop educational DNA
origami puzzles and a DNA LEGO constructor kit and will make them available to
everyone by taking advantage of the 3D printing technology.