* 1507511
* Optimal Estimation of Statistical Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Huibin Zhou, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 320,000.00

Network analysis is becoming one of the most active research areas in many
fields. It offers a natural way to organize data by incorporating pairwise
relations. This subject is highly interdisciplinary. Researchers from physics,
computer science, social science, biology and statistics have made significant
contributions to network analysis in theories, methodologies and applications.
Despite those recent methodological and theoretical progresses in network
analysis, there have been little fundamental studies on optimal estimation. The
wide range of important applications of networks ensure that the progress
towards the proposed fundamental research objectives will have a great impact in
a broad scientific community, which may include co-authorship networks, web
networks, friendship networks, educational networks, networks with information
flow, gene expression networks, political networks, and healthcare networks.
Research results from this project will be disseminated through research
articles and seminar series to researchers in other disciplines. The project
will integrate research and education by teaching monograph courses and
organizing seminars to help graduate students and postdocs, particularly
minority, women, and domestic students and young researchers, who work on this
topic. We will work closely with the Yale Institute for Network Science and the
Yale Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation to explore appropriate and
helpful network models for social sciences and medicine, and to make valid
statistical inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various algorithms have been
proposed and analyzed to understand the underlying generating mechanism of
networks, called graphon, and to do community detection. Many consistency
results are obtained. Despite these recent methodological and theoretical
progresses on graphon estimation and community detection, especially on
stochastic block model, there have been little fundamental studies on optimal
estimation. For example, it is not clear whether the error rates for graphon
estimation and community detection in those popular algorithms can be further
improved. The goal of this project is to develop a coherent theory on optimal
statistical network analysis. Specifically, we propose to study: 1) rate-optimal
graphon estimation, 2) optimal community detection error rate, 3) computational
barriers in graphon estimation and community section, 4) rate-optimal Bayesian
posterior contraction, 5) generalizations to exponential family, to sparse
networks, to networks of power law, to mixed membership networks, and to
exchangeable high dimensional arrays or tensors, and 6) applications to social
sciences and healthcare. The research in this project will significantly advance
the theoretical understanding of statistical network analysis. The optimality
theory will unveil the precision to what graphon estimation and community
detection can be attained with or without computational constraints, and will
integrate both frequentist and Bayesian perspectives for network analysis.