* 1507551
* UNS:   Liquid crystal templated three-dimensional nanoparticle assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,10/31/2019
* Linda Hirst, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 10/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

CBET - 1507551&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hirst, Linda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to design and characterize new microcapsules that have
multifunctional capabilities. The fabrication of the microcapsules is based on
the self-assembly of nanoparticles that uses liquid crystals to direct the
assembly. Liquid crystals are ordered fluids that are best known for their use
in computer displays. The nanoparticles are modified so that they form
nanoparticle-rich liquid crystal droplets. These droplets act as a template for
the self-assembly of nanoparticles into spherical shells, which can then be used
in a variety of applications, including fluid photonic devices and molecular
encapsulation and release. The investigators will use the project to develop new
physics laboratory modules to introduce undergraduates to nanoscience, and the
research team will expand its outreach to the public by organizing community
college level workshops in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will design custom nanoparticle (NP) 3D assemblies using a liquid crystal (LC)
based self-assembly method. A new technique will be explored to form thin shells
of closely packed quantum dots ranging in diameter from 200 nanometers to 5
microns with walls that vary in thickness from 20 to 100 nanometers. The
fabrication process is controlled by a liquid crystal phase transition. A
nematic liquid crystal acts as the host phase into which mesogen-functionalized
NPs (semiconducting, metallic and magnetic particles) are dispersed. The
particles are surface-modified to incorporate a mesogenic (LC-like) ligand.
Mesogen-functionalized NPs are an emerging class of materials that can assemble
in LC/NP hybrid phases. Once formed, the capsules can be extracted from the host
nematic phase and re-dispersed in different solvents for a variety of
applications. The project goals are to design different NPs with mesogenic
ligands using semiconducting, metallic and magnetic nanoparticles for 3D
assembly in a host liquid crystal phase, fully elucidating the controlling
parameters in the assembly process, and developing this new assembly method to
create and test unique photonic structures and active multifunctional capsules.