* 1507354
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of injection molded nanostructured biomedical consumables
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,01/31/2016
* John Coulter, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Directing and modulating the fate of stem cells poses a primary challenge in the
bioscience community. Control of cell behavior is traditionally accomplished
using chemical methods; and these methods are inherently useful, but
difficulties with cell stability do arise. Currently, cells are grown on tissue
culture treated Petri dishes (made from polystyrene or glass). These products,
while inexpensive and readily available, can produce undesirable effects on
adherent cells. Effects such as premature differentiation and/or aging
phenomenon in cells may limit the potential of these cells to be used in future
cell therapeutics. This I-Corps team has developed nano-structured multi-well
plate inserts for cell culture. These nano-structured substrates, produced using
injection molding techniques allow for robust culture of stem cells (both human
mesenchymal and other subtypes) in the absence of further chemical treatments,
such as oxygen plasma, protein coatings, or other surface modifications;
potentially reducing the cost of laboratory cell culture protocols. Through
manufacturing, modulation of the nano-structured surface features (llows for
either long-term culture of stem cells or controlled differentiation of the
cells. The wide variety of cell-substrata interactions made possible as a result
would enable a whole new paradigm for stem cell development and differentiation,
and allow this science to possibly translate at a faster rate to clinical
applications.

Biological cells exert mechanical forces in both the horizontal and vertical
directions. In general, however, the vertical forces are small compared to
horizontal cellular forces (traction forces). Thus, the key to affecting cells
via these dominant traction forces is to control substrate compliance in the
lateral direction (flexural stiffness). Considering the substrate to be rigid,
Hooke's law of elastic deformation can be applied, which for cylindrical columns
at the micro- or nano-scale yields a predictable in-plane force-displacement
relationship. With precise determination of surface feature dimensions and
spacing, micro/nanostructured surface arrays can be designed to yield a range of
effective lateral surface compliances. As feature deformation is dictated by the
applied force, a finer pitch will position more features under each cell and
produce a reduction of the biological traction forces applied to each one. To
manufacture these features, the team has taken advantage of injection molding as
a high volume and repeatable method to create surface areas conducive to
eliciting specific cellular functions. Ultraviolet lithography, combined with
deep reactive ion etching, is used to generate micro-features over a relatively
large surface area of a silicon wafer. The micro-featured silicon wafer is then
used as a mold insert for the micro-injection molding process to create surfaces
from a wide variety of thermoplastic polymers. Altering the mold features
controls the micro-geometry, which further alters the effective surface
stiffness of the polymer substrate and the resultant behavior of the cells -
leading to advanced cellular engineering opportunities.