* 1507146
* Exploring the Frontier of Photonic Device Size, Speed, and Efficiency Limits with Gain-enhanced Multifuncional Metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2019
* USD 350,000.00

Abstract title: Exploring the Frontier of Photonic Device Size, Speed, and
Efficiency Limits with Gain-enhanced Multifuncional Metamaterials &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;(Non-technical)&lt;br/&gt;Metal-dielectric
composites hold significant promise as the building blocks of next-generation
information, communication, and sensing systems. The combination of metals and
dielectrics offers unprecedentedly small volumes, fast speeds, and enhancements
to nonlinear effects in photonic devices such as light sources, waveguides, and
switches. Generally, however, the incorporation of metals necessarily increases
the energy dissipated as heat in such devices, consequently reducing the energy
carried by useful signals. We propose to create metal-dielectric and metal-
semiconductor composites with the primary goal of demonstrating optical signal
transmission without energy loss. Semiconducting materials may be engineered to
emit and absorb light over a very broad color range, and their properties may be
tuned by external electronics. We aim to develop the theoretical underpinning
and experimental knowledge on the role of active semiconductors in enabling
propagation of optical signals without loss of energy, while still retaining the
small footprint and fast operation of the metal-dielectric-based photonic
devices. We additionally plan to explore, both theoretically and experimentally,
the enhancement of nonlinear effects in such devices, due both to the local
enhancement of electromagnetic fields and to the cascaded nonlinearities present
at the interfaces between the constituent materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;(Technical) &lt;br/&gt;Hyperbolic metamaterials offer unique and
enhanced functionalities compared to conventional optical materials. For
example, hyperbolic metamaterials exhibit highly localized electric fields in
deeply subwavelength volumes, enabling field-enhanced nonlinear polarization, as
well as broadband Purcell enhancement of the spontaneous emission rate. By
introducing external strain, the band-structure of the constituent materials can
be further modified, enabling multi-scale engineering of the hyperbolic
metamaterials's linear and nonlinear optical responses. Unfortunately,
hyperbolic metamaterials typically suffer from considerable Ohmic losses,
preventing their applicability to practical devices. To overcome this
deficiency, optical gain may be introduced for improved device performance. To
date, most research on gain-compensated metamaterials has focused on dye
molecules as a gain medium because they are easy to incorporate in proof-of-
concept experiments and can be accurately modeled using simple two-level
systems. In contrast, inorganic semiconductors and their heterostructures are
attractive as gain media because their absorption/emission resonances may be
engineered from terahertz to ultraviolet frequencies. Additionally,
semiconductor hyperbolic metamaterials may be electrically injected with charge
carriers, allowing for a more direct and reliable control of their
functionality. And lastly, inorganic semiconductors offer distinct advantages
over dyes in terms of robustness, lifetime, and integrability with guided wave
devices. The overall goal of this proposal is to advance the science and
technology of Gain Enhanced Multifunctional Metamaterials. Specifically, we aim
to comprehensively understand and experimentally demonstrate: (1) lossless
propagation in waveguide-based Gain Enhanced Multifunctional Metamaterials, (2)
field-enhanced second- and third-order nonlinear effects in Gain Enhanced
Multifunctional Metamaterials, and (3) strain-enhanced nonlinear effects in Gain
Enhanced Multifunctional Metamaterials, all mediated by semiconductor gain. For
specificity, we focus on the near-infrared part of the spectrum, but we stress
that the lessons learned from our work may easily be extended to ultraviolet and
terahertz frequencies alike. &lt;br/&gt;Gain Enhanced Multifunctional
Metamaterials offer an avenue for achieving unprecedented nonlinear conversion
efficiencies with lossless signal transmission. Due to their extremely small
footprint and potentially fast operation, Gain Enhanced Multifunctional
Metamaterials will become strong candidates for integrated nonlinear devices of
future photonic circuits. The proposed research will not only advance the basic
science and technology of active semiconductor metamaterials, but will also set
an example for the investigation of physical phenomena in which the self-
consistent treatment of electronic, electromagnetic, and mechanical interaction
becomes crucially important. We anticipate that Gain Enhanced Multifunctional
Metamaterials will find applications in data- and telecommunications, graph-
processing, computation, biomedical imaging, and chemical sensing.