* 1507826
* Understanding the Links among Structure, Processing, and Electronic/Ionic Properties in Soft Mixed Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Alberto Salleo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 408,952.00

Nontechnical Description: Mixed conductors, i.e., materials that have the
ability to conduct electricity using both electrons and ions, have many
potential applications. One of the most appealing areas on which these materials
can have an impact is the interface between living matter, whose physiology
operates via ion fluxes, and electronics, which operate by moving electrons. The
goal of this research project is to provide an in-depth understanding of how the
molecular structure of these materials and their processing conditions affect
their ability to operate as transducers of ionic signals into electronic
signals. Better knowledge of these materials could impact many areas of society,
from the management of energy to human health. In addition to these broader
benefits, educating students in this emerging area contributes to producing a
trained workforce ready to develop materials and devices for the marketplace.
Outreach efforts associated with this project involve a local high school with a
large Latino population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Beyond
organic electronic conductors, organic mixed conductors are a promising category
of materials with potential applications in many areas, such as electrochemical
cells and bioelectronics. Compared to the conventional conjugated polymers,
mixed conductors have the added complexity of containing an ion-conducting
phase. The interplay of the transport of the ion conducting and the electron
conducting phase is at the heart of the operation of these materials. This
project aims to establish the structure-property relationships in mixed
conductors and to develop an in-depth understanding of how mixed conductors
work. Specifically, the morphology of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
(PEDOT)-based blends is widely tunable by changing the partner of PEDOT in the
blend or by processing. The electrical characterization and modeling of the
response of organic electrochemical transistors (OECT) allow the measurement of
carrier mobility and the degree of entanglement of the ion conducting and
electron conducting phase. Charge modulation spectroscopy is used to study the
polaronic or bipolaronic nature of the carriers. Structural characterization,
based on X-ray scattering and electron microscopy, is carried out to understand
how morphology affects the functionality of mixed conductors. The project also
plans to study new materials that integrate the ionic conduction functionality
and the electronic conduction functionality in a single molecule.