* 1507282
* Nano-Reactor Assembly Across Multiple Lengthscales
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Trevor Douglas, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 540,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Indiana is to use biological processes and
directed self-assembly to make a new generation of materials to overcome their
limitations. The investigator sees the biological cell as an inspiration for the
design of new complex materials, assembled from molecular components across many
different length scales. Currently, even the simplest living systems exhibit
complexity that is well beyond the ability to mimic synthetically. The power of
biological cells to respond to environmental stress lies in their ability to
regulate biochemical networks of enzyme-mediated reactions. Harnessing the power
and complexity of enzymes, and enzyme networks, for the synthetic development of
complex catalytic materials has not been realized in part due to the fragility
of enzymes and their incompatibility with materials processing approaches. This
project will develop a set of design rules to incorporate materials properties
and catalytic functions to bioinspired materials. This researcher expects these
materials to make impacts in areas of bio-designed catalysis and that their
utilization will lead to the development of more energy-efficient, renewable,
safe and affordable technologies. As an integral part of the project, this
investigator will continue to develop science outreach programming wherein
undergraduate and graduate students, participating in cutting-edge science, will
also learn to effectively communicate their research to the general public and
inspire the next generation of scientists. This will be achieved through
partnerships with local and regional schools in which long-term relationships
between teachers, students, and researchers can foster an excitement about
science and connect with youth and communities that are underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Using a bioinspired approach, this
researcher will develop a complex self-assembling system to create protein cage
architectures in which multiple copies of up to 3 enzymes are encapsulated with
controlled adjacency and stoichiometry. These enzymes perform a coupled cascade
of reactions, creating a material capable of effecting a synthetic metabolic
pathway for methanol (and potentially methane) oxidation. In addition, a
mathematical model is developed for predicting the kinetics for coupled
reactions under co-localized conditions, based on the diffusion length of
intermediates between partner enzymes. The planned kinetic studies showed that
intermediate channeling between sequential enzymes is dependent on both the
inter-enzyme distance as well as a balance between the kinetic parameters of the
two enzymes, a finding that challenges the simplistic view that any co-
localization will automatically yield enhanced overall activities. In addition,
individual nanoreactor particles can be assembled into ordered hierarchical
arrays providing a path forward for the programmed assembly of bulk materials
built from individual protein cages and having designed complex catalytic
properties. Thus, using naturally occurring and designed molecular components,
the investigator will construct complex catalytically active materials through
directed self-assembly of modular building blocks at multiple lengthscales.
Graduate student training in the context of this research will include:
structural studies using cryo-electron microscopy and image reconstruction to
evaluate the packing of enzymes within the self-assembled protein cage
architectures; mass spectrometry to evaluate changes in enzyme dynamics due
crowding effects; dynamic and static (multi-angle) light scattering to evaluate
the self-assembly processes from molecular components to materials; small angle
x-ray scattering (Argonne National lab (APS) and Brookhaven National Lab (NSLS
II) to probe the long range order in the assembly of protein cage materials. The
students will be trained in the relevant characterization techniques.