* 1507837
* Atomic level studies of step dynamics in the homogeneous growth of metal crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2019
* David Dunlap, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 12/31/2019
* USD 382,271.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABASTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;The growth of crystalline materials is the
first step in the manufacture of numerous electronic devices including
microprocessors for computers, chemical sensors for human health, and biological
detectors to counter terrorism threats. Today, individual atoms are being
manipulated in attempts to create such processors and sensors at the atomic
scale. Improvement in our understanding of atomic scale surface processes, such
as atom transport and its role in the growth of crystalline materials, is
required so that the manipulation of individual atoms can be routinely employed
to enhance the performance of existing devices, as well as develop new devices.
This project uniquely combines the ability to view the motion of individual
atoms using a microscope with the capability of identifying the atomic species
in motion using a mass spectrometer. It thereby allows for a detailed atomic
level study of the growth of an elemental crystalline material. This research is
serving as the Ph.D. thesis project for one graduate student and employing an
undergraduate science major to assist with the experiments. The inherent
interdisciplinary nature of the project is training the students in a wide
variety of technical areas and thereby helping to thoroughly prepare them to
begin a career in the physical sciences. Underrepresented groups have a good
opportunity to fill the student positions on this research effort because the
University of New Mexico is exceptional in combining a highly rated research
program and designated as both a Minority-serving institution and a Hispanic-
serving institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;The
dynamics of steps on crystal surfaces is one of the most important processes
governing atom transport and the resulting crystal growth. In this project, step
dynamics at the atomic scale in the prototypic case, elemental crystals, is
being investigated for the first time. To enable the study of such homogeneous
systems we are employing a novel approach - the use of an adatom that is a
stable isotope of the elemental substrate. This preserves the chemical nature of
the homogeneous system, yet the isotope adatom is distinguishable due to its
known mass and isotopic abundance. The field ion microscope is being used for
atomic resolution surface imaging. Possible isotope adatom-substrate atom
exchange processes that occur during atom transport are detected by the removal
of individual atoms as ions with field evaporation and subsequent time-of-fight-
based atom-probe microanalysis to determine their mass. The project is
investigating step dynamics on various transition metal surfaces by studies of:
Year 1 - The descent of isotope adatoms over steps and the diffusion of isotope
adatoms along step edges, Year 2 - Nanosecond-time-scale diffusion initiated by
laser pulses to capture any 'non-equilibrium' isotope adatom-substrate
configurations, and Year 3 - The impact of the proximity of steps to one another
on isotope adatom-step dynamics.