* 1507384
* UNS:Diffuse Optical and Correlation Tomography for Monitoring of Bone-graft Healing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Regine Choe, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 301,345.00

1507384 &lt;br/&gt;Choe, Regine &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
proposal is to develop new and safe imaging methods that use red and infrared
light to monitor and image the re-growth of blood vessels in healing bones.
These methods are based on diffuse optical tomography (DOT) and diffuse
correlation tomography (DCT) as scientific research tools to provide non-
invasive, deep-tissue longitudinal monitoring of vascularization of engineered
tissues. Tissue engineering is a strategy for using artificial or combinations
of natural and artificial materials to assist re-growth of damaged tissues, such
as broken bones. The optical methods being developed in this project are based
on shining a source of light into the tissue of interest (bone in this case),
through the skin, and then analyzing light that is reflected back by the
tissues. Techniques that non-invasively monitor and longitudinally assess the
vascularization process could significantly accelerate the tissue-engineering
field, which will lead to new methods for healing damaged tissues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards this goal, a comprehensive DOT and DCT system will
be optimized for monitoring the vascularization of bone grafts. The utility of
this approach will be established using well-established murine femoral defect
models and bone tissue-engineering strategies. Although there have been various
applications of diffuse optical tomographic techniques, their utility in bone-
vascularization monitoring, especially in engineered tissue, has never been
explored. The proposed research objectives are: (1) Expand an existing optical
system into a 3D imaging DOT-DCT system and develop a comprehensive tomography
algorithm for longitudinal imaging of murine leg; (2) Compare total hemoglobin
concentration from DOT and blood flow from DCT to contrast-enhanced micro-CT and
histology and a fluorescent microsphere technique, respectively, using live
murine autograft models; (3) Characterize the longitudinal vascular changes due
to autografts, devitalized allografts, and allografts with tissue-engineered
periosteum using the DOT-DCT system and develop a predictive model for graft
healing. Educationally, the proposed research will provide stimulating research
topics for graduate and undergraduate students, with opportunities to interact
with national and international collaborators in various interdisciplinary
fields. The project will also involve educational outreach to underrepresented
high school student groups at the University of Rochester.