* 1507974
* Chemical Control of Quantum Defects in Low-Dimensional Carbon Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* YuHuang Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2018
* USD 486,146.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program of the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor YuHuang Wang of the
University of Maryland to investigate the effect of chemical defects on the
physical properties of linear and two dimensional carbon materials. As with
islands in the sea, these defects serve as focusing points of activity on an
otherwise plain surface. These points are where interesting new chemistry and
physics can occur. Successful completion of the proposed study may open an
entirely new approach to engineering materials that could translate into new
entries into optical probes and selective chemical sensors. The proposed work is
also projected to engage undergraduate students, including students from
underrepresented groups, directly in the research program through graduate-
undergraduate mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed defects are being
synthetically created in Prof. Wang's laboratory by covalently attaching a
controlled number of functional groups to semiconducting carbon nanotube model
systems. The beauty of this type of defect is its better-defined structure,
excellent chemical tunability, and more importantly, previously unexpected
fluorescent properties. An exciton, or electron-hole pair, can light up at the
quantum defect site, making it possible to experimentally probe defects using
conventional spectroscopic techniques. These chemically tailored, fluorescent
quantum defects will be explored as a new tool to engineer nanomaterials,
potentially to break the dark exciton limit of nanotube photoluminescence, and
to probe chemical events that could be otherwise difficult to capture.