* 1507386
* Visualization study of vortex-line dynamics in a magnetically levitated helium-4 superfluid drop
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Wei Guo, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 04/30/2018
* USD 302,362.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum vortices, which are like
little tornados governed by the laws of quantum mechanics, are important in
understanding the behavior of systems such as superfluid helium,
superconductors, liquid crystals, neutrons stars and perhaps even cosmic strings
in the early universe. This project explores the behavior of quantum vortices in
small (~1cm) droplets of superfluid liquid helium. Magnetic levitation, which is
the same technique being explored for high speed trains and elevators that can
move in all 3 dimensions, is used to float the droplet and eliminate the
influence of the walls and the motion of the vortices is imaged using tracer
molecules which fluoresce when illuminated with laser light. These studies will
help us better understand the behavior of this strange form of quantum matter
and will benefit studies of advanced materials such as superconductors and
liquid crystals. This project will also train a new generation of scientists in
technologically important fields such as low-temperature physics, fluid dynamics
and advanced laser technologies. The research team plans to conduct
demonstrations involving magnetic levitation and superfluid helium in various
educational and outreach programs at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
to introduce these scientific concepts to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
intriguing fundamental problems relevant to the dynamics of quantized vortex
lines. The objectives include a thorough investigation on how the appearance of
vortices can affect the stability of a rotating superfluid drop and an in-depth
study of the evolution of a vortex tangle in a wall-free environment. In
superfluid helium-4, vortex lines can be directly visualized by imaging tracer
particles trapped on the lines. However, producing tracers in helium at low
temperatures and imaging the trapped tracers remains challenging, and the
container walls can often affect the vortex-line motion. This project employs a
levitated helium-4 drop as the working system, in which the vortices can be
produced via fast evaporative cooling and controllable drop rotation. These
vortices can be decorated with metastable He2 molecular tracers which can be
imaged using a laser-induced fluorescence technique. The study of the vortex
configuration in a rotating helium-4 drop helps explain the observed drop
morphology and allows the derivation of the stability diagram of rotating
superfluid drops. Since a levitated helium drop may serve as a model for other
superfluid drop systems, such as neutron stars, the results obtained in this
study may generate broad interest. Visualizing the evolution of a vortex tangle
in a helium drop can facilitate the study of central questions in quantum
turbulence research, such as the existence of polarized vortex bundles and the
generation of Kelvin waves on vortices; these studies can directly advance our
knowledge about the characteristics of quantum turbulence.