* 1507213
* Surface Heterogeneity and Defects in Gas-Surface Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* S Alex Kandel, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 461,459.00

S. Alex Kandel, Surface Heterogeneity and Defects in Gas-Surface Reactions

Chemists use formulas containing reactant and product molecule symbols to
describe a chemical reaction. However the formula is only a very basic starting
point for understanding how the reactions occur and, therefore, how to control
them. Dr. Kandel is investigating the molecular changes, or mechanisms, of
chemical reactions taking place at solid surfaces to shead light on how these
reactions actually take place at the atomic scale. He is particularly interested
in determining the effect of compositional impurities and atomic-level structure
on the rate and the products of a reaction. In some cases, these changes are
desired, such as the enhanced catalytic activity demonstrated by specific
defects in many processes of industrial importance. In others, such as the
preparation techniques used to create computer chips and other semiconductor
devices, even a small number of imperfections in a surface can result in an
unusable product. Dr. Kandel employs an imaging technique known as scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) to "see" individual atoms and molecules in order to
determine how the solid surfaces change at the atomic level during the course of
a chemical reaction. These experiments produce time-lapsed sequences that show
how the particular local composition and geometry influence and control both the
rate and the outcome of a chemical reaction. The fundamental understanding
gained in this project helps the future design of new catalysts, surface
coatings, and materials processing methods. Dr. Kandel's research is attractive
to students at many levels, and he involves several high school students and
their teachers as research assistants every year. He also maintains a data base
of STM images that is accessible to the general public through his web page at
the Univeristy of Notre Dame.

In this research program, Dr. S. Alex Kandel is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to study the reactions between
gas-phase radical species and solid surfaces, with a particular emphasis on how
the local molecular structure of a surface influences chemical reactivity.
Hydrogen, chlorine, and methane radicals are used to chemically modify well-
characterized organic monolayers, and the progression of atomic-scale changes
caused by their interaction is monitored using scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM). Radical-surface reactions are relevant to a variety of chemical processes
in which a surface is exposed to a reactive environment, including combustion
(hydrogen atoms), upper atmosphere chemistry (chlorine atoms), chemical vapor
deposition (hydrogen, methyl), and plasma processing (hydrogen, chlorine). In
addition, the systematic investigation of how various aspects of the surface
monolayer structure influences reactivity helps build fundamental knowledge of
surface-radical interactions and new mechanistic understandings of gas-surface
chemistry. Dr. Kandel involves high school, undergraduate and graduate students
in his research, and serves as a mentor for high school students in local and
international science competitions. He also maintains a data base of STM images
that is accessible to the general public through his web page at the Univeristy
of Notre Dame.