* 1507055
* Sense Codon Reassignment: Evaluating the Plasticity of the E. Coli Genetic Code
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* John Fisk, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2018
* USD 424,866.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences
and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences. Proteins are
the central actors in living systems, performing the vast majority of catalytic,
signaling, structural, and controlling functions in cells. The chemistry of
proteins is largely determined by the chemistry of the 20 genetically-encoded
amino acid building blocks of proteins. Although sufficient for living systems,
this set of natural amino acids encodes a limited set of chemical
functionalities. The expansion of the genetically encodable chemical
functionality beyond that afforded by the 20 natural amino acids will open vast
new vistas of protein sequence and functional space for exploration and
exploitation. Enlarging the encodable chemistry of proteins through genetic code
expansion is an enabling technology that offers the potential to dramatically
increase the functions of proteins. This research will explore the space of
sense codon reassignment in E. coli to identify a set of reassignable codons for
genetic code expansion. The research will lead to improved technologies for non-
canonical amino acid incorporation that allow multiple copies of multiple non-
canonical amino acids to be incorporated into any protein of interest. The
pursuit of these experiments will help prepare of the next generation of
interdisciplinary scientists and engineers to contribute to a strong competitive
STEM workforce. The legacy infrastructure built in the form of tRNA/aminoacyl
tRNA synthetase systems optimized for sense codon reassignment will provide new
tools to the protein science research community and direct benefits to society
through rapid increases in the rate of generation of improved protein-based
materials and devices.

Under this award, Fisk and his research team will study the expansion of the
genetic code through sense codon reassignment. The research project will employ
a fluorescence-based screen to measure the extent to which sense codons that
naturally read through wobble interactions in E. coli can be reassigned using
the orthogonal tRNA/aaRS pairs most commonly employed for nonsense suppression.
The same fluorescence screen will be further employed to evolve the tRNA/aaRS
systems to better decode reassigned sense codons, to evaluate the plasticity of
aminoacyl tRNA synthetase-tRNA recognition domains, and explore the extent to
which the machinery of translation can be molded to accommodate expanded genetic
codes. The systems identified and optimized to reassign sense codons will be
combined to generate genetic codes containing 22 and 23 amino acids. The
combined experimental aims of the project provide a host of new measurements to
better map the plasticity of the translational system in E. coli and evaluate
the degree to which representative tRNA/aaRS pairs can be modified to reassign
the meaning of sense codons.