* 1507566
* The Design and Synthesis of Electron-Deficient Boron Containing Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Paul Rupar, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 405,628.00

With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Paul Rupar of the University of
Alabama Tuscaloosa is conducting research to synthesize and characterize novel
conjugated polymers with unique electronic properties. Polymers are ubiquitous
in modern life. Common uses of polymers include plastics, surface coatings, and
cosmetic products. Conjugated polymers are a sub-class of polymers that can be
conductive and have numerous emerging applications, including use in display
technologies, solar cells, and electronic devices. In addition to advancing
fundamental chemistry knowledge, this research aims to yield new polymers with
potential applications in selective gas sensors, organic solar cells, and
organic transistors. As a part of the broader impacts of this project, the Rupar
Group collaborates with Alabama Science in Motion (ASIM), a statewide program
that provides engaging laboratory experiments to high school students and
teachers. A novel ASIM educational experiment module is being developed to help
to enhance STEM education in west Alabama, a region with a high proportion of
under-represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
design, synthesis and characterization of novel boron-containing conjugated
polymers. The empty p-orbital on 3-coordinate boron is a strong pi-acceptor that
increases the electron affinity of a polymer when conjugated with the pi-system.
Using computational modeling, the Rupar group has identified polymers containing
fused boron rings (e.g. borafluorenes) as promising electron-deficient
conjugated polymers, potentially useful as n-type conducting materials. The
inclusion of the boron also provides the potential for polymers with inherent
sensing capabilities. The main thrusts of this research are: 1) to synthesize
boron-containing conjugated homopolymers and study the n-type conducting
properties; 2) to explore the potential application of boron-containing
conjugated polymers in detecting electron-rich gas; and 3) to develop novel
synthetic approaches to boron-containing donor/acceptor copolymers (which
contain alternating electron-accepting and electron-donating moieties) as narrow
band-gap conjugated polymers.