* 1507713
* Vertically Oriented Anisotropic Nanoparticles in Polymer Matrices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Russell Composto, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 580,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To promote the progress of polymer
science, this project is focused on polymer nanocomposites. Because they
underlie so many applications, polymer-nanocomposite research impacts and
improves technologies ranging from complex devices, such as energy producing
solar cells, to everyday materials, such as lighter packaging. The fundamental
issues that the project seeks to address are those that govern the assembly of
anisotropic particles in block copolymers. Specifically, the project will
produce vertically-oriented, anisotropic particles with controlled regular
separations, and in so doing will advance understanding of nanorods and
nanoplates in polymeric materials having special geometries such as
nanocylinders in a matrix or alternating nanosheets. The resulting insights
about how to self-assemble vertically oriented nanoparticles will enable the
scientific community to explore a variety of anisotropic properties including
molecular, electrical, and thermal transport. A successful outcome of the
proposed research will be precise control over the vertical orientation and
lateral spacing of nanorods and nanoplates in polymer nanocomposite films, which
have potential benefits to society in areas of nanofiltration, sensing, barrier
coatings and lighting. Besides producing a well educated, scientifically skilled
work force, the integration of research and education benefits society at
several levels. Besides graduate education, undergraduates from the US and
abroad as well as local Philadelphia high school participants will benefit from
research and mentoring. To reach a broad audience, researchers will participate
annually in Nanoday@Penn and Philly Materials Day, which attract over 200 high
school students and 2000 attendees, respectively. Furthermore, the annual
Teachers Materials Science Workshop will continue as well as a unique
partnership with Central High School, Philadelphia, which exposes a large
minority student population to opportunities in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thermodynamic and dynamic principles that
control vertical alignment of nanorods and nanoplates in block copolymer (BCP)
films will be investigated. Anisotropic particles will be grafted with polymer
brushes to control their interactions with other particles and BCP. Research
objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Vertically align nanorods in perpendicular
cylindrical domains of block copolymers. Metallic, nanophosphor and
semiconducting nanorods will be investigated in poly(styrene-b-2-vinyl pyridine)
(PS-b-P2VP) and P2VP films. The effect of nanorod diameter and length on
vertical orientation is of particular interest, as well as using binary mixtures
of nanorods to direct them to specific microdomains. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Vertically
align nanoplates in perpendicular lamella domains of block copolymers. Graphene
oxide, nanophosphor and laponite nanoplates will be investigated in
poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate) (PS-b-PMMA) and PS films. &lt;br/&gt;(3)
Investigate the dynamics of nanorod assembly in homopolymer and block copolymer
films during solvent annealing. Single particle tracking will be used to measure
nanorod mobility. Field theoretic simulations modified to include dynamics will
guide experiments and provide insight into the balance between thermodynamics
and dynamics that differentiates the final morphology.&lt;br/&gt;The research
leverages new and continuing collaborations to create novel particle-polymer
assemblies, perform in situ characterization, and model vertically aligned
polymer nanocomposites. Specifically, dispersion will be studied as a function
of particle shape, size and surface chemistry, film thickness and interface
interactions, and BCP composition and size. Three-dimensional field theoretic
simulations will guide the choice of experimental parameters and provide a
thermodynamic framework for understanding the interplay between particle and BCP
orientation. BCP morphology will be determined by TEM, AFM and SAXS, particle
location by TEM, FIB-SEM and depth profiling by RBS. GISAXS will be used to
follow in situ structural evolution during solvent annealing. Optical properties
will be characterized by UV-vis spectroscopy. This research benefits from
unfunded collaborations with Sandia National Laboratories and the Advanced Light
Source.