* 1507383
* Superconducting Circuits and Macroscopic Quantum States of Light and Sound
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Miles Blencowe, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 296,812.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education in theoretical condensed matter physics. Recent developments in the
design of microwave circuits involving transistor-like elements made of
superconductors have resulted in the ability to make electrical supercurrents
interact strongly with microwaves. At sufficently low temperature, supercurrents
in superconductors carry electricity without dissipation. The superconducting
state involes the collective behavior of a large of electrons that together can
exhibit properties of quantum mechanical states typical of the world of atoms
and molecules even though the supercondutor itself is a macroscopic object.
Preliminary work suggests that the resulting generated microwaves can be
inherently low noise, somewhat akin to a laser. Such microwave sources may be
useful for quantum communication purposes. The PI aims to develop a theoretical
understanding of the nature of the microwaves that are generated as a result of
these strong light-charge interactions. The PI will work in close collaboration
with experimentalist. In a related thrust the PI will investigate a hybrid
system where a superconducting transistor element couples microwaves with a
nanoscale, mechanical vibrating wire. It is expected that this coupling will
result in low inherent noise for the microwaves and coupled mechanical
vibrations. This kind of vibrating nanowire device may enable the development of
an ultasensitive force microscope. An overall goal of these two projects is to
develop an understanding of how to generate steady-state, large amplitude
microwave and nanomechanical motions that have manifestly quantum mechanical
properties such as ultralow amplitude noise, otherwise known as "quantum
squeezing." &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A graduate student and advanced undergraduate
students involved in the project will receive training in theoretical condensed
matter physics. The students will benefit from having direct access to
experimental results from colleague Prof. Rimberg's lab, and will help in the
interpretation of the experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education concerned with advancing understanding of a class of superconducting
circuit systems that strongly couple microwave photons to Cooper pair transport
and to nanomechanical motion. The activity comprises two superconducting circuit
projects. One project will develop a comprehensive theory of the Cooper pair
laser, in particular elucidating the quantum nature of the generated microwave
cavity photons and modeling the data from recent and planned experiments. The
other project will develop the theory for a related microwave cavity-Cooper pair
circuit system that includes a nanomechanical resonator, also being realized in
experiment. This recently proposed system achieves ultra strong coupling between
the microwave cavity photons and nanomechanical energy quanta--phonons. The
project will in particular address the generation of manifestly quantum states
of the mechanical resonator involving large average phonon number. The
theoretical investigation will complement a parallel experimental effort by
Dartmouth colleague Prof. Alex Rimberg, also supported by the NSF. The goal of
the project is to provide a better understanding of how to generate steady,
quantum sources of microwaves and mechanical quantum states involving large
average photon and phonon numbers. Robust, tunable sources of quantum microwaves
may find application in quantum communication, while steady, continuously
generated mechanical quantum states may find use in ultra sensitive position
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the training of a graduate
student, as well as advanced undergraduate students involved in the research in
theoretical condensed matter physics, gaining expertise in such areas as many
body theory, mesoscopic quantum physics, nonlinear dynamics, quantum optics, and
computational physics. The students will also have opportunities to apply their
theoretical models to help explain experimental data from Prof. Rimberg's group.