* 1507160
* Search for Anomalous Physics with Precision Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Dmitry Budker, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The spatial orientation of an experiment should never affect its outcome. For
light, this principle has been tested in the famous Michelson-Morley experiment
leading to the basic principle in physics known as "Lorentz invariance" and,
more generally, Einstein's theory of Special Relativity. Modern theories of
matter require that not only light but also all other particles should be
invariant to rotations. The goal of the experiments in this project will be to
perform a Michelson-Morley experiment for electrons. Detecting even tiny energy
variations between electrons moving in different directions would mean that
space is not isotropic and that we need an entirely new class of theories to
describe nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the experiment, a laser pulse will
create superpositions of electronic wavepackets inside Calcium ions. Those
wavepackets will then evolve independently of each other in orthogonal
directions. A second laser pulse will then recombine the wavepackets. The
corresponding&lt;br/&gt;interference signal will be directly sensitive to the
difference in how the two electronic wavepackets move. The experiments rely
heavily on tools developed for ion trap quantum information processing to
control and measure the quantum state of individual Calcium ions. In particular,
engineering symmetric quantum states of two and more ions makes the signal
immune to common noise sources such as magnetic field fluctuations. Thus, the
long coherence of the electron motion in combination with accurate control of
all relevant systematic error sources will enable testing the isotropy of space
and Lorentz invariance at the level of (and beyond) 1 part in ten to the
nineteen (nineteen decimal places of accuracy).