* 1507529
* Reversible Anion and Ion-Pair Recognition under Electronic Control
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Sourav Saha, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Lisy
* 10/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professor Sourav Saha of Florida State
University to develop new strategies and receptors that can not only
discriminate anions on the basis of their electronic properties, but also
capture and release the target anions in a reversible fashion under the
influence of electrons and light. Anions and cations are ubiquitous, and have
diverse structures, properties, and functions. Some play important roles in
biological, chemical, industrial, and environmental processes, while others are
toxic and pollutants. For these reasons, it is important to regulate these
charged species with high precision and selectivity. Selective ion receptors can
provide scientists with systems that are recyclable, reusable, and better suited
for applications in environmental protection. The graduate, undergraduate, and
postdoctoral researchers working on this project will gain an array of
scientific knowledge and technical expertise, from synthesis to molecular
recognition. Integrated outreach activities are directed at local schools, the
public library, and at students from Florida Agricultural and Mining University,
an HBCU institution. Through these efforts, Dr. Saha plans to engage young and
underrepresented students in hands-on experiments to motivate them to consider
the pursuit of careers in science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to develop new strategies to (i) discriminate anions on the basis of
their electronic properties, (ii) capture anions and cations simultaneously in a
cooperative fashion, and (iii) bind and release ionic guests in a reversible
fashion under the influence of electrons and light. To discriminate anions in
aprotic solvents, the Saha research team is exploiting the ability of ð-acidic
naphthalenediimide (NDI) receptors to accept electron(s) from strong Lewis basic
anions, form charge-transfer complexes with less basic anions, and engage in
anion?ð and CH···anion interactions with charge-diffuse anions. To overcome the
ion-pairing effect that weakens the binding interactions between ionic guests
and receptors, tweezers-shaped, ditopic ion-pair receptors are being developed
by tethering two terminal NDI units with folded linkers that can bind cations.
The hypothesis is that cation binding at the linker units should facilitate
anion binding between the two overlapping NDI units and vice versa. During
biphasic extractions, these ditopic receptors should selectively extract salts
that contain less hydrated charge-diffuse anions from aqueous to organic medium,
while the more hydrated hard anions should remain in water. NDI-based cationic
metallacycles are being constructed to capture large charge-diffuse anions
inside their cavities through anion/NDI interactions. The metal ion corners
should mitigate the ion-pairing effects. The reversible redox chemistry of the
NDI units and the tendency of their reduced forms to expel anions offer a new
approach to release the captured anions from these receptors upon chemical,
electrochemical, and/or photochemical reduction.