* 1507673
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Experimental Characterization of the Dynamics of Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Charles Kolb, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 11/30/2019
* USD 250,000.00

This project, funded by the Environmental Chemistry program of the Chemistry
Division at the national Science Foundation, investigates the chemical and
physical properties of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) particles produced in the
atmosphere by reactions of gas-phase organic chemicals (emitted by vegetation,
industrial and transportation sources) with ozone and hydroxyl radicals. SOA is
a complex mixture of thousands of low-volatility organic species that condense
on preexisting atmospheric particles and form a large fraction of atmospheric
particulates that impact human health and alter climate and visibility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project brings together research groups
from Boston College (BC) and Aerodyne Research, Inc. (ARI) with demonstrated
expertise in SOA production and measurement of submicron SOA particle properties
and a group at the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) with capabilities in
modeling the thermodynamic and molecular dynamic properties of liquid, glassy
and crystalline organic materials. The project supports a series of laboratory
experiments, directed by Professor Paul Davidovits at BC and Dr. Charles Kolb at
ARI, that characterize the dynamic properties of mixtures of SOA-like surrogate
chemicals as well as laboratory generated SOA particles. The UCB theoretical
team, led by Professor David Chandler, is formulating models to reproduce the
dynamic properties of SOA measured in thin film deposition and fine particle
reactive uptake experiments, with the goal of predicting the impact of relative
humidity and temperature on thermodynamic and kinetic properties of SOA/water
systems found in the atmosphere. The coupling of fundamental, theoretical, and
experimental dynamics of glassy organic material help clarify and codify the
roles of SOA in cloud formation, cloud and aerosol radiative properties and
cloud precipitation. The project trains students to work in an interdisciplinary
team that includes fundamental physical chemists, applied aerosol physicists and
atmospheric chemists. The resulting theoretical tools is used by the atmospheric
science community to better predict and parameterize SOA particle climate
impacts and SOA particle inhalation exposures, with direct societal benefits.