* 1507321
* Dynamic metallo-supramolecular oligomers stabilized by Cucurbit[8]uril connectors: self-assembly applied to combinatorial chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Eric Masson, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 12/31/2019
* USD 451,278.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program of the NSF Division of Chemistry, Prof. Masson investigates the
recognition properties of water soluble metal-ligand complexes towards CB[n] and
develops dynamic combinatorial approaches to preparing dynamic oligomers and
polymers. Synthetic polymers are found in most objects used in everyday life.
Polymers that spontaneously adjust their composition depending on their
environment in water are of particular interest to Professor Eric Masson at Ohio
University. His research group studies the formation and properties of a novel
type of dynamic polymers in which the interchangeable building blocks are tied
to one another with a pumpkin-shaped, hollow molecular ring called
cucurbit[8]uril (CB[8]). The project has potential applications in biochemistry,
as the dynamic polymers can interact with medically or biologically relevant
materials such as proteins and cells, and in analytical chemistry, as the
polymers can be used as sensors in quality control and drug detection
applications. This project is multidisciplinary, and provides training to
undergraduate and graduate students with a broad range of interests and talents,
from organic synthesis, to biochemistry and statistical analysis. In addition,
students are involved in the upgrade of an organic synthesis board game created
by Professor Masson for computer tablets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The building
blocks of the dynamic oligomers targeted herein are metal-terpyridine complexes
linked to CB[8]-binding units. The terpyridine ligands bear phenyl or naphthyl
groups at the 4'-position to promote binding in the CB[8] ring. The terpyridine
ligands are also functionalized with bio-inspired side chains (based mostly on
amino acid residues) at the 4- and 4"-positions for interactions with the outer
wall of CB[8] and for target recognition. The metal-ligand complexes are
connected non-covalently via binding to the CB[8] rings. The outer wall of CB[8]
participates de facto in the target recognition process once the metal-
ligand/CB[8] oligomers are formed. This project involves (1) the preparation of
a library of metal-ligand complexes (such as iron(II)-, ruthenium(II)- and
iridium(III)-terpyridine) with a variety of pendent groups; (2) the assessment
of their recognition properties towards CB[n]s and the interactions between the
pendent groups with the outer convex surface of CB[n]s; and (3) the preparation
and characterization of the metal-ligand/CB[8] dynamic oligomers in the absence
and presence of biologically relevant targets.