* 1507664
* Porous Molecular Crystals and Metal-Organic Frameworks Based on Fluorinated Pyrazoles
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Olafs Daugulis, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Porous materials have microscopic voids in
their structures. Because these voids are comparable in dimensions to molecules,
porous materials find numerous applications related to energy, petrochemical
industry, environment, and medicine. With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this project
develops new classes of porous materials in which building blocks are individual
molecules. Such materials have superior properties relative to the currently
available porous materials: they are lightweight, recyclable, and much more
easily processable, as they are soluble and can in principle be "painted" on a
surface. Their unusual internal structures make these materials superb water-
repellants; they are also capable of capturing Freons and fluorocarbons-which
are both powerful greenhouse gases and ozone-depleting substances. In addition,
they strongly bind hydrocarbons, which makes them promising in applications in
fuel storage and oil spill cleanup. This research project is integrated with a
broad education plan that aims to increase student competency in the areas of
energy and sustainability, as well as to involve undergraduate and high school
students in original research, with a focus on minority and female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project is focused on the preparation of extensively fluorinated
porous materials based on pyrazoles. Fluorinated metal-organic frameworks are
formed by deprotonation of pyrazoles into pyrazolates and their coordination to
transition metals. Fluorinated pyrazolates have been chosen as ligands since
their high basicity should translate into chemically robust frameworks.
Fluorinated molecular crystals are formed by the self-assembly of neutral
fluorinated pyrazoles into a porous framework held together by a combination of
[pi···pi] stacking and hydrogen bonding. These porous molecular crystals were
recently discovered by the principal investigators. This research fills a gap in
the existing knowledge: extensively fluorinated porous materials have been
underexplored because of the paucity of the appropriately fluorinated molecular
precursors. This project will dramatically expand the knowledge in this area,
through its four goals: (1) creation of a general synthetic strategy to access
extensively fluorinated aromatic pyrazoles (and derivatives) through novel
copper- and palladium-catalyzed C-H functionalization reactions; (2)
reticulation of fluorinated pyrazoles into porous molecular crystals, and
understanding of structural elements necessary for the creation of robust
porosity that persists above 200 °C; (3) synthesis of extensively fluorinated
metal-organic frameworks starting from the precursor pyrazolate ligands prepared
in the first part of the proposed work, and (4) exhaustive characterization of
both classes of fluorinated materials, with an eye toward future applications.
Performance characteristics of interest include: thermal and chemical stability,
hydrophobicity, and potential as adsorbents for (a) Freons and fluorocarbons,
(b) fluorinated anesthetics, (c) amphiphilic fluorinated pollutants, (d)
hydrocarbons, and (e) molecular oxygen. This research generates fundamental new
knowledge in the areas of organometallic, inorganic, and supramolecular
chemistry.