* 1507429
* Complex Functional Materials Accessed Uniquely through Selective Covalent and Non-covalent Macromolecular Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Karen Wooley, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 551,059.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic polymer materials,
commonly thought of as plastics, are of critical importance to every aspect of
human life, from the clothes that we wear to the computers that we use to the
tires on which we drive to the devices through which medicines are administered.
Due to the large, macromolecular size of polymers, there is great opportunity to
vary the chemical composition and structure, throughout the entire molecular
framework or in specific sub-regions, to achieve significant variation in the
materials properties: i.e., flexible vs. rigid, conducting vs. insulating, etc.
As the chemical structure of polymers becomes increasingly complex, their
properties and technological applications also often increase. The expected
significance of the proposed work will be in the advancement of synthetic
chemistry approaches that allow for simple, scalable production of polymer
materials that possess intricate complexity and exhibit unique physical and
mechanical properties. A focus is on building the polymers to have a "bottle-
brush-like" molecular architecture enabling them to exist as pre-fabricated
super-size macromolecules that contain sub-regions designed for programmed
assembly or degradation. From these macromolecules functional nanostructured
objects can then be produced. Such objects may be able to be used as synthetic
versions of viruses for synthetic vaccines, or as porous thin films for water
purification, gas separation or other transport and separations applications.
Other target structures will include nanostructures that are capable of oil
spill clean-up with magnetic recovery. The fundamental knowledge generated is
expected to impact chemistry, physics and engineering disciplines, and the
project will also include multifaceted educational components. With the
practical applicability of these new materials, including the specific target
applications to be studied, industrial interest may be anticipated, which may
translate to products offering additional societal
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of the proposed work will involve
the development of advanced synthetic methodologies to afford nanoscopic
materials having enhanced compositions, structures and functions. One objective
is to increase the complexity of materials compositions, structures and
properties, by first kinetically-trapping linear polymer precursors into
covalent molecular brush architectures having pre-determined regiochemical
distributions of functionalities. A second objective is to develop an
understanding of the morphologies and properties that can be generated from the
assembly of the resulting molecular brush building blocks in solution, thin
films and the bulk. In addition to the roles of molecular architecture on the
assembly processes and resulting properties, polypeptide segments will be
incorporated as side chain grafts to provide for active secondary structural
interactions, and degradable polypeptide or polyphosphoester portions will be
built-in to allow for heterogeneous modulation of the density within nanoscopic
domains of the overall materials. Beyond the fundamental objectives, specific
targets will include discrete nanocage frameworks, modeled after the assembly of
globular proteins into viral capsids, and extended thin-film or bulk porous
polymer network materials, each of controlled dimensions and porosities for
potential use in transport and separations applications. An additional objective
is to further investigate hybrid inorganic-organic heterostructures that are
designed to outperform our recently-developed magnetic shell crosslinked knedel-
like (MSCK) nanoparticles in their capacity for crude oil recovery efforts. The
methods that will be employed will include combinations of polymerization and
chemical modification reactions to build up the structures, homogeneous or
heterogeneous supramolecular assembly methods to afford complex morphologies,
crosslinking of selective regions to stabilize those morphologies, and, in some
cases, degradation of selective domains within the materials. Throughout the
work, rigorous characterization studies will be conducted. A broad educational
and outreach program is part of this project.