* 1507741
* Chemical Biology Approaches to Sorting Out Functions of the MYST Acetyltransferases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Y George Zheng, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Y. George Zheng at The University of Georgia to
investigate the molecular basis for the enzymatic mechanisms of the MYST family
of histone acetyltransferases (HATs). Biological traits such as eye and hair
color are encoded in the specific genes. Factors other than gene sequences also
play roles in when genes are turned on and off. The variations in traits that do
not depend on gene sequences are referred to collectively as epigenetics. One
key epigenetic mechanism is the acetylation of chromosomal proteins called
histones catalyzed by enzymes known as histone acetyltransferases (HATs). How
HAT enzymes regulate epigenetic processes is poorly understood. This research
project is designed to elucidate molecular mechanisms in the function of HAT
proteins. The program will create interdisciplinary training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students in chemical biology and epigenetics
research. By getting involved in these projects, students will learn how to
design experimental strategies and apply advanced technologies to resolve key
problems in today's cutting-edge biological research. Outreach will be extended
to high school students by sponsoring research internships for them. These
research-related educational efforts are important to prepare next-generation
scientists in chemical and biological sciences.

Functional roles will be investigated for key amino acid residues of the HATs in
substrate recognition and acetylation. Bioorthogonal chemical biology probes
will be used to profile cellular substrates of the MYST HATs at the proteomic
level, and activity-based chemical probes will be created to dissect critical
cellular factors that regulate the enzymatic activity of the MYST HATs. A
multidisciplinary approach, involving molecular cloning, organic synthesis,
protein expression, enzymology, and mass spectrometry, will be employed to
investigate substrate specificity and biochemical functions of key MYST HAT
enzymes. The proposed research can be expected to yield a better understanding
of HAT biology by providing mechanistic insights into how protein acetylation is
regulated and exerts its impact in MYST-mediated cellular pathways. In the
process, new chemical tools for the functional study of HATs in general will be
prepared. On a broader level, advancement of knowledge of post-translational
modifications in epigenetic regulation will be coupled with multidisciplinary
research training opportunities for graduate students and undergraduates as well
as internship experiences for high schools students.