* 1507914
* Inorganic Biological Hybrid Systems for Photochemical Biosynthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Peidong Yang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical Energy and environmental problems represent one of the greatest
challenges facing humankind in this century. Despite tremendous efforts to
develop renewable energy sources, still the majority of energy used is derived
from non-renewable fossil fuels. Reducing carbon dioxide, an abundant carbon
source, into value added fuels using a renewable energy input (i.e. artificial
photosynthesis) would allow us to reduce our dependence on conventional fossil
fuels, mitigate CO2 emissions and make our society more sustainable.
Furthermore, chemical fuels produced from carbon dioxide could be readily
implemented in the current energy infrastructure allowing a quick and smooth
transition toward a renewable energy society. This research is aimed at solving
several problems: harvesting solar electricity using semiconductor nanocrystals,
synthesizing a variety of useful chemicals with nanocrystal/bacteria hybrids,
and disposing of a troublesome waste product produced in very large quantities,
i.e., carbon dioxide. This research is also highly cross-disciplinary as the
confluence of two disparate technologies to produce a solution to a problem,
i.e., materials science to produce semiconductor nanocrystals, and biotechnology
to use the electrons and holes produced by the nanocrystals to general value-
added chemicals. The insights gained in this study possesses the potential to
supplant the reliance on petrochemical routes to chemical synthesis for fuels,
fertilizers, industrial and commodity chemicals, polymers, pharmaceuticals, and
more, while simultaneously providing a path towards carbon capture and reduction
of atmospheric CO2 levels.

Technical Natural photosynthesis relies upon a series of light harvesting
proteins, which are optically limited to an absorption peak, only capable of
utilizing a relatively narrow region of the solar spectrum and are susceptible
to damage by higher energy photons. In comparison, inorganic, solid-state
semiconductors, which form the basis of high efficiency commercial photovoltaic
cells, surpass their biological analogues, possessing an absorption band, above
which all higher energy photons can be collected for chemical work. However,
such inorganic light harvesting schemes are quite costly, requiring scarce
elements in exceptionally high purity, and energy intensive synthesis schemes.
Additionally, unlike their biological counterparts, many of the highest
performing materials are fundamentally unstable, susceptible to a variety of
damage and degradation pathways with no built in mechanism for self-repair. One
might envision a hybrid system, in which the best of both worlds are combined
for the purpose of photochemical biosynthesis: the optoelectronic properties of
inorganic chemical systems, with the synthetic, self-regenerative properties of
biological systems. Through such a symbiotic relationship, in which each half
augments the capabilities of the other, it is possible to design a new type of
biotic-abiotic hybrid biomaterial that surpasses the capabilities of their
individual components.

The objective of this research is to design and explore the fundamental biotic-
abiotic interfaces of a model system for inorganic-biological artificial
photosynthesis of a diversity of chemical products utilizing CO2 as the sole
carbon source. This model system will require several phases: 1) selection of a
biological component for chemical synthesis; 2) selection of an inorganic light
harvester; 3) exploration of the synergistic effects of the inorganic-biological
hybrid system; and 4) detailed study of the fundamental mechanisms at the newly
formed biotic-abiotic interfaces. This proposed work represents a first foray
into relatively unexplored territory: the energy transduction between
semiconductors and whole cell microorganisms. Of what the PI believe to be the
first work of its kind is the examination of the self-photosensitization of a
microorganism, in which bacteria is able to synthesize its own inorganic
semiconductor light harvester, and carry out normal metabolic function through
this new form of energy transduction. The proposed work will serve as a
foundation for teaching and training students highly interdisciplinary skills in
chemistry, physics, biology and materials engineering for renewable energy
research.