* 1507358
* UNS: Highly Sensitive H02 Diagnostics and Oxidation Kinetics of Oxygenated Fuels at High Pressure
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Yiguang Ju, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

1507358 (Ju)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal brings an extensive suite of
experimental tools to study the reaction phenomenon of basic fuels that exist in
more complicated fuels. These new tools developed at Princeton University allow
researchers to look at the phenomenon with sensitivity that has not previously
existed, especially under high-pressure conditions common in engines. The
principal investigators propose to involve graduate students in the research and
outreach activities using the Princeton Energy for Community Certificate
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new, highly sensitive, quantitative mid-IR FRS
(Faraday Rotation Spectroscopy) combustion diagnostic method for HO2 and OH will
be developed. The proposed mid-IR FRS/IR-LAS integrated photolysis flow reactor
will provide transformative capabilities and enable accurate quantification of
key elementary reaction rates at low and intermediate temperatures. The measured
HO2/OH, and other intermediate species, flame speeds, and elementary rate
constants will fill the gap of knowledge of the current understanding of
combustion kinetics at low temperature and high pressure, and will play a
critical role in developing a validated, high pressure and low temperature
kinetic mechanisms for the following common and important base fuels: methyl
formate, methanol, and dimethyl ether (DME). The obtained high pressure
methanol, methyl formate, and DME kinetic mechanisms will form the base
mechanisms for other larger hydrocarbon fuels, alcohols, biodiesels, and esters.