* 1507332
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Next generation 2D-LC with greatly improved quantitative performance: Innovations in hardware, software, and methodology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Sarah Rutan, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2021
* USD 406,671.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Dwight Stoll of Gustavus Adolphus College and
Sarah Rutan of Virginia Commonwealth University are studying fundamental aspects
of the quantitative performance of two-dimensional liquid chromatography
(2D-LC). 2D-LC is an analytical methodology used for separation of inherently
complex materials including urine, blood, urban wastewater, and the products of
chemical and biological synthesis. The separation power of 2D-LC is well suited
to better understand such complex samples in fields ranging from medicine and
pharmaceutical development to environmental chemistry. However, state-of-the-art
2D-LC currently suffers from poorer sensitivity and precision compared to more
conventional methods, and this limits its scope of application. This
academic/industrial collaboration between Gustavus Adolphus College, Virginia
Commonwealth University, and Agilent Technologies will enable a deeper
fundamental understanding of these limitations and support the development of
novel technologies to improve the quantitative performance of
2D-LC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage the strengths of the
collaboration partners to address the limitations in quantitative performance of
2D-LC through a combination of complementary strategies. Simulations will be
developed to better understand the underlying fundamental limitations of
coupling the two dimensions in 2D-LC, novel valve technology will be developed
and its performance characterized experimentally, and computer-based data
analysis methods will be developed that enable better utilization of the multi-
dimensional structure of data produced by 2D-LC methods. It is expected that the
detection limits of 2D-LC will be improved at least five-fold, and that the
quantitative precision will be improved so that it is competitive with
conventional liquid chromatography. The broader impacts of the work include:
wider application of 2D-LC as a high resolution separation technique across the
life sciences and chemical industries; engagement of students at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels in cutting-edge research; and
development of simulations that will facilitate more efficient and deeper
learning about critical concepts in liquid chromatography.