* 1507505
* Biomaterials Interfaces for Photoactive Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Gannon Jennings, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award to Vanderbilt and Tennessee State
Universities will explore fundamental advances in the integration of proteins
into devices to speed the development of biohybrid solar cells for the
generation of affordable, renewable power. A team of two chemists, and a
chemical engineer will collaborate in this project to develop nature-inspired
solar cells that use proteins from green plants as the photo-active elements.
The protein complexes Photosystem I (PSI) and Photosystem II (PSII) drive
photosynthesis in plants and are highly efficient solar converters. Members of
this team have experience in integrating PSI and PSII films with electrode
surfaces to design and construct photoelectrochemical cells with photocurrents
that have improved by a factor of nearly 106 over the past five years and are
now within an order of magnitude of many mature technologies. This research
project will address key fundamental biomaterials issues to greatly enhance the
performance of photosystem-based solar cells. The research team for this project
will build on their strong track record of integrating research with education
at Vanderbilt and Tennessee State University, an HBCU, by promoting the
interdisciplinary education of graduate and undergraduate researchers in
engineering and chemistry through research experiences and interdisciplinary
coursework. An established outreach program to include students from under-
represented groups through Fisk and Tennessee State HBCUs is combined with K-12
classroom outreach in the Vanderbilt Summer Academy and Vanderbilt Student
Volunteers for Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the team from Vanderbilt and Tennessee State will develop a biomimetic
approach to orient PSI on electrode surfaces, explore new ways of interfacing
these proteins with conductive materials to facilitate electron flow to/from the
proteins, and promote band energy alignment with the goal to achieve another
quantum leap in biohybrid solar energy conversion. First, PSI orientation at
electrode surfaces will be greatly enhanced by selectively modifying the exposed
stromal face of PSI within the thylakoid membrane with surface-active ligands
before releasing the modified protein for directed assembly onto surfaces.
Achieving uniform orientations of these biomolecular photodiodes without the
reliance on expensive and slow alternative methods would greatly advance
biohybrid performance. Second, the conductivity within PSI films will be
promoted by wiring reduced graphene oxide, redox polymers, and semiconductor
nanoparticles to the active PSI sites. These oriented and more conductive PSI
films will be interfaced with two types of electrode systems in both wet and
solid-state systems. Building from the group's recent success, PSI films will be
interfaced with semiconductors with appropriate energy levels to guide electron
flow unidirectionally through the circuit. In addition, an all-carbon-based
solar cell in which PSI films are sandwiched between oppositely doped,
atomically thin graphene sheets to yield "stacked" architectures with only
slight impedance of incoming light will be designed, fabricated, and optimized.
These advances will also be applied to the interfacing and photoelectrochemistry
of PSII onto substrate electrodes. The PIs will create outreach components and
kits for building and demonstrating these devices in the middle school and high
school settings.