* 1507385
* Controlling the flow of energy transduction through a protein medium via rational design
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Corey Wilson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2017
* USD 388,399.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Corey J. Wilson of Yale University to conduct a
rigorous study of protein-mediated energy transduction reactions. The process of
energy transduction in protein systems is may be initiated by absorption of a
photon by an "antenna" molecule, that channels that light energy into the
attainment of an excited electronic state. The fate of the excited electron
depends on a number of factors and productive reactions typically result in
electron transfer or energy transfer through the protein. These reactions are
essential to life-processes such as photosynthesis and cellular respiration.
Accordingly, the long-term goal of this project is to leverage rational protein
design methods to understand the principles that govern energy transduction in
natural systems, which will enable the development of novel bio-electronic
devices (e.g., energy harvesting paints for commercial uses as next generation
solar energy production). This pursuit will allow graduate and undergraduate
students to acquire specialized training both in advanced computational modeling
and experimental photochemical methods. A particular effort willl be made to
recruit members of groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM as part of the
research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be accomplished with the use
computational modeling and complementary experimentation to draw distinctions
between the role of the coupling matrix in electron transfer versus energy
transfer and to leverage this knowledge to develop new scoring functions for
second generation designs in future work. The working hypothesis is the rate of
energy transduction through a protein can be controlled via the strategic
redesign of the intervening medium and can be optimized for electron transfer
(EleT) or energy transfer (EngT) reactions. Accordingly, the goal of this
project is to develop and experimentally test computational design strategies
that will enable us to control the rate of energy transduction via pathway
redesign with distinction for EleT and EngT reactions. In principle,
modification of the EleT electronic coupling matrix and EngT bridge can result
in tuning of and control over the rate of energy transduction.