* 1507950
* US-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Si-compatible, Strain Engineered Staggered Gap Ge(Sn)/InxGa1-xAs Nanoscale Tunnel Field Effect Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Mantu Hudait, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 373,423.00

The aggressive down-scaling of silicon (Si)-based transistor technology over the
past five decades has resulted in an exponential increase in computing power due
to the corresponding up-scaling of logic device densities and operational
speeds. Moreover, this continued miniaturization has led to the proliferation of
affordable, powerful, and compact computing devices that have made Si
microelectronics an essential and ubiquitous aspect of modern society. To
prolong these trends and address the fundamental technical challenges that have
arisen as transistor technology approaches the atomic length scale, research
into novel transistor materials and device architectures is paramount. The
adoption of new semiconducting materials, e.g., germanium (Ge), germanium-tin
(GeSn) and indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs), and transistor architectures, e.g.
tunnel field-effect transistors operating on the principle of quantum mechanical
tunneling, offer paths to reduce power consumption and increase performance-per-
watt in future integrated circuits. However, unlike Si, these novel transistor
technologies and materials do not benefit from half-a-century of process
maturity. Therefore, the central thrusts of this research are to investigate the
materials and optical properties, electrical characteristics, and heterogeneous
integration of novel Ge(Sn)/InGaAs tunnel transistors on large area, cost-
effective Si substrates. Moreover, the implementation of a monolithic,
heterogeneous integration scheme for non-Si materials and devices on Si is a
transformative goal that leverages the existing mature process infrastructure
for Si with the performance benefits of novel, scalable non-Si transistor
technologies. By addressing these technical challenges, this research will
benefit a wide range of applications, ranging from industrial, medical,
commercial and personal use that require cost-competitive, low-power and high-
performance computational devices. Furthermore, this international co-operative
interaction between partners allows for a comprehensive project that trains and
mentors students through exchange programs, exposure to education and culture in
Ireland as well as lay a foundation for continued and growing US-Ireland
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To demonstrate the viability of the
proposed approach, several key technical and scientific concerns must be
addressed, including: (i) materials synthesis and characterization of
Ge(Sn)/InGaAs heterostructures; (ii) numerical simulation of the proposed
complimentary Ge(Sn)/InGaAs tunnel transistor device architectures; (iii)
development of a process flow for fabricating the n- and p-channel Ge(Sn)/InGaAs
tunnel transistors; and (iv) implementation of an integration scheme on Si. To
address (i), (iii), and (iv), the proposed research will utilize the state-of-
the-art in-house epitaxial growth (interconnected group-IV and III-V molecular
beam epitaxy chambers), collaborative materials characterization and simulation
(e.g., high-resolution x-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy,
photoluminescence spectroscopy, and ab-initio interfacial molecular dynamics and
electronic band structure simulation), and in-house nanoelectronics fabrication
facilities. To address (ii), a combination of commercial and custom software
packages will be leveraged to develop precise, experimentally-calibrated
Ge(Sn)/InGaAs device models necessary for large-scale circuit integration
feasibility. By investigating these topics, this research will elucidate
numerous as-of-yet unexplored avenues of fundamental research, including: (a)
the control of heterointerface atomic intermixing between group IV (Ge, GeSn)
and III-V (In, Ga, As) species and formation of atomically abrupt tunnel
junctions; (b) the role of group-III or group-V surface termination on the
electronic, optical and energy band alignment properties; (c) the reduction of
effective tunneling barrier heights in Ge(Sn)/InGaAs TFETs and conversion of
Ge(Sn) to a direct band-gap material through epitaxial tensile strain
engineering and Sn alloy incorporation; (d) the simultaneous chemical and
electrical passivation of group-IV and III-V materials; and (e) the realization
of device-quality epitaxial heterostructures on Si through minimization of
threading dislocations and anti-phase domains in in-situ III-V buffer
architectures on Si. Through a comprehensive examination and understanding of
the aforementioned issues, this research will offer a path to achieve next-
generation, non-Si nanoelectronics that will benefit industry and society via
extending technological and computational innovation towards the physical
scaling limit.