* 1507351
* Collaborative Research: High Efficiency Tandem Perovskite-Copper Indium Selenide Solar Cell
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* William Shafarman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 190,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Solar photovoltaic (PV) energy
conversion is an important technology for generating low-cost electricity to
replace coal-generated power. It is also very important for providing
electricity to half of the people in the world who currently lack grid-connected
power. For economical generation of PV power, efficiency of solar cells is a
very important consideration, since area-related costs such as encapsulation,
wiring and structure decrease proportionately as the efficiency of the cell
increases. A very recent development in this field has been the discovery that a
new thin film material, hybrid organic-inorganic metal halide based perovskites,
can be used to generate PV power with a conversion efficiency of ~20%. This new
material has a larger bandgap than commonly used thin film materials such as
copper-indium-gallium selenide (CIGS), and therefore, can be used as a higher
bandgap first cell in a monolithic tandem solar cell arrangement with CIGS.
Calculations predict that such a series-connected tandem cell structures can
increase the efficiency of thin film CIGS solar cells to 30% from the current
value of 20%, a 50% increase. This proposal is aimed towards fundamental
material and device research to achieve such high efficiency tandem cell
structures. It is hoped that such a structure will lead to further developments
which result in a significant decrease in the cost of solar-electric power. A
graduate student will participate in this project and new teaching materials
will be incorporated into courses dealing with solar energy
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is
focused on designing and fabricating a monolithic tandem cell structure with a
high gap perovskite cell deposited on top of a high efficiency CIGS cell. The
two cells are connected using novel tunnel junctions. Several new materials,
processes and device structures need to be developed for the concept to work.
Among these are:&lt;br/&gt;-A perovskite material with a bandgap in the 1.7-1.8
eV range as opposed to the current 1.57 eV material. The higher bandgap is
needed to make efficient tandem cells with a CIGS bottom cell. We will develop
efficient Pb(I-Br) perovskites to increase the bandgap.&lt;br/&gt;-A perovskite
material which is physically stable at higher temperatures so that transparent
contacts can be deposited on the device to allow light to be incident form the
top of the cell. We will use novel organic precursors such as formamidinium
iodide and urea hydroiodide to achieve thermally stable
perovskites.&lt;br/&gt;-A new vacuum process for depositing perovskites at
higher temperatures which avoids the instability of the solution growth
process.&lt;br/&gt;-The use of inorganic heterojunction layers for electron and
hole extraction , thus avoiding unstable organic heterojunction
layers.&lt;br/&gt;-ITO/ZnO tunnel junctions to connect the two
cells.&lt;br/&gt;-Innovative CIGS cells in1.1 to1.15 eV range with high
efficiency achieved by using bandgap grading strategies along with larger grain
growth and deliberate Na or K doping.&lt;br/&gt;The project includes
comprehensive material and device analysis tasks so as to understand the physics
of the device.