* 1507789
* UNS: High performance tetrahedrite thermoelectric materials:  An integrated experimental and computational approach
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Wei Lai, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 05/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

CBET - 1507789 PI: Morelli, Donald T.

Thermoelectric materials are capable of converting heat into an electrical
voltage or an electrical voltage into heat. These materials can be used for
power generation, for capturing waste heat in combustion processes, and for
cooling applications. This project comprises experiments and atomistic modeling
of tetrahedrite minerals, which have shown promise as especially efficient
thermoelectric materials. In addition, the tetrahedrite family of minerals is
abundant on earth and environmentally benign compared with other semiconductor
thermoelectrics, which incorporate rare or toxic elements to achieve
thermoelectric efficiency. Results from the project will be incorporated into a
web-based education and outreach program called Atoms in Materials in 3D and
into a science newsletter for elementary and middle school students.

This project will identify connections between atomic and electron density and
thermoelectricity in copper-rich tetrahedrites. Research will focus on the
influence of doping of metal ions on the copper site, ionic mobility and ion
migration in copper-rich tetrahedrites and effects of isoelectron substitution
on the anion site. The project will use x-ray and neutron scatter techniques to
provide structural information, insight into atomic displacement and diffusion,
and electron density characteristics. Results will be combined with
thermoelectric property measurements and atomistic simulation studies to develop
quantitative relationships between atomic and electronic structure and
thermoelectric properties of the materials. Enhanced thermoelectric performance
can have a strong influence on the efficiency of energy usage in diverse
industrial processes.