* 1507305
* Lie Algebras, Vertex Operator Algebras, and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Kailash Misra, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 11/30/2017
* USD 47,000.00

The conference "Lie Algebras, Vertex Operator Algebras, and Related Topics" will
take place August 14-18, 2015 at the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana. The conference web page is http://www3.nd.edu/~conf/LieConf15/. This
conference will bring together junior and senior researchers engaged in
mathematical research related to the intersection of and interaction between the
fields of algebra, geometry, and theoretical physics. The broader impacts are
twofold: training of younger scientists and dissemination of new results and
techniques. Expository talks by senior researchers will introduce junior
researchers to the frontiers of mathematical research in the topics of the
conference. The conference will provide an excellent setting for the exchange of
ideas and for developing new collaborations.

This conference is intended to be an important occasion for deepening and
developing our understanding of Lie algebras, vertex algebras, quantum groups,
and related structures from several different perspectives (algebraic,
combinatorial and geometric), with some emphasis given to those fields of
mathematics in which James Lepowsky and Robert Wilson made significant
contributions. This conference is a necessary component in the timely
development of these and related areas, especially in view of rapid developments
in theoretical physics. The focus of this conference will be on the following
topics: Representation theory of Lie algebras and quantum groups; Vertex
operator algebras and their representations; and applications of Lie algebras,
quantum groups and vertex operator algebras to other areas of mathematics and
mathematical physics.