* 1507905
* I-Corps:  Plasma enhanced electrochemical capacitors
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Prabhakar Bandaru, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The widespread use of portable electronic devices, e.g., smart phones, and other
wireless devices, relies on durable electrical energy storage devices as well as
rapid energy delivery. While significant effort and development is underway to
improve the energy capacity of batteries which provide such energy, a major
issue with the related technology is the relatively poor capability and rate at
which at which the energy can be provided. This is reflected for example, in the
rapid draining of the battery, e.g., when flash photography is used.
Electrochemical capacitors (ECs) constitute a new class of devices that may be
used to efficiently produce rapid spurts of electrical power and constitute the
topic of discussion in the proposed work. The goals of the project are aimed at
alleviating a major issue of presently used ECs, which is that while energy can
definitely be supplied in a short time span, the quantity of energy is typically
very small. The successful completion of the project, followed by a wide
implementation of high energy density ECs will then have a major technological
impact. The energy enhanced ECs could be used broadly, (a) in wireless
applications and mobile phones, (b) for consumer use, such as e-gift cards and
digital cameras, e.g., as flashes in mobile phones, as well as (c) in larger
scale utilities, incorporating medical devices, automotive applications, etc.
The project aims towards a large societal and environmental impact, e.g., the
deployment of electric vehicles could be further accelerated through the use of
ECs, which provide sustained acceleration with reduced burden on the battery.
The improved capacitance and concomitant energy density would lead to the wider
deployment of the ECs, with the potential to even substitute for batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work involves the application of innovative
methods to enhance the energy density of the ECs, through the addition of
electrical charges introduced through carefully controlled plasma processing.
Moreover, charge introduction can enhance the constituent nanocarbon capacitance
through exploiting pseudocapacitive contributions in addition to the nominal
double-layer charge accumulation. In preliminary experiments, a three-fold
enhancement of the capacitance was observed, which lends credence to the
hypotheses related to enhanced charge density. Based on these principles, a
prototype EC device was constructed in the PI's laboratory. While the initial
proof of principle was shown through relatively well controlled nanostructures,
e.g., graphene or carbon nanotubes, it is proposed to extend the principles to
more widely used nanocarbons such as activated carbon (AC). A large commercial
impact would accrue from the fabrication of higher energy density electrodes in
the ECs, through relatively cheap industrial scale plasma processing. The close
interactions with capacitor manufacturers and with the EC industry would give
the team the opportunity to understand issues involved in device manufacture and
foster creative engineering attitudes. Several constituent components of the net
charge density, incorporating the electrostatic capacitance (e.g., space charge,
double-layer, etc.) as well as the quantum capacitance effects would be
clarified with respect to their utility in commercial scale ECs.