* 1507750
* UNS:GOALI: Collaborative Research: Aquatic Fate and Toxicity of III-V Materials in the Presence of Nanoparticles Used in Industrial Polishing Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Paul Westerhoff, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2019
* USD 167,310.00

Sierra-Alvarez, Reyes (Principal investigator), The University of Arizona,
Tucson, Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Westerhoff, Paul (Co-principal investigator), Arizona
State University, Tempe, Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Speed, David (Co-principal
investigator), IBM Corporation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing application of
III-V materials (e.g. gallium indium arsenide) in semiconductor and electronics
manufacturing is expected to lead to generation of large volumes of wastewaters
containing III-V metals (arsenic (As), gallium (Ga) and indium (In)) and metal
oxide nanoparticles (SiO2, Al2O3 and CeO2). The potential that these engineered
nanoparticles (NPs) may act as carriers of toxic III-V species and modify the
reactivity of the NPs themselves is a concern. This project aims to quantify the
adsorption of III-V materials by NPs and explore how these interactions impact
the environmental fate, biological uptake, and aquatic toxicity of III-V species
and NPs. This research will be conducted in collaboration with the semiconductor
industry, a major user of SiO2, Al2O3, and CeO2 NPs, that is launching extensive
R&amp;D efforts to develop a new class of integrated circuit devices that will
employ III-V semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research work will be
conducted to: i) determine new equilibrium aqueous complexation constants for
In, Ga, and As with NPs and simulate the speciation and distribution of III-V
elements in the presence of NPs; ii) demonstrate experimentally and through
quantum calculations that sorption of III-V ions on NPs alters their surface
reactivity and potential to produce reactive oxygen species, a marker commonly
associated with increased cytotoxicity; and iii) understand the impact of III-V
species?NP interactions on the toxicity and uptake of these emerging
contaminants by model aquatic organisms. Work supported by industry will assess
the fate and impact of a binary mixture of NPs and III-V ions during on-site
water treatment and downstream municipal wastewater treatment. The primary
intellectual merit of this project is the exploration of the central hypothesis
that NPs can act as a ?Trojan Horse? of adsorbed III-V species, and thereby
affect the surface reactivity and toxicity of NPs, as well as the biological
uptake, fate and toxicity of the dissolved III-V metals in the aquatic
environment. Whereas the concept of using NPs as Trojan Horse delivery systems
for biomedical applications has attracted wide research attention, there are few
realistic studies of this concept using environmentally relevant ions and NPs.
Also it is well established that some NP can adsorb environmental contaminants,
but the notion that adsorbed metals can alter the reactivity of NPs is novel.
The study will also improve our understanding about the environmental chemistry,
fate and ecotoxicity of Ga and In, two poorly characterized metals which have
increasing risk to enter water systems because of their expanding industrial
uses. This project will be among the first to conduct in depth experimental and
modeling work of NPs in industrial waste streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safe
development of nanotechnology is a major theme on both UA and ASU campuses and
this research will contribute to expand the broader impacts associated with
nanotechnology development at both institutions. The project will have benefits
in education by supporting graduate student research and providing scientific
results to develop modules in environmental engineering courses. Other key
impacts include the development of best practice guidelines that can be used by
industry to reduce the potential environmental impact of semiconductor effluents
containing NPs, including effluents from planarization of III-V films. Overall,
the research could benefit society by providing new knowledge and tools to
facilitate assessment of potential hazards of NPs and III-V metals in the
aquatic environment. Findings from this study will be made publicly available in
scientific publications and presentations at scientific conferences, and they
will be presented at professional meetings organized by the semiconductor
industry.