* 1507964
* Collective Rotation Networks in Dense Granular Flow Experiments:  Connecting Rotation and Translation Across Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Wolfgang Losert, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 04/30/2019
* USD 449,934.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Transport and processing of
granular materials costs the United States approximately one trillion dollars
annually. Further, granular flows are implicated in many catastrophic events,
such as avalanches and earthquakes. Thus, improvements in the predictive
modeling of granular flow is valuable for a diverse set of engineering
challenges, from the mixing of powders in the pharmaceutical industry, to rock
avalanche hazard prediction and assessment. Most other efforts in this area
focus primarily on the translational motion of grains from one location to
another. This project, by contrast, explores the role of the rotational motion
of grains in macroscale granular flows. The specific goals are to (1) measure
and quantify rotations in 3D granular flows at the particle scale, (2)
characterize and analyze collective rotations at the mesoscale and (3) connect
rotational and translational motion across scales. The project trains the next
generation of scientists in experimental and modeling techniques that are highly
transferable to a broad range of fields, e.g. to measure collective cell
migration, collective firing of neurons, or to analyze social media via network
analysis. The research team develops a boot camp to disseminate these approaches
of measuring particle and rotational dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to explore how
important macroscale characteristics of granular flows emerge from the
collective behavior of individual particle rotations. Recent research indicates
that particle rotations may play an important role in granular flows: in some
granular configurations, rotations can facilitate rearrangements with minimal
frictional dissipation, while in other configurations torques can enhance
jamming. Rotational motion at the scale of individual grains is poorly
characterized in three-dimensional systems, yet just like forces and
translational motion, torques and rotations couple from grain to grain, and
thus, particle scale rotations naturally connect to mesoscale and macroscale
dynamics. The project provides new insights into key bulk flow properties like
reversibility and segregation, and also explores how preferred shear planes
connect to rotational alignments. The research team expects that insights into
the statistics of collective rotations will have a transformative impact on the
materials science of granular matter. Identifying the role of cooperative
rearrangements in granular flows also has direct applications in a broad range
of engineering, geophysical, and astrophysical contexts. The project's first
objective, to accurately measure the 3D rotations inside a flowing granular
material, builds directly on the research team's established expertise in
measuring 3D granular flows. The rotational statistics and dynamics measured
from careful experimental observations on 3D rotation dynamics have the
potential to provide important validations for current and future models of
granular flows. The second objective, analysis of the collective behavior of
rotations, has the potential to yield transformational insights into hidden
mesoscale structures that could facilitate jamming or flow. We expect collective
features of rotations to be as important as but distinct from collective
translational motion since rotations couple in loops, while translational motion
tends to couple in chains. The approach to characterizing collective rotations
is based on the team's expertise in nonlinear dynamics and network theory.
Finally, the third objective is to connect rotational dynamics across scales to
gain new insights into bulk flow phenomena. Here, the team benefits from prior
in-depth studies of translational particle dynamics across scales in the context
of reversibility, convective flow, and segregation.