* 1507501
* I-Corps:  Opticent Health-Functional Imaging For Early Disease Detection.
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Hao Zhang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

More than 21 million Americans and 285 million people worldwide are either
legally blind or with low vision. While 80% of all visual impairment can be
prevented or cured, ophthalmologists presently lack adequate resources to make
timely diagnoses and decisions regarding treatment. Hence, there is an urgent
need to provide a clinical tool that detects minute physiological abnormalities
much earlier than irreversible anatomical alternations manifest in the eye. This
team has developed the state-of-the-art retinal imaging technologies to provide
the earliest warnings of several vision threatening diseases, including diabetic
retinopathy, macular generation, and glaucoma, well before current clinical
practices can achieve. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed solution relies on
novel optical coherence tomography technology, working within both visible-light
and near infrared spectral ranges, and sophisticated inverse algorithms to
extract both retinal blood flow and retinal blood oxygenation at the capillary
level. The key merit of the innovation comes from the fact that our device
improves clinicians' diagnostic and treatment capabilities by providing retinal
oxygen metabolic in addition to microscopic anatomical information in the
retina. Without such functional information, clinicians must rely on a
discernible structural abnormality to determine the disease stage, which
oftentimes comes once the disease is already advanced and difficult to treat.
The proposed metabolic optical coherence tomography opens up new window for
quantitative risk evaluation and management of vision loss diseases at early
stage. Moreover, commercializing this technology will ultimately help to reduce
the societal healthcare costs and improve the quality of lives of millions of
patients in the US alone.