* 1507629
* DNA-mediated Surface Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2018
* Haitao Liu, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 10/31/2018
* USD 356,073.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Haitao Liu of the University of
Pittsburgh is developing a new lithography method based on DNA nanotechnology.
Lithography is used to make integrated circuits such the ones used in personal
computers and cellphones. However, conventional lithography is approaching its
resolution limit imposed by light diffraction. This project will develop a DNA-
based lithography that is both high resolution and low cost by exploiting the
programmability of DNA nanostructures. In addition, this grant will also
initiate a summer research program that will train undergraduate students from
non-Ph.D. granting institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test
the hypothesis that the local chemical environment (e.g., base sequence and
chemical modification) within a DNA nanostructure can effectively modulate the
rate of surface reactions to result in high-resolution pattern transfer. The
proposed work aims to understand the chemical mechanism of this novel pattern
transfer process and based on which to develop a general strategy to control
surface reaction kinetics using DNA nanostructures. The effect of local chemical
environment on the reaction kinetics will be studied by varying the base
sequence and the chemical functionalization of a DNA nanostructure template.
These experimental studies will be coupled with molecular dynamics simulations
to provide a molecular scale understanding of the effect of DNA nanostructure on
the adsorption of reactive precursors and their subsequent reactions on the
surface. Using the chemistry developed here, one will be able to fabricate
arbitrary-shaped patterns with unprecedented resolution, down to sub-10 nm. More
significantly, because the mechanism of the pattern transfer is widely
applicable to supramolecular templates, in general, this work could have broad
impact on the field of bottom-up nanofabrication.