* 1508943
* Inferring the behavior of distributed energy resources from incomplete measurements
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Johanna Mathieu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 407,452.00

While sensing is becoming more prevalent in power systems, electric utilities
still often lack an accurate real-time picture of the behavior of distributed
energy resources, such as electric loads and distributed solar power. Such
information would help system operators, utilities, energy efficiency providers,
and demand response providers improve power system reliability, economic
efficiency, and environmental impact. However, sensing infrastructure is costly,
especially when considering the large number of quantities we might be
interested in measuring. The goal of this research is to develop methods to
infer the real-time behavior of aggregations of distributed energy resources
from existing power system measurements, which are hierarchical, heterogeneous,
incomplete, and of varying quality. To do this, the researchers are applying and
extending emerging online learning techniques that leverage dynamical system
models. While methodological developments are grounded in the power system
application at hand, the extensions are informing new research directions for
signal processing. Knowledge of what can and cannot be inferred from existing
data will help utilities determine the value of additional sensors, what type of
sensors are needed for different applications, and where to put them. This will
also help policy makers determine which infrastructure investments are
worthwhile and the need, if any, for subsidies. Additionally, the results will
inform energy policy discussions on the value and cost of consumer privacy,
which will help develop policies that better balance the objectives of power
system operators, utilities, and third-party companies with those of consumers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is applying an emerging technique, online
learning with dynamics (OLWD), to determine what can and cannot be inferred from
both existing power system measurements and measurements that we might expect to
have in the near term. Contemporary online learning algorithms do not handle
time-varying phenomena because they do not include dynamical models, and
classical online estimation algorithms are not robust to model misspecification.
In contrast, OLWD uses a collection of models (of arbitrary form) and the
algorithm simultaneously estimates state and selects the model or combination of
models that best predicts the state at the next time step. OLWD is based on one
of the most successful current online optimization algorithms, inheriting many
of its appealing properties. While the approach is well-suited to the problem,
the theory is incomplete. A key component of the research is extend OLWD to
handle measurements that are hierarchical, heterogeneous, incomplete, and of
varying quality. The researchers are exploring both passive online inference and
active online inference, where the latter uses external control (e.g., of
controllable loads and curtailable solar photovoltaics) to enhance learning.
Additionally, the researchers are characterizing trade-offs between system cost,
inference accuracy, and consumer privacy.