* 1508891
* EAPSI:Discerning human from non-human great ape in the southern Chinese fossil dental record
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Toby Avalos, Avalos                  Toby
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

A handful of scientists consider a collection of two million year old fossil
teeth from China to be the earliest evidence for humans outside of Africa.
However, many scientists disagree, believing instead that humans left Africa
around 1.5 million years ago, and consider this collection of teeth to belong to
extinct orangutans. This research, conducted in collaboration with Dr. Changzhu
Jin from the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), applies state of the art
statistical methods, called geomorphometrics, to assess whether these teeth are
in fact human or ape. Dr. Jin has been involved with the excavation of many of
these fossils firsthand and is China?s authority on extinct apes. After
photographs of tooth surfaces are taken, the positioning of their shared
features relative to one another is recorded, providing distance data between
specimens. The group with which they cluster more closely will determine whether
they belong to living or extinct humans or orangutans. If these teeth are
confirmed to be human, the research will provide evidence that the earliest
remains for humans outside of Africa are not only found in China, but also half
a million years older than previously thought.

Recent publications posit evidence for early humans in southern China two
million years ago based on disassociated fossil dentition. Such controversial
taxonomic assignments have resulted from an overreliance on simple linear tooth
crown measurements and traditional qualitative analysis. The results of these
types of studies often produce dental dimensions that overlap with early African
hominins. To determine a more precise phylogeny for these specimens, a
geomorphometric analyses on 2-D digital photographs of the occlusal surfaces of
posterior dentition attributed to the following hominid taxa will be performed:
Lufengpithecus, extinct Pongo, Hominoid indeterminate, Hominin indeterminate, H.
erectus, and teeth historically assigned to Chinese early Homo or
Australopithecus; all housed at the CAS, Beijing. This NSF EAPSI award is funded
in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and Technology of China.