* 1508131
* CDS&amp;E: In Situ Data Analysis and Scalable Machine Learning for Exascale Scientific Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Aiichiro Nakano, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Large scale scientific simulations are used in a range of application domains
including materials science, climate modeling, combustion and others. These
simulations are often limited by the hardware on which they run, including the
capacity of computational platforms and storage systems. The goals of these
simulations may include finding rare but interesting events in simulation
output, discovering common sequences of events, and discovering causality among
events. Often, these scientific simulations consume all available computational
resources on a high performance computing platform during a simulation run, and
be forced to only sample data techniques to decrease the size of the simulation
so as to make it possible to store, transfer and post-process the output data.
Such data sampling reduces the quality of science results, since not all
available data are utilized during analysis. This project aims to greatly
improve the scale and quality of scientific simulation results using innovative
"in situ" algorithms and machine learning techniques for rare event detection.
This research will be validated using a large-scale materials science
simulation, that of self-healing nanomaterial system capable of sensing and
repairing damage in harsh chemical environments and in high temperature/high
pressure operating conditions. Self-healing is of significance since it can
improve the reliability and lifetime of materials while reducing the cost of
manufacturing, monitoring and maintenance of high-temperature turbines, wind,
solar energy and lighting systems. The research can be generalized to a range of
scientific simulation domains that share the common goals of discovering rare
and interesting events, sequences of events and causality among events. Finally,
the research concepts and results will be incorporated into graduate level
courses taught by the research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to demonstrate the feasibility, performance and scalability of the
research approaches in greatly improving the quality of exascale scientific
simulations using in situ machine learning algorithms within a well-defined,
reusable in situ software framework. The scope of the project includes:
selecting a simplified, but representative, long-time material process suitable
for super-state parallel replica dynamics (SPRD); developing in situ machine
learning algorithms for rare event detection of super-state transitions; and
studying library-based approaches to support the high performance coupling of
exascale simulations with in situ machine learning algorithms. To accomplish the
project goals, the following three objectives are defined: 1) Prove the
feasibility, performance and scalability of in situ SPRD simulation for
predicting long-time material processes; 2) Prove the feasibility, performance
and scalability of in situ machine learning algorithms for rare-event detection
of super-state transitions; and 3) Prove the feasibility, performance and
scalability of in situ library-based approaches to coupling exascale simulations
and machine learning algorithms.