* 1508527
* Exploratory Chemistry of Oxide Based Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Mas Subramanian, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 470,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials are drivers of new phenomena
and technologies. New materials discovery research and understanding of crystal
structure property relationships of functional materials are critically
important for the advancement of science and economic growth. With support from
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, this project focuses on the discovery of new sustainable materials
with crystal structures that can simultaneously exhibit multiple properties
useful for designing efficient devices that can revolutionize energy,
environment and electronics areas. The primary goals of the project are to
discover and characterize new types of metal oxide compounds, and to understand
their crystal structures, chemical bonding and physical properties. This project
significantly contributes to education and research training for graduate and
undergraduate students in the field of solid state and materials chemistry. This
interdisciplinary project provides students with intellectual challenge of
understanding complex properties of newly synthesized materials. It forges links
between chemistry, physics and materials science and prepares them well for
career in industrial and academic environment. High school students
participating in this project gain valuable hands-on research experience and
learn about the pursuit of advanced education and careers in science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goals of this research are discovery, synthesis and characterization of
new types of metal oxides and understanding of their crystal structures,
chemical bonding and physical properties. The project is based on the general
theme of structure-property relationships with the aim of developing scientific
concepts and experimental protocols leading to new functional materials.
Focusing on the oxide class of materials, the project has the following
directions: (a) Designing functional materials based on transition metal oxides
with unusual structural features where metal cations occupy trigonal bipyramidal
coordination. The resulting structural instability and allowed d-d electronic
transitions are leveraged to create new ferroelectric materials including
multiferroics and durable color pigments respectively. (b) Discovering new mixed
metal oxides of tin and bismuth where Sn 5s and Bi 6s bands situated above the O
2p band leading to compounds with vivid yellow, orange and red colors for
environmentally benign, durable inorganic pigments. (c) Designing
superconducting oxides with square planar palladium and adjusting their carrier
concentration to a region where high temperature superconductivity normally
occurs in copper oxides. Various synthesis methods are used to create materials
in the form of powders, sintered pellets and single-crystals. Experimental
characterization tools employed include X-ray and neutron diffraction,
UV/Vis/Infrared spectroscopy, scanning and transmission electron microscopy,
differential thermal analysis, and measurements of electrical conductivity,
dielectric and magnetic properties.