* 1508147
* Education and Public Outreach at the Soudan Underground Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Alec Habig, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2019
* USD 239,521.00

This award supports the public outreach program at the Soudan Mine Underground
Laboratory, the only place in the country where visitors can tour an operational
underground high energy particle physics and astrophysics facility. The study of
weakly interacting particles is at the forefront of both fields and is the
primary objective of experiments at the Lab. The Lab is hosted in a Minnesota
State Park, where each year approximately 4,000 of the Park's visitors venture
2,341 feet underground to see the facility. The main experiments include the
Main Injector Neutrino Oscillation Search (MINOS) and the Cryogenic Dark Matter
Search (CDMS). MINOS is a long-baseline neutrino experiment designed to observe
the phenomena of neutrino oscillations, an effect which is related to neutrino
mass. The CDMS detectors operating at Soudan are for a series of experiments
designed directly to detect particle dark matter in the form of Weakly
Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs).

Two high school science teachers and three undergraduate interns will work in
the lab over the summer. Their primary duty is to help give the twice-daily
"physics tours" and explain the lab and the science to visitors of the park.
They will then use this experience and their science education skills to improve
the lab's outreach program and develop lesson plans and educational materials
for use by the many school groups which visit the lab on field trips during the
school year. They will also participate in research projects with the
experiments in the lab, not only the larger MINOS and CDMS projects but several
smaller ones involved with Research and Development for low background
measurements. A half-time outreach coordinator works year round with school and
community groups. This award will also support the annual Open House at the lab.