* 1508537
* High Capacity Mg Batteries Based on Inert and Non-Nucleophilic Carborane Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Juchen Guo, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 445,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Over the last decade there has been an
explosion of technological advances in rechargeable portable devices and
electric vehicles. However, innovations that reduce the cost, improve the
sustainability, and increase the storage capacity offered by state-of-the-art
Li-ion technology have not kept pace with this revolution. In addition, Li-ion
batteries can undergo catastrophic failure, which results in unpredictable
fires. Mg-based batteries are an attractive alternative to Li-ion systems
because Mg is less expensive, much more abundant, inherently safer, and can
store twice the amount of charge. With the support from the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, this project
will develop Mg-batteries that are more powerful and cost effective than
traditional Li-ion systems. A key enabling factor of this project is the
implementation of special electrolytes composed of collections of carbon and
boron atoms called carboranes. Undergraduate and graduate students in the
Chemistry Department at the University of California Riverside (UCR) are
mentored in this program and participate in research. Additionally, the
Principal Investigator (PI) and Co-PI have integrated a mentorship program into
the project for disadvantaged high school students. In the summer months, these
high school students participate in the proposed research at UCR. The
anticipated outcome of these activities is the increased recruitment and
retention of students from underrepresented groups in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Mg-based batteries are
an attractive alternative to Li-ion systems, but suitable electrolytes are
lacking. Electrolytes for Mg batteries must be completely resistant to
decomposition and ideally non-nucleophilic. The goal of this project is to
produce Mg-based batteries that are less expensive, inherently safer, more
sustainable and powerful than state-of-the-art-Li-ion technology. A key feature
of this work is implementing inert and non-nucleophilic carborane based
electrolytes, which will enable the realization of high capacity Mg-batteries.
This project will be accomplished via three specific aims. Aim 1 utilizes novel
chemical reduction methodology to prepare halide free electrolytes of simple
dicationic Mg carborane salts. Because the carborane anions are both highly
oxidatively stable and non-nucleophilic, they are suitable for applications as
Mg battery electrolytes for systems that utilize either high voltage
intercalation or S cathodes. Aim 2 encompasses the design of monocationic
carborane electrolytes featuring supporting ligands. Implementation of novel
transmetalation methodology allows access to monocationic Mg complexes that
contain carborane counter anions, which are suitable electrolytes for high
voltage intercalation cathodes. In addition, the preparation of sulfur
compatible "passivated" electrolytes derived from the reaction of N-Heterocyclic
Carbenes (NHCs) with S8 is under investigation. In Aim 3, the electrolytes
prepared in Aims 1 and 2 are coupled with suitable cathode materials to produce
prototype rechargeable Mg-batteries. Both layered molybdenum and vanadium
sulfides as well as thiospinel vanadium and chromium sulfides are utilized as
intercalation type cathodes. In addition, sulfur cathodes based on sulfur-carbon
composites with two types of carbon hosts having distinctly different pore sizes
are under investigation.