* 1508526
* Autoxidation in the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Paul Wennberg, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 465,000.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professors Paul Wennberg and Brian Stoltz of the California
Institute of Technology to investigate the role of autooxidation in
environmental processes. Autoxidation of organic compounds is known to be
important in combustion, food and wine spoilage, degradation of olefinic
liquids, and very broadly in biological systems. The role of autoxidation in the
environmental degradation of organic compounds is being explored. A
collaborative team of scientists is studying the kinetics and mechanism for
autooxidation of a series of model compounds. The goal is to create a model of
autoxidation for use in evaluating the rate by which autoxidation converts
reduced carbon compounds in the environment to highly oxygenated substances.
More broadly, the kinetics of autoxidation described through this study address
many gas and condensed phase applications that span science from improved food
preservation to reduced aerosol production in open-air combustion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of autoxidation in the environmental degradation
of organic compounds remains largely unexplored. Via a collaboration of a team
of scientists, including computational, organic, and analytical chemists, the
rate of this oxidative chemistry for a diverse set of organic substrates is
investigated. Model compounds that characterize many of the reduced organic
substrates found in the environment are synthesized to explore the physical
chemistry of autoxidation. Using density functional calculations and laboratory
observations, a model of autoxidation for use in evaluating the rate by which
autoxidation converts reduced carbon compounds in the environment to highly
oxygenated constituents is being created. Initial applications include study of
the formation and aging of organic aerosols, and the atmospheric oxidation of
alkenes by the nitrate radical during the night. Broader impacts of these
studies could be far-reaching should it be found that this oxidative chemistry
impacts the burden of ozone and aerosol quite generally.