* 1508875
* Exploiting Low-dimensional Structures in Data Management of High-dimensional Synchrophasor Measurements for Power System Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Joe Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 399,999.00

Phasor measurements units (PMUs) in North America provide terabytes of
synchronized phasor measurements of key operational parameters of power systems
on a daily basis. In current practice of power system operation, the large
amounts of PMU measurements are stored for past event analysis, and the in-situ
data processing for real-time decision is beyond the capability of current
technologies used in power systems. This proposal will develop a framework of
collective processing of measurements in multiple PMUs across multiple time
instants for various tasks in power system monitoring. The research goal is to
develop efficient data management and information extraction methods that are
suitable for real-time processing of large volumes of PMU data. The outcome of
this project will positively impact the reliable operation of future power
systems. The generic techniques for high-dimensional data analysis developed in
this project can potentially find applications in other areas beyond power
systems, e.g., Internet monitoring, social network analysis, image and video
processing, etc. This proposal also contains an integrated educational agenda
for K-12 students, undergraduates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal for the first time bridges the
areas of power system monitoring and high-dimensional analysis based on low-
dimensional models. By developing new generic tools that are motivated by tasks
in power system monitoring, this proposal will contribute to the development of
the field of PMU-based power system monitoring and the field of high-dimensional
data analysis. Focusing on improving data integrity and data accuracy of PMU
measurements, this proposal will address the following challenges and open
questions by:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing new computationally efficient
missing data recovery methods to fill in the measurements that are lost during
communication. &lt;br/&gt;2. Developing new methods to detect events in power
systems by collectively processing PMU measurements in multiple channels.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Developing new convex-optimization-based methods to detect cyber
data attacks to PMU measurements. &lt;br/&gt;4. Analyzing the likelihood and
frequency of cyber data attacks to power systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the
developed methods will be numerically evaluated on actual PMU data in Central
New York Power System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will establish a
framework of data-challenged power system monitoring by exploiting low-
dimensional structures. It will extend the current understanding of low rank
methods to the field of PMU data analysis. It will connect high-dimensional data
analysis with graph theory through the research on the detection of cyber data
attacks to power systems. This project will provide new insights to
optimization-based high-dimensional data analysis by investigating the
theoretical limits of proposed methods.