* 1508592
* Partial Order Colloidal Phases as Photonic Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Chekesha Watson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2019
* USD 377,260.00

Nontechnical Description: The objective of this research project is to fabricate
partial order photonic mesophases made of non-spherical colloidal particles and
characterize their optical properties. These novel materials exhibit structural
ordering between those of crystals and glasses and hold promise to strongly
modify spectral and angular transport of light (similar to crystals) and also to
promote bandgaps with high isotropy (similar to glasses). The research helps
clarify the mechanisms for the formation of photonic band gaps in various
photonic media and seeks novel optical properties such as negative refraction
for ultrahigh resolution lenses and low speed of light for enhanced nonlinear
optics. The education activities of this project include developing informal
science learning activities at the Ithaca Sciencenter; broadening participation
of underrepresented minorities and women in science through involving them in
research; and contributing to a manual of the best practices for undergraduate
research developed by the Institute for Broadening Participation. In particular,
graduate student facilitators are trained in science communication to public
audiences including children.

Technical Description: This project exploits the thermodynamics of shape-
anisotropic colloids to capture photonic mesophases, a new class of photonic
materials in which order and disorder cohabit, and to study their photonic
properties. The research aims to develop an understanding of the types and
bounds of order that promote significant photonic properties (i.e., photonic
band gaps, negative refraction, slow light) and an ability of fabricating
photonic mesophase materials for photonic slabs via low-cost, large-area self-
assembly. Specifically, the self-organization of anisotropic colloids and shape-
binary mixtures is mapped out under wedge-cell confinement to elucidate the
conditions for stabilizing photonic mesophases. Confinement height up to five
layers, system density and interparticle interactions are varied and the self-
organization is studied using quantitative confocal microscopy imaging with
precise spatial and temporal resolution. The spatial distributions of the mode
fields, transmission (reflection) spectra and density of states are calculated
to elucidate the structure and optical property correlations. The photonic
mesophases are characterized using angle-resolved specular reflectance
measurements to probe the dispersion relations. The effects of partial order on
refraction and slow-light propagation properties are determined from the
analysis of equifrequency contours and the calculation of the group velocity at
the band gap edges, respectively. Simulations of the refraction and the flat
lens imaging of a point source are performed for photonic mesophases that
exhibit all-angle negative refraction and effective refractive index of negative
one.