* 1508259
* Synthesis and Nanoscale Characterization of Novel Magnetic Chalcogenide Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Arunava Gupta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2020
* USD 349,846.00

Synthesis and Nanoscale Characterization of Novel Magnetic Chalcogenide
Nanocrystals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New magnetic materials are required for use in
emerging electronic devices that exploit the spin of the electron in addition to
its charge, commonly referred to as spintronics. In particular, magnetic
materials that display semiconducting or insulating characteristics are highly
desirable, but their choice is presently limited. Dr. Gupta of the University of
Alabama is investigating a class of complex sulfur and selenium-based inorganic
materials - referred to as chalcospinels - that display novel magnetic
properties. He is particularly interested in the synthesis of new semiconducting
and insulating chalcospinels in the form of very small "nanocrystals" using wet
chemistry approaches. Unlike bulk synthesis, which usually requires high
temperatures and extended reaction time, solution-based synthesis of nanoscale
materials can be carried out at much lower temperatures and at a reduced time
scale. However, directly probing the physical properties of individual
nanocrystals is challenging because of a lack of suitable techniques. In
addition to synthesis, Dr. Gupta actively works with United States and
international collaborators to develop new microscopy-based characterization
methods for probing the intrinsic magnetic and electrical properties of the
nanocrystals. The project requires a multidisciplinary effort that makes
significant contributions to scientific knowledge, education, outreach and
infrastructure. Dr. Gupta also plays a role in several ongoing education and
outreach activities related to the proposed research. These include
collaboration with local schools to facilitate participation by high school
students in research, as well as public tours and
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, Dr. Arunava Gupta
of the University of Alabama is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to investigate novel solution chemistry routes
for the synthesis of a promising class of magnetic Cr-based chalcospinel
materials in the form of nanocrystals. Motivation for these materials is derived
from theoretical studies suggesting the possibility of realizing unique magnetic
and electrical properties in some complex chalcospinels. These materials may
additionally serve as important model systems for fundamental studies of the
interaction between charge carriers and magnetic ions. Guided by band structure
calculations that are conducted in parallel, nanocrystal synthesis of a family
of substituted chalcospinels are being explored. A potential limitation of
nanocrystals as compared to bulk is the lack of appropriate methods for directly
measuring the nanoscale properties. Therefore, the project also utilizes novel
electron spectroscopic imaging techniques to probe the intrinsic physical
properties of the nanocrystals. Dr. Gupta is an active participant in the multi-
disciplinary Center for Materials for Information Technology (MINT) at the
University of Alabama and leverages the considerable resources available through
MINT for the maximum impact of outreach and dissemination of results
specifically related to this work. Dr. Gupta also plays a key role in several
on-going education and outreach activities related to the proposed research.
These include collaboration with local schools to facilitate participation by
high school students in research, public tours, and demonstrations.