* 1508492
* Functions of Carbon-Oxygen Hydrogen Bonding in Biological Methyl Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Raymond Trievel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Professor
Raymond Trievel at the University of Michigan to investigate the proposition
that methyl CH---O hydrogen bonding plays an important role in
S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet or SAM)-dependent methyltransferases.
Methyltransferases are enzymes that catalyze reactions in the metabolism of
numerous biological molecules, as well as in cellular signaling through the
methylation of proteins, DNA, and RNA. In addition, methyltransferases have been
implicated in numerous diseases, making them attractive targets for the design
of new drugs to treat cancer, cardio-vascular disease, microbial infections, and
neurological disorders. Recent studies suggest that the transferred methyl group
forms unconventional carbon-oxygen (CH---O) hydrogen bonds within the active
sites of these enzymes. Although the existence of CH---O hydrogen bonds in
biological macromolecules has been postulated for some time, the potential
contributions of these interactions to biological processes, particularly methyl
transfer, remain poorly defined. The goal of this project is to characterize the
functions of these hydrogen bonds in methyltransferases using experimental and
computational approaches. This project will engage both undergraduate and
graduate students in the fields of biochemistry, structural biology, and
spectroscopy, providing for a multi-disciplinary research experience at the
chemistry-biology interface. It will also provide students with opportunities to
perform sophisticated experiments at national research laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using model methyltransferases, the functions of these
hydrogen bonds in AdoMet recognition and methyl transfer catalysis will be
examined using an integrated approach combining enzymology, crystallography, NMR
spectroscopy, and computational methods. The results of these studies will be
used to develop a conceptual framework that seeks to define the enzymatic roles
of CH---O hydrogen bonding in AdoMet-dependent methyltransferases. In the
broader context, it is envisioned that this work will yield insights that lead
to a more general understanding of the contributions of these interactions to
enzyme catalysis and biomolecular structure.