* 1508593
* Organic Ligand Induced Chiroptical Semiconductor Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Yuri Dahnovsky, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 0.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program at NSF is
supporting Professors Balaz, Dahnovsky, Kubelka, Varga and their respective
groups to study the optical properties of semi-conductor quantum dots (QDs).
These are nanometer size crystals made of semiconductor materials. Their
spectroscopic properties, such as light absorption and light emission, are
closely connected to their size, shape and environment. Amino acids are building
blocks of proteins and can exist in two mirror-image structural forms: right-
handed and left-handed. Yet, all essential amino acids are left-handed. Placing
a left-handed amino acid on the surface of QDs causes the crystal to distinguish
between "left-handed light" and "right-handed light". The project aims to
understand this interesting phenomenon on a molecular level. The unique
properties of mirror-image QDs promise a broad range of new applications in
research and technology including memory devices and new light-emitting
materials and sensors. The research provides graduate and undergraduate students
at the University of Wyoming (UW) with new, exciting research and educational
opportunities in a cutting-edge interdisciplinary scientific area. The outcomes
of this research are shared in peer-reviewed publications, at regional, national
and international meetings, as well as at Wyoming Community Colleges and High
Schools. New experiments focusing on QDs are introduced into UW undergraduate
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum dots (QDs) are
semiconductor nanocrystals with potentially unique properties, which arise from
the sensitivity of their electronic properties to the QD size and environment.
Previous research in Balaz lab has shown that L- and D-enantiomers of the amino
acid cysteine induce mirror image circular dichroism and circularly polarized
luminescence in achiral QDs. Coupled with quantum size effect, the post-
synthetic ligand exchange represents an appealing approach to induce and tune
chiroptical characteristics of QDs. The objective of this project is to
determine the origin of chiral capping ligand-induced chiroptical activity of
achiral QDs using a combination of experimental and theoretical approaches. The
project explores: (i) the structural and electronic requirements of QDs as well
as chiral capping ligands to induce and tune chiroptical activity of QDs, (ii)
the binding geometry of chiral ligands to the surface of QDs, and (iii)
fundamental understanding of the origins of the induced chirality through
theoretical simulations of ligand induced CD spectra in QDs and their comparison
with the experimental CD data. Knowledge acquired within the proposed research
is being applied for the development of chiral memory devices, light-emitting
nanomaterials, and QD-based devices for chiroptical sensing of chiral
biomolecules.