* 1508687
* Symposium on Stakeholders Perspectives on the Bioeconomy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Ganti Murthy, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

1508687 (Murthy) This award is in partial support of the Symposium on
Stakeholders Perspective on the Bioeconomy. The biobased economy has potential
to produce biofuels and bioproducts in an environmentally sustainable way.
Despite governmental and private support to create a new bioeconomy through
research, pilot scale testing, university industry consortiums and financial
incentives, this promise has not been realized completely at commercial scale.
Challenges in feedstock logistics and conversion technologies have received
attention of researchers and many solutions are being developed to address these
challenges. Unfortunately, practical issues faced by producers and processors
have received less attention in peer reviewed literature. The S-1041 multistate
committee consists of researchers from more than 15 land grant universities
working on various facets of bioenergy and bioproducts such as feedstocks,
biochemical and thermochemical conversion, techno-economic and life cycle
assessment. Annual meetings of the S-1041 multistate committee are held to
coordinate and share research from land grant universities across the nation. In
the last few years, symposiums were organized with leading researchers and
speakers from funding agencies to share the latest research knowledge and
coordinate future research. The 2015 S-1041 multistate committee meeting will be
held in OARDC (Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center), Ohio State
University, Wooster, Ohio, August 10-11, 2015. In contrast to past symposiums,
the S-1041 multistate committee membership decided to focus the 2015 symposium
on obtaining perspectives from stakeholders in the bioeconomy.

The goal of the 2015 symposium is to develop an understanding of challenges in
the evolution of the bioeconomy from a stakeholder perspective. This information
will be used to further develop and coordinate the research agenda for the
S-1041 committee and will guide research on biofuels and bioproducts in over a
dozen land grant universities across the nation. This is a meeting where the
students can interact with the entire sector of the bioeconomy including
researchers, producers, processors, financial sector and government agencies.
This will help in orienting the next workforce generation to challenges and
opportunities in the bioeconomy. Therefore, the NSF funds will support
attendance of graduate and undergraduate students to the meeting through travel
awards. The proceedings from the symposium will be published in both hard and
soft copy formats and distributed widely to interested audience across the
nation by S-1041 members. Additionally, a white paper will be developed at the
end of the conference and will be made widely available.