* 1508986
* On the Holomorphic Embedding Power Flow Method: Theoretical Foundation, Limitations, Extensions and Implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Hsiao-Dong Chiang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2021
* USD 377,541.00

Power flow study is used extensively in power system operations and planning. It
involves solving a set of nonlinear power flow (algebraic) equations. A great
challenge in power flow study is the problem of power flow divergence. This is a
long standing problem. The integration of new power system devices and renewable
energy aggravates the power flow divergence problem. Future power grids have to
support a wide variety of power flow patterns due to renewable energies. The
conventional options currently available to overcome power flow divergence are
quite limited. In addition, the following issues need to be addressed when the
power flow divergence occurs:

-Issue EN (existence): a power flow solution does exist, but the numerical
method, such as the commonly used Newton method has failed to compute it from a
given initial guess, or -Issue NE (non-existence): no power flow solution exists
with the specified network topology and loading conditions.

Recently, a Holomorphic Embedding Power Flow (HEPF) method was proposed, awarded
a U.S. patent, and declared to be smart and robust. Specifically, the following
three major and yet important claims were made (i) it is deterministic and non-
iterative, (ii) it consistently computes the correct power flow solution if its
existence is ensured, (iii) it unambiguously signals the nonexistence of a power
flow solution if it cannot find the correct power flow solution. However, there
is little theoretical basis and technical analysis to support the above three
major claims. HEPF, if works as claimed, can resolve the long-standing power
flow divergence problem. However, the current version of HEPF method has several
limitations, deficiencies and seven unresolved issues and the above claims are
unjustified. This proposal aims to establish a theoretical foundation for the
HEPF method, examine the limitations of HEPF, study the scope of its
applicability and extend the HEPF method to deal with large-scale power networks
with renewable energy. The proposed work will cover a range of theoretical
foundation development, solution methodology design and practical numerical
implementation. A smart and robust power flow solver and its theoretical
foundation will be developed and applied to large-scale power grids with
renewables. Robust and efficient computation of the solutions of a set of
nonlinear equations is an important task in many practical applications in
engineering and sciences. Hence, the development of the proposed study has broad
impacts on many practical applications such as computation of direct current
(DC) operating points of very large scale integration (VLSI) circuits. This is
one of the most important and yet difficult tasks in VLSI circuit simulators.
Overcoming the difficulties of power flow divergence problems will have a far-
reaching benefit since the problem is at the heart of several power system
studies such as power transfer capability calculations, static security
assessment, optimal power flow, dynamic security assessment, etc.