* 1508591
* RUI: Organic Molecular Crystal Growth in Complex Solvent Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* David Patrick, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 12/31/2019
* USD 320,000.00

Non-technical abstract Most modern electronic devices are based on inorganic
semiconductors like silicon. For some applications though, significant cost or
performance advantages could in principle be gained by changing to molecular
semiconductors, composed of polymers or small molecules. Examples of
technologies that could benefit from molecular semiconductors include less
expensive, higher performance solar cells, thinner, mechanically flexible
displays, and lower cost, higher efficiency lighting. Prior research has shown
that for applications such as these, the microscopic structure of the molecular
semiconductor domains - including their size, position, and crystallinity -
critically affects performance. With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, researchers are using
spectral imaging and highly controlled growth methods, combined with theory and
modeling, to study molecular semiconductor crystallization in technologically
important hosts. The outcome will be improved fundamental understanding of the
factors affecting microscopic structure, and ultimately of ways to better
control it. The research will be conducted primarily by undergraduate students.
Because the research bridges physics and chemistry, students are benefitting
from a rich experience working with faculty and other students with different
academic and preparatory backgrounds, educating them to become collaborative
problem-solvers with strong interdisciplinary skills.

Technical abstract Increasingly sophisticated architectures and materials
combinations required for applications such as doped polymer organic light-
emitting diodes, fission-sensitized organic photovoltaics, all-organic single-
crystal field-effect transistors, place stringent demands on the morphology,
dimensions, crystallographic orientation, spatial positioning, and other growth
characteristics of small-molecule crystalline guests, incorporated within
complex hosts. Organic molecular crystal (OMC) formation takes place in
multicomponent, multiphasic environments, influenced by both thermodynamic and
kinetic factors, surpassing the ability of current theory to provide insight,
let alone predictive design guidance. Likewise, conventional methods for
preparing OMC-containing active layers in complex matrices (e.g. physical vapor
deposition, spin casting, etc.) typically do not afford sufficient control over
the variables driving crystallization to enable the kinds of controlled
observations needed to advance fundamental understanding in such chemically and
structurally diverse solution environments. This research is addressing these
challenges by studying small-molecule organic crystal formation through
controlled measurements involving model polymeric, small-molecule, and mixed
fluid phase hosts, and combining these studies with a closely integrated program
of theory and modeling to make broad generalizations about the design rules
governing OMC formation. The objective is to better understand the underlying
chemical, kinetic, and thermodynamic factors influencing nucleation and growth
in technologically-relevant solution matrices.