* 1508701
* CCSS: Switched Capacitor Power Amplifiers for Digital MIMO Transmitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Jeffrey Walling, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 226,752.00

The desire for increases in data transmission rates to support hi-definition
video content and increased availability of wireless has pushed data service
providers to use more than one antenna for each communication link between a
user's mobile device and the fixed point base station operated by the
communications provider. This requires complex circuits and systems for beam-
steering that can appropriately direct the signal from each antenna and form a
communications beam that optimizes wireless data transmission. Current circuit
architectures rely on highly linear transmitter and receiver circuitry that is
inefficient in its energy usage. The goal of this research is to introduce new,
highly energy efficient transmitter/amplifier architectures that are easily
integrated with the beam-steering circuitry. Such circuits will enable longer
battery lifetimes when used for mobile devices and will draw less energy from
the electric grid due to increased efficiency. The theories and techniques that
will be developed will enable engineers and researchers to design more efficient
wireless transmission systems that operate with much higher data transmission
rates. In addition to the scientific and engineering outcomes associated with
the proposal, the educational objectives will seek to educate STEM students at
the secondary education level and encourage them to enter into STEM fields and
focus on topics such as using energy more efficiently. This will be accomplished
by curriculum development, mentoring local secondary students and also
incorporating undergraduate students into research at early stages in their
post-secondary education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is
to improve the resolution available in digital switched-capacitor power
amplifiers (SCPAs). Increase in the resolution of these power amplifiers is
necessary to enable their practical use in wireless systems, as the out-of-band
noise, owing to signal quantization, limits their deployment in wireless
systems. Presently SCPAs have been limited to amplitude quantization of less
than eight bits. Not only does the SCPA need additional resolution to drive the
out-of-band noise down to sufficient levels, additional amplitude control is
needed to allow better focusing of the beam. Other digital power amplifiers have
achieved higher resolution. However, they are not as linear; hence they must use
digital pre-distortion for correction of the nonlinearity. The proposed research
will address several of the current limitations in increasing the resolution of
the SCPA using techniques that include: (1) Split-array techniques that allow
higher resolution with practical capacitor sizing of capacitive elements in
fine-line CMOS processes; (2) C-2C array techniques to improve the matching of
the capacitors in the array that will improve the SCPA's linearity while
reducing the need for on-chip hardware decoding; (3) Digital signal processing
techniques such as dynamic range reduction and digital pre-distortion, that
enhance the operation of the higher resolution arrays; and (4) Multiple-input,
multiple-output (MIMO) system integration and validation. The designs and
findings from the experiment can provide relevant guidelines for deployment of
such digital power amplifiers in MIMO systems and further move the digital
interface closer to the antenna, allowing promising solutions toward deployable
software defined radios.