* 1508269
* Macromolecular juggling by a prokaryotic Fe-S assembly system
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* David Barondeau, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 12/31/2018
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. David Barondeau from Texas A&M University to investigate
the enzymology of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster biosynthesis. Iron-sulfur (Fe-S)
clusters are one of the most versatile auxiliary cofactors used by proteins to
facilitate biological processes, and there are literally hundreds of different
examples. Many of these Fe-S proteins have unknown functions. Remarkably,
despite tremendous diversity in the structures of these proteins, conserved sets
of assembly proteins serve to build and deliver Fe-S clusters to all Fe-S
containing proteins. These elaborate multi-component systems have evolved to
protect organisms from the toxic effects of free iron and sulfide ions while
promoting the efficient biosynthesis of these cofactors. One of the major
limitations in studying Fe-S cluster biosynthesis has been the lack of specific
probes that allow real-time analysis of cluster synthesis and transfer
reactions. To overcome this limitation, labeling methods were developed that
directly report on Fe-S content for labeled proteins in a background of
unlabeled Fe-S proteins and other species. This methodology facilitates advanced
time dependent experiments with complex Fe-S assembly assays, which are required
for the rigorous evaluation of the role of protein components in Fe-S cluster
biosynthetic pathways. This project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in biochemical methods, protein labeling, and enzymology. High school
students will also gain exposure to science. Overall, the proposed studies
outlined in this grant are designed to provide insight into the chemistry of
this important assembly pathway and generate robust tools that will be useful in
investigating the function of other Fe-S containing systems.

Currently, there is limited mechanistic information about how this system
synthesizes different types of Fe-S clusters, identifies and discriminates
protein targets for cluster transfer, and mediates ligand exchange from the
assembly complex to target proteins. Fluorescent tagging approaches were
developed in which the fluorescence is sensitive to different cluster types,
ligand environments, and cluster oxidation states. This fluorescent reporter
technology will be instrumental in untangling the intricate network of transfer
pathways and identifying factors affecting flux through branch points. High
sensitivity, suitability with high-throughput methodology, and compatibility
with anaerobic techniques are additional benefits of this approach. Here a
complex biosynthetic assay will be developed and used to test specific
hypotheses for the roles of accessory proteins, chaperones, and regulatory
proteins in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis. Fluorophore labels also permit anisotropy
experiments that monitor protein association and dissociation during cluster
assembly and transfer reactions. This fluorophore labeling methodology will
contribute to the study of Fe-S cluster biosynthesis by tracking both the
composition of the protein complex and the protein the Fe-S cluster is bound to
during transfer reactions.