* 1508595
* Collaborative Research: Small molecules as chemical probes of protein dynamics and protein-protein interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Harish Vashisth, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2019
* USD 218,439.00

Understanding details of how living cells signal and coordinate complex cellular
activities is an unsolved problem of high fundamental significance. It is known
that cells are comprised of an array of molecules, and therefore the
interactions among these molecules at a specific time and location are
potentially responsible for functional outcomes. It remains challenging to
quantify intermolecular interactions between a pair of molecules at atomic
scale, owing largely to a poor understanding of underlying dynamic motions.
Importantly, many such structural motions in biomolecules such as proteins
cannot be directly inferred from high-resolution static experimental structures,
and therefore novel methods to probe dynamic motions are needed. In this
project, the unique combination of atomically-resolved molecular simulations
with various experimental techniques establishes new approaches to study
protein-protein interactions, and the small molecules developed may lead to
tools for controlling such interactions. The graduate and postdoctoral
researchers working on this project acquire interdisciplinary training in
computer simulation approaches for proteins and experimental approaches
involving protein characterization and spectroscopic methods, thereby gaining an
appreciation for ways in which theory and experiment can inform each other. The
outreach activities of this project educate and train high school students and
teachers in STEM disciplines via hands-on lab experiences. The resulting tools
such as software, structural models, and protein constructs are demonstrated in
chemical engineering, biophysics, and pharmacology courses, and are disseminated
among the broader scientific community via workshops, symposia, and
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project employs large-scale
molecular simulation techniques on all-atom models of proteins to infer
underlying dynamics, discover hidden conformational states, and quantify
interactions at protein-protein interfaces. A variety of computational
approaches are pursued including classical molecular dynamics simulations in
explicit solvent, methods for enhanced conformational sampling and thermodynamic
characterization of proteins, and Monte Carlo protocols for small molecule
docking. To gain a better understanding of dynamics and interactions, the
modeling and simulation effort are integrated with many experimental
(biochemical, biophysical, and spectroscopic) techniques at various levels.
These combined tools are used to study regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS)
proteins using thiadiazolidinone (TDZD) analogues as small molecule chemical
probes. The focus is to quantify differences in dynamics of three-different RGS
proteins that result in differences in specificity and potency for different
small molecules, and discover the mechanisms by which small molecules affect and
inhibit interactions between various RGS proteins and activated G-alpha subunits
of G-proteins. The quantification of mechanisms and interactions in this family
of proteins may reveal the extent to which dynamic motions play a role in
regulating protein-protein interactions, and the unique ways in which such
motions can be exploited for targeting protein-protein interfaces.