* 1508961
* Mid-infrared Ultra-strong Coupling Polariton Emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Anthony Hoffman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2018
* USD 337,002.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Mid-infrared metamaterial intersubband polariton
emitters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project
is to develop mid-infrared optical sources by engineering the quantum mechanical
interaction between light and semiconductor quantum wells in metamaterials with
designer photonic environments. Many molecules of interest interact strongly
with mid-infrared light (3-30 ìm) and these new sources will enable sensing and
imaging for applications in industry, medicine, and homeland security. The
program combines quantum and photonic engineering to design fundamentally new
sources with improved emission efficiency. Special quantum states that are
simultaneously light and matter are incorporated into metamaterials with
engineered photonic environments. Both the quantum state and the photonic
environment are designed to emit photons at an increased rate. In addition to
advancing the state-of-the-art for mid-infrared emitters, this program also
seeks to address education and diversity in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics by engaging local students in outreach events that focus on
understanding the role of light and optics in consumer technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The program aims to improve the
radiative quantum efficiency of incoherent mid-infrared sources by engineering
ultra-strong coupling between the photon field in a metamaterial resonator and
electronic intersubband transitions in semiconductor quantum wells. The overall
theme of the proposal is to improve the emission rate of photons using quantum
and photonic engineering rather than incremental improvements to devices such as
quantum cascade lasers. Several innovations to increase the light-matter
coupling strength are proposed, such as using InP-based materials and excited
state intersubband transitions. Another innovation is the incorporation of
hyperbolic metamaterials into the resonator design to enhance the photonic
density of states, thus further improving spontaneous emission. The approach for
the program is integrated, including, theoretical, computational, design,
fabrication, and experimental efforts to (1) develop mid-infrared metamaterial
resonators, (2) increase light-matter coupling strength, and (3) implement
efficient electrical injection mid-infrared emitters. Designed metamaterials
with quantum wells will be grown via molecular beam epitaxy and fabricated into
devices in a state-of-the-art nanofabrication facility. The materials and
devices will be characterized using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The
work in this program will develop a basis for incorporating metamaterials into
active optoelectronic devices and also lay a foundation for engineering ultra-
strong light-matter coupling in electrically pumped devices. The goals of this
program are ambitious: incoherent mid-infrared sources with more than 3 mW of
power and greater than 0.5% conversion efficiency superseding alternative
approaches such as sub-threshold laser emission that is four to five orders of
magnitude less efficient.