* 1508057
* Advanced Tunneling-Based Detectors and Imaging Systems for Millimeter-Wave and THz Sensing and Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Lei Liu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 380,000.00

This project will investigate and develop devices for millimeter-wave and THz
detection and imaging systems with superior performance and advanced
functionalities. This technological area has a wide range of applications of
societal benefit, including scientific applications such as radiometry and
remote sensing (climatology, radio astronomy, chemical spectroscopy), security
applications such as through-barrier imaging (i.e. the ability to detect persons
or objects through packaging, walls, etc.) and explosive detection, and other
sensing applications such as avionic guidance and imaging through fog, sand, and
other visible obscurants, medical imaging, and industrial process control (e.g.,
detection of subsurface defects). The research involves two main thrust areas:
(1) device-level demonstration of ultra-sensitive, low-noise heterostructure
interband tunneling-based detectors, and (2) system-level demonstration of
prototype antenna-coupled detectors and imaging arrays. The devices being
explored promise noise levels more than 30 times lower than conventional
approaches. This much lower noise allows systems to be greatly simplified,
leading to much lower size, weight, and cost, and enabling practical
implementation and exploitation of millimeter-wave and THz imaging in cost-
sensitive commercial and civilian applications. The project will also produce
prototype imaging arrays offering spectroscopic and polarization sensitivity,
allowing more than just "grayscale" imaging. This enhanced functionality is
valuable for material identification and characterization, as well as to provide
the ability to discriminate among similar substances and objects in imaging
applications. The project provides significant educational opportunities for
students from high school science and technology outreach through graduate-level
research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project features an
interdisciplinary approach, with effort in both device design and optimization
as well as imaging array and system design. This approach ensures that the
devices developed serve the needs of the system architectures, and the system
architectures can be tailored to fully tap the potential of devices. Two
emerging device technologies will be explored: heterostructure backward diodes
(HBDs) and tunneling field-effect transistors (TFETs); using interband tunneling
to generate the detectors? second-order nonlinearity provides significant
advantages in terms of sensitivity and noise performance; the sensitivity can
exceed the fundamental limits imposed by thermionic emission in Schottky and
field-effect transistor (FET) detectors, while operating with zero applied bias
for low flicker (1/f) noise and high sensitivity. These devices will be
monolithically integrated with planar antennas in novel configurations to enable
frequency tuning and polarization-resolved detection in the millimeter-wave and
THz regimes. Simulations indicate that noise equivalent power (NEP) of 0.05
pW/Hz1/2 and below should be possible to achieve. Through device design
improvements (i.e., modifications to the epitaxial wafer structure, focusing on
novel stepped-barrier designs) and scaling (reduction in critical lateral
dimensions through advanced fabrication processing), devices with operational
frequencies well into the THz will be demonstrated. Imaging arrays with
frequency tuning capability (implemented with varactive tuning of planar annular
slot antennas) and polarization discrimination (also using loaded annular slot
antennas) will be prototyped and assessed to validate the performance of the
detectors for imaging applications. The research scope includes exploration of
the relevant physics in interband tunnel diodes and tunneling field effect
transistors (TFETs), detailed device design and optimization, experimental
fabrication and characterization of devices and validation of the device
physical models, and prototyping of imaging arrays leveraging these devices. The
intellectual impact includes advancing the understanding of device designs for
leveraging interband tunneling for millimeter-wave and THz detection, as well as
imaging array architectures and approaches to spectroscopic and polarization-
resolved imaging in this frequency regime. These devices and imaging arrays can
be expected to find applications in a diverse range of detection and imaging
applications in the scientific, industrial, and security arenas.