* 1508611
* SusChEM: Rational Design and Synthesis of Stable Strain- and Defect-Rich Cu/Ceramic Nanocomposites for Efficient CO2 Reduction
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Tewodros Asefa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 358,202.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: In this project, supported by the Ceramics Program in the
Division of Materials Research, Professor Tewodros Asefa is developing novel
nanoparticles containing defect- and strain-rich copper nanocrystals sandwiched
between two metal oxides. These materials are being used to investigate the
stability and catalytic activity of copper nanocrystals for the conversion of
carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas) to methanol (a synthetic fuel and a commodity
chemical). While defect- and strain-rich copper nanocrystals have high catalytic
activity for this chemical conversion, these very sites are also unfortunately
unstable, and thus can easily lose their activity. This problem is overcome by
the design of nanomaterials that comprise metal oxide cores and porous metal
oxide shells around the strain- and defect-rich copper nanocrystals. This unique
structure allows the nanocrystals to retain their catalytically super-active
sites, while remaining stable and allowing for the systematic investigation of
the interplay between the structures and catalytic properties of copper
nanocrystals under high temperature (the condition used for converting carbon
dioxide to methanol). State-of-the-art high-resolution neutron scattering
techniques at the Center for High Resolution Neutron Scattering (CHRNS) in the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) are being used to decipher
the defects and strains on the nanoparticles and any changes that they may
undergo during catalysis. The instrumentation at CHRNS allows for various unique
characterizations of the structure and dynamics of the materials being
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: While defect and strained
sites on copper nanocrystals have been recently found to have high catalytic
activity for high temperature chemical conversion of carbon dioxide to methanol,
these very sites are also unfortunately thermodynamically unstable, and thus can
easily undergo sintering and deactivation under these conditions. Key features
of the research are the designing of core-shell nanoparticles containing stable
and highly active, defect- and strain-rich copper nanocrystals sandwiched
between metal oxide cores and porous metal oxide shells, and using the resulting
nanocatalysts to provide a thorough understanding of the structure-property
relationships of copper and other related metallic nanomaterials under high
temperature catalytic conditions. The synthesis of such copper nanocrystals is
carried out by a method called controlled ligand-assisted etching. The research
ultimately uncovers key structural factors that need to be tailored in copper
and other related metallic nanomaterials for the efficient catalysis of various
reactions, including the conversion of carbon dioxide to methanol, or a
greenhouse gas to a synthetic fuel or a commodity chemical. Additionally, the
project provides training of a graduate student and three or more undergraduate
students, including those from groups historically underrepresented in science
and engineering. The students participating in this research gain
interdisciplinary, hands-on training with a variety of materials synthetic
methods, catalysis, and materials characterization using the infrastructure
available at the Rutgers Laboratory for Surface Modification, as well as that
available at NIST. Furthermore, the results from the research will be
incorporated into graduate course offerings that address materials engineering
for sustainable and renewable energy applications.