* 1508566
* Covalent Polymer Mechanochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2019
* USD 522,553.00

With this award the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program is
funding Professor Stephen Craig of Duke Unviersity to study covalent polymer
mechanochemistry. This project involves the study of chemical reactions that are
accelerated by an applied mechanical force. These reactions impact multiple
aspects of materials design, including the macroscopic failure and mechanical
limitations of current polymeric materials. In addition, mechanically responsive
functional groups might serve as the critical elements in new stress-responsive
and self-healing polymeric materials. These studies will provide insight into
how the macroscopic mechanical forces experienced by polymers during use can be
effectively channeled into desired chemical responses, providing a foundation
for new classes of polymers. Broader impacts come from: (1) integration of
research and education through new active learning modules and associated
laboratory experiences in introductory chemistry and through coupled research
experiences; (2) broadening the participation of underrepresented groups by
engaging and recruiting young scientists before the onset of disproportionate
attrition from the sciences; (3) disseminating the results of the research
broadly; and, (4) probing molecular behavior in materials in a manner that will
have an impact on polymer chemistry, physical organic chemistry, and self-
healing and stress-responsive materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
technical objective is to lay a quantitative foundation for mechanochemical
kinetics by employing state-of-the-art physical measurements and developing new
methods for quantitation. The research plan includes the direct, experimental
characterization and quantification of the effect of mechanical forces on
covalent reactions triggered along overstretched polymer backbones. Because
mechanical force, unlike conventional forms of energy input such as heat or
light, is directional, the coupling between mechanical force and reactivity
provides insights into the structure of transition states. Despite its
importance, however, quantitative measures of the effect of force on chemical
reactions are rare. The proposed work makes use of two novel approaches to
quantifying mechanochemical reactivity: the single molecule force spectroscopy
of multi-mechanophore, non-scissile polymers, and the pulsed sonication and
molecular weight degradation of multi-mechanophore, scissile polymers. Models
for the observed mechanochemical activity are expected to enable quantitative
assessment of reactivity in both classes of mechanophores.