* 1508323
* Collaborative Research: Size-effect driven nanoparticle ferromagnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* John Ketterson, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 91,669.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic size effects are related to the
dependence of the magnetic properties on the dimensions of the magnetic material
being studied. Noble metals like gold have not traditionally been considered as
magnetic materials because of the lack of permanent magnetism in their bulk
forms. However, recent research has shown that nanomaterials may have strikingly
different physical properties and indeed noble metals may become magnetic below
some critical feature size. The current research project is an integrated
research and education program to understand the size dependence of the magnetic
properties of noble metals. This is the first detailed study on the size and
shape dependence of the magnetic properties of noble metal nanoparticles. A
variety of techniques are being used to determine the composition, size and size
distribution and magnetic properties of the noble metal nanoparticles. Students
in kindergarten through high school and undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds are involved in this research via a research-based mentoring
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this proposal is to test the hypothesis that reducing the
dimensions of certain normally diamagnetic metals to the nanoscale can result in
ferromagnetism. Reports of ferromagnetism in noble metal nanoparticles like gold
are considered controversial because the findings contradict well-established
physics. Laser-processing techniques are being used to synthesize nanoparticle
samples of noble metals like gold, silver and palladium of desired sizes in
oxide thin films. Deposition of the nanoparticles in nonmagnetic oxide thin
films simultaneously provides synthesis, suppressed agglomeration, and in-situ
passivation of the nanoparticles by the oxide thin films (magnesia, alumina,
etc.). Detailed atomic-level structural characterization and high-resolution
physical property measurements along with element specific magnetization studies
is being used to thoroughly characterize the samples. The magnetic studies
include static and dynamic measurements and ferromagnetic and electron
paramagnetic resonance studies of the nanoparticles. Understanding the size-
dependent behavior of these materials will elucidate the origin of the
ferromagnetism in noble and near noble nanoparticles. The project supports 2
graduate students and involves several undergraduate students. The educational
objectives of this proposal are to: mentor a diverse group of high achieving
students to STEM careers and contribute to K-12 STEM recruitment efforts.
Undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds will be involved in our
research-based mentoring program: Success Through Enthusiasm and Awareness of
Materials Engineering Research (Project STEAMER). All of the educational and
outreach activities will be assessed to monitor the efficacy of the programming
and to contribute to the literature on STEM-based education.