* 1508707
* Spatially resolved studies of transport and selectivity of chemically reacting flows in topologically distinct microporous frameworks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Louis Bouchard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
funding Professor Louis Bouchard at the University of California, Los Angeles is
studying the interplay between molecular transport and reaction selectivity in
reactions catalyzed by metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). MOF's are three-
dimensional structures built, in a tinker toy-like manner, from metal atoms and
organic molecules and are of interest to the chemical industry due to the fact
that their structure can be easily varied. Several MOFs have been developed as
catalysts, but very little is known about the behavior of MOFs inside catalytic
reactors, which are used in the industry to carry out reactions. Research in
catalysis leads to many new everyday products, lower production costs and
increased accessibility worldwide, all of which are desirable outcomes to
society. Better and more efficient catalysis, along with the optimization
methods will ultimately lead to a cleaner environment, lower production costs
and increased accessibility to the consumer. The project is also integrating
research, training and education. Graduate and undergraduate students
participating in the research project are learning important research and
communication skills, and Professor Bouchard is partnering with a local high
school to host these students for research experiences in the laboratory.

Professor Bouchard is investigating catalytic reactions from a unique angle: by
mapping flow and transport processes occurring inside live reactors and
correlating them with the outcomes of the reaction. Thermodynamic fluxes yield
an understanding of transport processes in microporous materials, in relation to
the catalytic outcome, enabling optimization of reaction parameters and
catalyst. Two kinds of reactions are being studied: epoxidations and
oligomerizations. Epoxidations are important to the chemical industry, in which
epoxides are used as starting materials for the synthesis of polycarbonates.
Oligomerizations are important to the petroleum industry, and an important
challenge is to maximize selectivity with respect to selected product(s) of the
reaction. Professor Bouchard's group found evidence that transport and topology
of the framework strongly influence the outcome of such reactions, the details
of which are still unclear. A fundamental understanding of the reaction in live
reaction settings is therefore needed. In this project microporous catalytic
frameworks are being optimized as function of framework topology, size and
active centers, with the goal of identifying industrially viable MOF catalysts.