* 1508662
* High-Resolution Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry for Chemically Imaging Cell Membrane Organization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Mary Kraft, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program (CMI) in the
Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB), Professor Mary Kraft
and her group at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign are developing new
approaches to quantitatively image the subcellular distribution of distinct
lipid species. Differences in the relative abundances of cholesterol among the
membranes of various organelles influence mammalian cell function and are
correlated with disease. Yet, current analytical tools are inadequate for
assessing the cholesterol abundance within subcellular compartments. Professor
Kraft and her team plan to address this need by developing a high-resolution
secondary ion mass spectrometry method for quantitatively imaging cholesterol
and sphingolipids within specific cellular organelles with high spatial
resolution. This work entails the development and optimization of labeling
strategies for organelle detection, depth profiling conditions, and quantitative
data analysis methods, as well as determination of sputtering rates on mammalian
cells.

The proposed research will yield a chemically specific approach for imaging the
relative abundances of cholesterol and other lipid species in specific
organelles or near intracellular proteins of interest with less than 100-nm-
lateral resolution. This chemical imaging tool will greatly facilitate
identifying the mechanisms by which cholesterol regulates intracellular
trafficking, and ultimately, cellular function. The project will train graduate
and undergraduate students in secondary ion mass spectrometry, cell biology,
metabolism, quantitative bioanalytical chemistry, experimental design and
hypothesis testing. Results will be incorporated into a lecture and laboratory
activity that will be presented at the Girls' Adventures in Mathematics,
Engineering, and Science (GAMES) Bio- and Chemical Engineering Camp for 9th and
10th grade young women.