* 1508785
* Pump-probe ARPES for Studies of Electron and Phonon Dynamics in Novel Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Daniel Dessau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 404,999.00

Nontechnical abstract Utilizing a newly developed time-resolved angle-resolved
photoemission ARPES system, the dynamics of electron interactions in a variety
of important classes of materials will be determined. The focus will be on
"correlated electron" systems including high transition temperature
superconductors and charge density wave systems, in which the electronic
interactions or correlations are especially important. The general goal and the
basis of the intellectual merit of the project will be to determine the dynamics
of various excited states of a solid and ultimately to control these processes
through suitably tailored ultrafast optical pump pulses. These goals directly
relate to two grand challenges: "How do remarkable properties of matter emerge
from complex correlations of the atomic or electronic constituents and how can
we control these properties?" and "How can matter be characterized and
controlled away from - especially very far away - from equilibrium?". In
addition to the scientific impacts discussed above, the intimate inclusion of
students in this research program is emphasized as it is one of the most
effective ways to attract talented undergraduates and retain them in careers in
science and engineering. Four undergraduate research students are currently
working on projects related to this program. The PI will also expand upon a set
of active outreach projects, which will include education and outreach over the
full range from middle-school students to advanced researchers and
professionals.

Technical abstract Utilizing a newly developed time-resolved angle-resolved
photoemission ARPES (trARPES) system, the dynamics of electron interactions in a
variety of important classes of materials will be determined. The focus will be
on "correlated electron" systems including high transition temperature
superconductors, charge density wave systems, and Mott insulators. trARPES is
still in its infancy, though the power of this new technique is clear because it
brings the powers of ARPES together with the field of ultrafast spectroscopy and
coherent control. The new system includes a number of advantages compared to
previous trARPES systems, including a) improved energy resolution while staying
at or near the time-bandwidth limit. b) Improved selectivity and control in how
the system is pumped, including wide tunability of photon energies as well as
high pump power, giving the possibility for tailored resonant pumping of charges
and phonons. The trARPES experiments will be closely coupled with static (single
photon) laser and synchrotron-ARPES experiments performed in the same group on
similar or identical materials. In addition to the scientific impacts discussed
above, the intimate inclusion of students in this research program is emphasized
as it is one of the most effective ways to attract talented undergraduates and
retain them in careers in science and engineering. Four undergraduate research
students are currently working on projects related to this program. The PI will
also expand upon a set of active outreach projects, which will include education
and outreach over the full range from middle-school students to advanced
researchers and professionals.