* 1508794
* CDS&amp;E: Uncertainty Quantification and Bayesian Updating in Data-Driven Cardiovascular Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Alison Marsden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

CBET - 1508794&lt;br/&gt;Marsden, Alison L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiovascular
disease is one of the major problems facing US and the world. While simulations
of cardiovascular hemodynamics are now being used to study fundamental
processes, trust in personalized simulation results before making clinical
decisions for a patient is absent due to several uncertainties. This is exactly
what this proposal is about, investigating these uncertainties and developing
techniques to allow informed medical decisions. The co-PIs propose to
disseminate their computational tools as open source programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though it is well known that cardiovascular simulations
require numerous assumptions and assimilation of uncertain clinical data, these
uncertainties currently get swept under the rug, asking end-users to accept
deterministic simulation predictions as "truth" with no associated statistics.
As a result, researchers and clinicians are left to wonder "How reliable are
simulation predictions in light of myriad uncertainties?" and "How do the
statistics on output predictions change with differing methodologies and
assumptions?". These questions lead to justified skepticism in the research and
clinical community, and are a roadblock to adoption. Development of
transformative technology to assess uncertainty, currently lacking in the field,
is of paramount importance for safe and routine adoption of simulations for
personalized medicine and biomechanics research. This is the area that this
proposal comes to cover, as it aspires to develop techniques that can lead to
the incorporation of data-driven cardiovascular models to inform decisions
surrounding choices of drug therapy, device placement, surgical methods and
interventions for individual patients. The proposal has two goals: 1) Develop
fast automated methods for parameter estimation and assimilation of uncertain
data into multiscale models, 2) Develop an efficient framework to propagate
uncertainties from clinical and imaging data to simulation predictions. It is
proposed to demonstrate the uncertainty quantification (UQ) framework through
application to multiscale simulations of coronary artery disease (CAD), though
the framework will apply to a wide range of other cardiovascular and respiratory
diseases. Simulations will be run in a high performance computing (HPC)
environment using a multi-level parallel algorithm structure. The ultimate goal
is to address currently unanswered questions about reliability and robustness in
cardiovascular simulation. Results from this work, if successful, would enable
acceptance of computational models and establish reliability metrics to guide
model improvement and data collection. Cardiovascular simulations have potential
to personalize treatments for individual patients and to characterize the in
vivo mechanical environment, providing key biomechanical data that cannot be
readily obtained from medical imaging. The proposed computational framework
could be applicable to a range of problems in biomedical computing, biological
modeling, and engineering applications using computational fluid dynamics.
Dissemination will be achieved through contributions to the SimVascular open
source project, for which Dr. Marsden is the PI. Activities that integrate
research and teaching by introducing statistics concepts in graduate level
courses and through outreach to middle and high school students are proposed.