* 1508801
* RUI: Electron Transfer and Inhibition of Dihydromethanopterin Reductase
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Madeline Rasche, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Methane-generating microorganisms (methanogens) synthesize methane as both an
alternative energy source and a greenhouse gas. In addition to their
environmental impacts, these organisms are medically important because
methanogens in the human gut have been correlated with obesity. Research in the
principal investigator's laboratory focuses on the discovery of proteins needed
for microbial methane generation and the development of chemical inhibitors that
may decrease methanogen contributions to greenhouse gases and obesity in the
future. The research is conducted by high school students, undergraduates, and
graduate students at California State University at Fullerton, a primary
undergraduate institution and Hispanic-serving university. This research
contributes to the reduction of biological methane production and to the
development of the next generation of scientific researchers in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Chemistry Division is funding research by Professor Madeline
Rasche at California State University-Fullerton to understand and chemically
inhibit dihydromethanopterin reductase. Tetrahydromethanopterin (H4MPT) is an
unusual folate-like cofactor required for the microbial synthesis of methane as
an energy source and greenhouse gas. The flavoprotein dihydromethanopterin
reductase (Dmr) catalyzes the final step in the biosynthesis of H4MPT, and this
enzyme is a potential target for chemical inhibitors designed to mitigate
biological methane production. Based on the X-ray crystal structure of
dihydromethanopterin reductase B (DmrB) from Burkholderia xenovorans, a ping-
pong mechanism for electron transfer has been proposed. The goal of this NSF-
funded research is to test structure-based hypotheses about the mechanism of
electron transfer in the bacterial protein (DmrB) and in a homolog of
dihydromethanopterin reductase (DmrX) from a true methane-producing
microorganism. The research is conducted by an integrated network of high school
students, undergraduates, and graduate students at California State University
at Fullerton, a primarily undergraduate institution and Hispanic-serving
university. This research contributes to the development of chemical inhibitors
of methane as a greenhouse gas and to the education of the next generation of
chemistry researchers in the United States.