* 1508484
* Collaborative Research: Deformation Mechanisms in FCC and HCP Cobalt with High Density Stacking Faults
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Yashashree Kulkarni, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,400.00

Nontechnical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cobalt (Co), in the form of thin
films, is a critical magnetic material with widespread applications in magnetic
data storage devices, microelectromechanical and nanoelectromechanical systems
(MEMS/NEMS), as well as environmentally benign wear and corrosion resistant
coatings. Yet, the mechanical properties of Co films, either in face-centered-
cubic (fcc) or hexagonal-close-packed (hcp) form are poorly understood. The
principal investigator's recent studies show that high-density stacking faults
(SFs) - atomic planes that disrupt the ordered arrangement of atoms - can be
introduced into fcc and hcp Co. These SFs may drastically enhance mechanical
properties leading to higher strength and ductility of Co. The aim of the
project is to elucidate the effect of the density of SFs and systematically
investigate the mechanical properties of Co with SFs. The investigators have
existing collaborations and their expertise nicely complements each other. The
collaboration provides students with the opportunity to gain complementary
knowledge in experiments and simulations through mutual visits, lectures and
seminars at the participating institutions. The investigators also have
arrangement for graduate students to visit the Department of Energy - Center for
Integrated Nanotechnologies to access advanced microscopy facilities. The
knowledge derived from this project can be incorporated into curricula at both
institutions. The co-investigator can leverage successful outreach programs at
University of Houston to broaden participation in engineering. The principal
investigator can recruit a minority graduate student through the "Pathway to
Doctoral Program" from minority institutions. Both investigators continuously
supervise undergraduate students and encourage their students to attend major
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate
the deformation mechanisms in fcc and hcp Co with high-density SFs. The ultimate
goal is to understand the significance of SFs in governing the mechanical
properties of metals, and improving the strength and deformability of Co. The
investigators combine experiments and molecular dynamics simulations to perform
the following major tasks: (1) understand the nucleation of SFs and the
formation of intercepted SFs in fcc Co, and tailor the density of SFs in fcc and
hcp Co; 2) examine the deformation mechanisms in fcc Co, including dislocation-
SF interactions, size effect and work hardening, via a combination of in situ
nanoindentation and atomistic modeling; and 3) investigate the deformation
mechanisms in hcp Co with high density SFs and understand nucleation mechanisms
of deformation twins in hcp Co. This project could reveal the significant role
of SFs in mechanical behavior of metals. Furthermore, the combination of novel
nanomechanical testing tools with molecular dynamics simulations fills in the
knowledge gap through comprehensive interrogation of the deformation mechanisms
in fcc and hcp Co with SFs at the atomistic level.