* 1508301
* SusChEM: Artificial Hydrogenases by Design: Hybrid Protein-Organometallic Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Giovanna Ghirlanda, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 473,529.00

The NSF Chemistry of Life Processes Program supports the efforts of Professor
Giovanna Ghirlanda of Arizona State University to investigate the design of
artificial hydrogenases. A pressing challenge facing society is the development
of sustainable energy sources. In this context, hydrogen emerges as a possible
clean alternative to carbon-based fuels, if scalable and environmentally
friendly methods for its production and utilization can be developed. A
potentially cost-effective and environmentally sound route to hydrogen can be
gleaned from nature where a family of specialized enzymes called hydrogenases
catalyzes proton reduction as well as hydrogen oxidation under mild conditions,
using non-precious metals such as iron at the active site. Unfortunately,
hydrogenases are large, complex proteins with several drawbacks that prevent
their utilization in applications. Professor Ghirlanda designs and optimizes
synthetic miniaturized proteins that contain artificial organometallic sites
that are capable of proton reduction to molecular hydrogen. The presence of the
organometallic unit is augmented with state-of-the-art methods to optimize the
environment and long-range interactions in the protein scaffold, in an effort to
obtain good rates of hydrogenase activity. This approach provides a means to
test natural hydrogenase mechanisms while generating blueprints to develop novel
enzymes. The project relies on a highly interdisciplinary approach that offers
students at the graduate and undergraduate level a rich training in modern
bioinorganic chemistry. In partnership with the Solar Utilization Network (a
student-led organization that conducts science workshops in schools throughout
the Phoenix area), Dr. Ghirlanda develops teaching modules designed to adhere to
the Arizona sixth grade science standards and to introduce concepts related to
sustainable energy in the classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioinspired
organometallic complexes have clarified many mechanistic aspects of proton
reduction, but have not reached the efficiency of natural hydrogenases due to
limitations on the incorporation of second-sphere and long-range interactions.
Here, Dr. Ghirlanda and her group examine a hybrid system by which the chemistry
of simple, relatively inefficient organometallic centers are enriched through
second-sphere and long-range interactions provided by a protein scaffold. Their
unique strategy is built around the use of unnatural amino acids that can
coordinate and stabilize bioinspired organometallic catalysts. Using this
strategy, nascent hydrogen production by small peptide-based model systems in
water at near-neutral pH have been demonstrated. This project now (1) expands
synthetic methodologies to prepare a family of artificial amino acids, (2)
develops prototype de novo-designed artificial hydrogenases, and (3) uses
computational protein design concomitantly with directed methods to optimize
second coordination sphere and long range interactions. The development of
evolvable protein-based hybrid catalysts capable of producing fuel in a
sustainable manner directly addresses an urgent global need. Beyond hydrogen
production, this project establishes a procedure to develop hybrid catalysts
that may be widely applicable to a variety of chemical reactions, including
those not occurring in nature, with the potential to impact the production of
high-value chemicals.