* 1508285
* I-Corps:  3D Tissue Inks: Multifunctional 3D Printing Platform for Bone Graft Substitutes
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Ramille Shah, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Most bone grafting procedures to date still use autograft or allograft materials
as the standard of care, which require tissue harvesting, are expensive, and are
difficult to form into patient-specific implants. The proposed new materials
technology platform allows for the synthesis and 3D-printing of customizable or
off-the-shelf products that closely mimic tissue such as bone. Its unique
mechanical and biological properties, combined with the ease of fabrication,
potential for scalability, and low material and processing costs make this
material system a very promising new bone tissue substitute for patients
suffering from orthopaedic, dental, or craniomaxillo facial tissue defects. This
new technology has the potential to transform the standard of care for these
applications, while significantly reducing medical costs associated with product
manufacturing, surgical procedures, and patient recovery times.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike other high ceramic-content biomaterials, which are
brittle, require high temperature processing, and have limited bioactivity, the
proposed patent-pending material, Hyperelastic Bone (HB), has elastic and
formable qualities and can be rapidly fabricated at room temperature from liquid
inks into complex, custom or mass-produced, implantable structures using an
extrusion-based 3D-printing platform. Additionally, the proposed 3D printable
material platform enables users to tailor the implant through control of a
variety of parameters, including overall architecture, porosity, strength,
stiffness, absorbency, and bioactivity. Biological testing shows that this
material is biocompatible and effectively supports cell and tissue infiltration
as well as bone formation.