* 1508728
* SusChEM: Catalytically Active Earth Abundant Materials with Unique Structure and Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Ryan Richards, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2019
* USD 613,318.00

Catalytically Active Earth Abundant Materials with Unique Structure and Property

Many of the metals and materials used in catalysis are rare and expensive.
However, as energy needs increase and the traditional catalytically-active noble
metals become scarce, it is paramount that novel materials are discovered to
replace them and the capabilities of these new materials are explored. The team,
consisting of Profs. Trewyn, Pylypenko, and Richards, is investigating the
development of nanostructures composed of earth abundant materials entrapped in
high surface area, porous materials with unique shapes and chemistry, and are
developing a fundamental understanding of factors that influence reactions
integral to biomass upgrading to higher value products, such as fuels and
chemical feedstocks for industrial use. The team is focused on the chemistry of
both catalytically active nanoparticles and metal atoms distributed in the
porous supports. They are studying the conversion process of metals and metal
oxides to metal carbides and metal nitrides which may possess unique catalytic
properties that closely mimic those of the noble metals currently used for many
of the catalytic processes important to our global energy and chemical needs.
This collaborative effort leverages a strong and unique ability to study the
properties of the active species distributed at the atomic level using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) under reaction conditions. Importantly, this team brings expertise in
material sciences, material characterization, inorganic and analytical chemistry
and catalysis. The catalytic activity of these newly synthesized catalysts are
tested against reactions frequently observed in upgrading biomass so as to
develop important structure/activity relationships. The team attracts
undergraduate and graduate students from many disciplines and walks of life to
participate in research. The group hosts and mentors high school students to
conduct research in their laboratories along with traveling to K-12 schools to
demonstrate the power of science. Finally, the team participates in organizing
several conferences in these research areas, all emphasizing student
involvement.

In this research project, Drs. Trewyn, Pylypenko, and Richards, all of the
Colorado School of Mines, are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to develop and study nanostructures of earth
abundant elements with enhanced catalytic activity while manipulating the
density and stability of the active sites on high surface area, porous supports.
Working as a highly complimentary team, they are evolving the synthesis of
supported metal carbides and metal nitrides by converting metal and metal oxide
nanoparticles embedded in mesoporous silica through exposure to methane (carbon)
and ammonia (nitrogen) at elevated thermal and pressurized conditions.
Atomically distributed metal carbides and metal nitrides are presently produced
by post-synthetically treating mixed metal oxides under similar conditions. The
group is investigating the properties of active species that give them catalytic
properties similar to the very active, but rare, Group 10 metals. In addition to
a strong synthetic background, the team uses their expertise in in-situ/operando
characterization techniques, including x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), which allows the team to analyze the
materials at the states most relevant to working environments to pinpoint the
most active sites. Using a series of biomass upgrading related reactions, the
team is measuring and comparing the catalytic activity of the newly synthesized
catalysts and identifying the best alternatives to noble metals. The research
team attracts diverse undergraduate and graduate students from many disciplines
to participate in research. They host and mentor high school students to conduct
actual research in their laboratories along with traveling to K-12 schools to
demonstrate the power of science. New curricula are developed to introduce
students to state-of-the-art methods of materials synthesis and characterization
along with extensive catalysis. The team is involved in organization of various
conferences aimed at disseminating the materials, material characterization
methods, and catalysis processes.