* 1508558
* Screw Dislocation-Driven Growth of Complex Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Song Jin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 430,000.00

Non-technical Abstract Nanoscale materials have significant applications in
electronics, solar energy conversion, catalysis, and batteries. The principal
investigator had discovered a new way of synthesizing nanomaterials that are
driven by screw dislocation defects. In this project supported by Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the
principal investigator develops the rational design and controlled synthesis of
novel and complex nanomaterials whose anisotropic growth is driven by screw
dislocations. This research can potentially have transformative impacts on the
rational and controllable synthesis of novel nanomaterials that can be
advantageous for a variety of applications, such as in renewable energy.
Furthermore, the research team integrates education and outreach with active
research by recruiting underrepresented undergraduate students to participate in
research, by developing new lab modules on solution synthesis of nanomaterials
for undergraduate lab courses, and by developing and conducting new nanoscience
hands-on activities at the annual Wisconsin Science Festival to the general
public.

Technical Abstract Dislocation-driven nanomaterial growth is a fundamental
advance that can create new dimensions in the rational synthesis of anisotropic
one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), and complex three-dimensional (3D)
hierarchical nanostructures. As a general mechanism that is applicable to any
crystalline materials at low supersaturation, it is particularly powerful for
growing anisotropic nanostructures of complex materials that have been otherwise
challenging to synthesize using catalyst-driven growth. Building on the
significant advances and classical crystal growth theory, the principle
investigator exploits the advantages of dislocation-driven growth to develop the
rational design and controllable synthesis of more complex nanostructures, in
terms of both more complex materials, such as ternary metal oxides/hydroxides,
and more complex 3D nanomorphologies and heterostructures. To address the
challenges associated with controlled solution growth of ternary metal
oxide/hydroxide and other complex compounds, the following specific objectives
will be pursued: i) develop general dislocation-driven growth of nanomaterials
using high-pressure high-temperature hydrothermal continuous flow reactors; ii)
investigate the use of non-aqueous solvents for dislocation-driven growth of
nanomaterials; iii) develop strategies via conversion reactions from
nanomaterials grown by dislocations; iv) make nanostructures with complex
geometries through dislocation-driven heterostructure growth.