* 1508139
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Energy harvesting nanorods-enhanced MEMS temperature-insensitive  gas sensor for combustion monitoring and control
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Guoan Wang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 06/30/2019
* USD 161,484.00

ECCS-1508711, Zhang, Haifeng, University of North Texas&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-1508139,
Wang, Guoan, Univ. of South Carolina&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-1508862, Zuo, Lei, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Collaborative Research: Energy harvesting
temperature-insensitive nanorods-enhanced MEMS gas sensor for combustion
monitoring and control&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2- &lt;br/&gt;Brief description of
project Goals: Solve critical challenges of combustion gas sensing in harsh
environments for in-situ monitoring and real-time control of gas
turbines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a)
Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Energy Information
Administration estimates that 67% of energy generated in the U.S.is from the
fossil fuels including coal, petroleum, and natural gas. The combustion of
fossil fuels accounts for 80% of greenhouse gas emissions in 2010 in the United
States and produces other air pollutants, such as nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon
monoxide (CO), and ammonia (NH3). Advanced gas sensors for in situ monitoring
and real-time control of combustion dynamics are urgently needed for
implementation of high-efficiency and low-emission combustion technologies. In
this GOALI project, three universities will collaborate with General Electric,
Inc. (GE) to investigate a novel self-powered piezoelectric MEMS gas sensor,
which can detect gas concentrations of key emission gas species such as NOx, CO,
and NH3 in harsh gas turbine environments. The self-powered MEMS gas sensing
system will realize the rapid detection and quantification of gas species in
high temperatures and thus revolutionize combustion processes, enabling in situ
monitoring and close-loop feedback control in gas turbines. The proposed gas
sensing technology will also have broader applications such as emission control
of vehicles, sensing and control of coal-fired power plants, and monitoring of
chemical production, metal cast and glass manufacturing processes. The
interaction between the universities and the world's leading turbine engine
manufacturer GE will guide the fundamental research to solve a critical industry
need, and enable accelerated implementation of the developed knowledge to
generate immediate industry impacts. This project also will significantly
benefit three universities through new course development, research mentoring
for graduates, undergraduate education, opportunities for minorities and women,
and K12 student outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this GOALI proposal is to
investigate a novel self-powered wireless nanorods-enhanced MEMS sensor to
detect key combustion gases NOx, CO, CO2, and NH3 in harsh gas turbine
environments with high temperature, high pressure, and large vibration
conditions. Three academic PIs with diverse backgrounds team up together with
industry leader GE, conducting fundamental research in gas sensing, energy
harvesting, and MEMS fabrication to solve an industry-wide urgent challenge in
combustion monitoring for energy efficiency and environment protection. The
research objective is achieved through three innovations. The first is to design
a temperature-insensitive piezoelectric MEMS resonator for gas sensing in high
temperature harsh environment. The second is to fabricate the MEMS resonator and
grow ZnO nanorods on the top of the resonator, which is used to selectively
attract the gas molecules and to subsequently cause the frequency shifts of the
MEMS resonator. The third is to design an energy harvester to harness the
intrinsic heat of the gas turbine engine to provide an unlimited and reliable
power source for the ZnO-based resonant sensor and wireless transceiver.