* 1508530
* Electrically Coupling Multifunctional Oxides to Semiconductors through Bandgap Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Joseph Ngai, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 370,290.00

Non-Technical Description: New materials are often required to further advance
technologies used for computers and clean energy harvesting. This project seeks
to combine two different classes of materials, namely, semiconductors and
oxides, as a means to create new composite materials with novel properties. This
project fabricates these new materials by stacking thin films together in a
layer-by-layer fashion with precise control at the atomic level and explores the
new physical properties resulting from the stacked materials systems. In
addition to scientific and technological impacts, this research also provides
training to graduate and undergraduate students in the forefront of materials
growth and characterization to prepare them for careers in STEM related fields.
Furthermore, the education and outreach activities combine art and science in
disseminating the research findings, aiming at encouraging high-school students
to pursue STEM fields of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: A
fundamental approach of developing novel functional materials is to structurally
and electrically couple materials exhibiting complementary properties within
layered, heterogeneous structures. This project focuses on understanding how
covalent semiconductors can be coupled with ionic complex oxides to create
functionalities beyond any of the constituent materials alone. Key to
electrically coupling oxides to semiconductors and realizing novel
functionalities is to control the band alignment at the heterogeneous
interfaces. This project seeks to elucidate the band alignments in three forms
of electrical coupling, namely, charge transport, charge tunneling and
polarization coupling. Such understanding could enable the ferromagnetic,
ferroelectric and dielectric properties of oxides to be coupled with
semiconductors for a range of applications. Particularly, the project focuses on
the growth of single-crystalline zirconates SrZrO3 and solid-solution SrZrTiO3
directly on GaAs and Ge using state-of-the-art oxide molecular beam epitaxy.
Band offset is controlled via stoichiometry, strain and interfacial structure.
The electronic and physical structure of the zirconate - semiconductor
heterostructures is characterized using X-ray photoemission, X-ray diffraction
and scanning transmission electron microscopy. Electrical behavior of the
heterojunctions is investigated via current-voltage and capacitance-voltage
measurements in order to determine transport, tunneling, and polarization
characteristics.