* 1508051
* Non-Ergodic Wireless Sensing: Fundamental Tradeoffs and Optimal Transmission Schemes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Shuguang Cui, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

As an essential element in the future information infrastructure, wireless
sensing systems have motivated a huge amount of research interests in the
community. Such efforts are critical to building the bridge between the physical
world and the cyber world, where physical system parameters such as
voltage/current levels in a power grid, temperature/humidity levels over a
farming field, and stress levels across a bridge could be collected and
processed for automatic cyber control. However, it is still an open problem on
how to find the optimal way of conveying information over such sensor networks,
since there is a lack of well-defined optimality criteria for end-to-end
information collection, transmission, and processing. In this project, the PI
first proposes new optimality criteria based on novel network-wise multiplexing
diversity tradeoff analysis, then studies the efficient information transmission
and processing schemes, with special considerations on network non-ergodicity in
hostile application environments. The proposed research will have great multi-
fold impacts on our society. The sensing system design results will enable
various key applications such as complex cyber-physical system monitoring and
large-scale real-time environment surveillance. The fundamental performance
analysis developed for sensor networks could also be applied to other types of
networks beyond the sensing applications. The proposed program will broaden the
education scope in the society by providing training to students, enhancing
school curriculum, holding regular seminars, posting results on the project
website, and presenting papers in technical conferences. It will also emphasize
the outreaches to women and under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, in this program, the PI starts by
addressing one fundamental problem in wireless sensing system design: Given M
unknown entities (sources) to sense by a network of N wireless sensing nodes
operating with certain resources in power, time, frequency, and space, what the
fundamental tradeoffs will be among the supportable M, the achievable end-to-end
reliability, and the required network resources. Non-ergodic random
communication channels and non-ergodic random node losses are jointly
considered. Both cases of correlated and uncorrelated sources are thoroughly
studied. Motivated by the multiplexing and diversity tradeoff result in multi-
antenna transmission systems, the concept of multiplexing and diversity tradeoff
is redefined as the optimality criteria in the distributed sensor network
context. The emphasis of this project is quantifying the fundamental achievable
tradeoffs among various entities of interest, and proposing efficient
information transmission and processing schemes to achieve some particular
operation points on the optimal tradeoff curves, with special considerations
over the non-ergodic natures of random sensor networks in various applications.
The deliverables include basic theories, performance bounds, and optimal sensing
schemes. The intellectual merits lie in the systematic treatment over core
design issues in wireless sensing systems operating for applications with non-
ergodic network randomness. Transformative new concepts based on
estimation/detection outage and estimation/detection diversity are thoroughly
investigated and generalized to cases involving correlated sources, multi-hop
networks, and multiple fusion centers.