* 1508577
* Hardness and Elastic Properties of Superhard and Ultrahard Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Craig Bina, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 298,701.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Society has long been fascinated by diamond as the
hardest known substance. Can a material harder than diamond be created?
Answering this question is not so straightforward because the very definition of
hardness employs diamond as the reference, and when materials under test
approach or potentially exceed the hardness of the diamond-based indenter,
results are difficult to interpret. A new class of superhard materials is being
developed based upon nano-polycrystalline or nano-twinned structures of diamond
and related compounds containing carbon, boron and nitrogen together in the same
structural configuration as diamond. These materials are synthesized at high
pressures and high temperatures in large-volume presses. Physical properties of
novel superhard materials are investigated using a newly-developed ultrasonic
system that measures the speed of sound waves at GHz frequencies. The results
precisely determine physical properties such as the shear modulus, which are
fundamentally correlated to hardness. New materials rivaling or potentially
exceeding natural diamond in hardness and thermal stability can make possible
the fabrication of ultrahard machine parts that do not burn or wear down under
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: High-pressure high-temperature
synthesis of single-crystals intermediate in composition between cubic-boron
nitride (c-BN) and diamond demonstrate a solid-solution wherein hardness and
thermal stability are optimized for a certain range of compositions. Identifying
the ideal composition requires improved measurement and theoretical
understanding of hardness-elasticity relationships. Whereas conventional
hardness measurements on materials harder than c-BN are difficult to interpret
because of plastic deformation of the indenter, a novel GHz-ultrasonic
interferometer is developed to measure the elastic constants of materials in the
superhard and ultrahard classes with very-high precision. Under that direction,
diamond-like compounds containing carbon, nitrogen, and boron and having nano-
polycrystalline or nano-twinned structure are targeted to produce materials
without cleavage, with high thermal stability, and with hardness rivaling and
potentially exceeding natural diamond. The research improves the fundamental
understanding of the relationship between hardness and elasticity thus advancing
the ability to design and predict the properties of ultrahard materials. The
proposal is timed to take advantage of newly developed synthesis techniques and
characterization methods. Graduate student training focuses on skills for job
placement in related fields in industry, academia, and at the National
laboratories. Outreach activities feature participation in Project Excite, a
program providing after-school enrichment experiences in science and mathematics
to minority students from local elementary schools.