* 1508245
* Entanglement and Scattering in 1d and 2d
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Israel Klich, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 12/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award supports fundamental theoretical research and education aimed at
advancing our grasp of quantum aspects of condensed matter theory at low
dimensions through the study of entanglement and dynamics in many-body states.
Many of the most interesting many-body physical systems, such as superconductors
and superfluids, involve interactions between many particles, which are governed
by the rules of quantum mechanics. One of the quintessential elements of quantum
mechanics is called entanglement, the phenomenon that parts of a physical system
can be correlated, i.e. "know" what goes on in another part of the system in the
sense that a measurement on one will determine the outcome of a measurement on
the other, even when the two parts become physically separated. Entanglement is
well understood when a small number of particles is concerned, and has even been
experimentally demonstrated. The role of entanglement in many-body systems is
more complicated and subtle, and is currently under intense study. A related
very difficult and important challenge is related to understanding the dynamics
of many-body systems. Indeed, our main way of investigating physical systems is
by examining their behavior under various external probes such as external
magnetic and electric field. Understanding the dynamics of such processes can
help explain the collective behaviors of their constituents that are responsible
for phenomena such as superconductivity and superfluidity. Entanglement and
dynamics are naturally intertwined, as entanglement may affect dynamics, and
dynamics may reveal entanglement. The present project will concentrate on both
of these effects and their relations, from highly theoretical aspects of
entanglement in quantum systems, to the development of methods to analyze actual
experimental measurements that involve quantum dynamics such as x-ray scattering
on superconductors and neutron scattering experiments in magnetic systems.
Characterizing entanglement and dynamics and their relations may also have a
potential long-term benefit of providing the keys to controlling quantum
systems. The project presents an excellent opportunity to train graduate
students and introduce them to these cutting-edge physics problems. The research
will also be accompanied by public lectures aimed at the promotion of scientific
thinking.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award supports fundamental theoretical research on aspects of two-
dimensional quantum systems. The main areas of research will involve
entanglement and dynamics. The first focus topic will be the investigation of
the nature of locality in a quantum lattice system through studying the nature
of locality in entanglement Hamiltonians. These are effective Hamiltonians that
describe the state of only a part of a quantum system. Recent exciting
developments show that in a large class of systems described by conformal field
theories, entanglement Hamiltonians may be of relatively simple, local, nature.
These systems will be explored from a general field theory perspective, with
particular emphasis on the special but crucially important case of fermions.
Special attention will be given to the development of new, original, and
transformative theoretical ideas. In the second part, some of the same methods,
especially those dealing with fermionic determinants, will also be utilized to
study dynamical problems. In particular, methods will be developed to analyze
the dynamical process essential in resonant x-ray scattering. Such experiments
have recently grown into a powerful investigative tool for the study of
correlated systems, such as high-temperature superconductors. The interpretation
of such measurements necessitates a detailed analysis, which may help
disentangle some of the possible mechanisms and ingredients leading to high-
temperature superconductivity. In parallel, the effect of quantum fluctuations
on low-dimensional spin models motivated by frustration phenomena in magnetism
will be studied. The project is expected to engage several different scientific
communities, ranging from high-energy physics and mathematics to experiment.
Organization of public lectures and training of students will be an integral
part of the activity.