* 1508825
* Development and Application of Experimental Methodology for Characterizing the Chemical Composition and Reactivity of Air-Water Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Jesse Beauchamp, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Beauchamp at the California Institute of Technology is
developing and applying new experimental methodologies for the sensitive
detection and characterization of a wide range of molecular species that
preferentially occupy the discrete interface between gases and liquids. Although
water occupies about 70% of the earth's surface, relatively little is known
about the complex reactions that take place at the air-water interface. This
boundary, only a few molecules in extent, represents one of the most common
chemical environments in nature, present on the surface of oceans and lakes, on
atmospheric aerosols, and even in the human respiratory system. Tools developed
by the Beauchamp research group, including field induced droplet ionization and
acoustic droplet ejection, are coupled with mass spectrometry to provide
unprecedented insights into complex interfacial processes ranging from the
oxidation of anthropogenic organics to form secondary organic aerosols in the
atmosphere to the oxidation of key proteins in the pulmonary surfactant layer
when ozone is inhaled. The conduct of these investigations provide training for
a new generation of scientists, providing them with tools for new discoveries
and the solution of scientific problems. Students are engaged at every level,
with presentations to school groups, hosting high school student interns in the
laboratory, and training graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique of field-induced droplet ionization
mass spectrometry (FIDI-MS), in which a pulsed electric field is applied to
stretch microliter droplets to form opposing dual positive and negative
electrosprays, is employed for many of these investigations. FIDI-MS has proven
highly capable for selective detection and temporal monitoring of complex
molecular species undergoing chemical reactions at the air-water interface. To
complement studies of droplets, a second approach, demonstrated in Professor
Beauchamp's laboratory, examines the composition of planar air-water interfaces
using a focused acoustic pulse to eject picoliter droplets from the surface for
subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. The latter experiment is performed in a
Langmuir trough, where variation in surface pressure is expected to be an
important parameter affecting both the structure and reactivity of interfacial
layers. The investigator employs these techniques to conduct fundamental studies
of the chemical reactivity of amphiphilic surface active molecules, ranging from
helical peptides embedded in lipid layers to organics present in atmospheric
aerosols, with gas phase species including ozone, hydroxyl radicals, oxides of
nitrogen and sulfur, and acids and bases. Theoretical studies involving the
development of detailed quantitative models for analyzing experimental kinetic
data combined with state of the art molecular dynamics and quantum chemical
calculations provides further insights in these investigations. Broad impacts of
this work include the training of a new generation of research scientists who
will be making contributions to our understanding of problems ranging from
environmental science to human health.