* 1508189
* RUI: Search for Verifiable Complex Diffusion Mechanisms
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Matthew Zacate, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 154,578.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion, the long-range movement of
atoms, is a major factor in the processing and performance of materials. Such
movement is essential for the thorough intermixing of atoms needed to form
intermetallic compounds whereas unwanted diffusion can lead to compound
degradation. There is a firm theoretical understanding of diffusion; however,
there is limited experimental evidence verifying the correctness of that
understanding for the case of complex diffusion mechanisms. This is because it
is difficult to observe the individual atomic steps of diffusion processes
experimentally. The main goal of this research is to use computer simulations to
predict favorable experimental conditions for which the processes of complex
diffusion mechanisms can be observed directly and theories assessed. The
simulations and corresponding follow-up experiments will provide a better
fundamental understanding of diffusion processes and allow researchers to refine
preparation methods of intermetallic compounds and to find ways to control
potentially destructive diffusion in materials. Since intermetallic compounds
are used throughout industry, with applications ranging from medicine to
national security, the impacts on society made possible by an enhanced
understanding of diffusion are likely to be widespread. Results are to be
disseminated to the scientific community through conference presentations and
peer-reviewed journal articles and to the general public through informative
webpages and public lectures. It is anticipated that between five and ten
undergraduate students will receive training in advanced computer simulation and
experimental techniques during their participation in this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer
simulations based on the embedded atom method (EAM) are being used to calculate
free energies of point defect formation, solute site occupation, defect
association, and migration, all including vibrational contributions, to predict
diffusion pathways of selected tracers in binary intermetallic compounds.
Additional calculations based on density functional theory serve to parameterize
the EAM model and predict the electric field gradients experienced by tracers in
those compounds. The main goal of this research is to determine compatible
combinations of radiotracers and intermetallic compounds for which measurements
using perturbed angular correlation spectroscopy (PAC) are likely to allow
determination of operative diffusion mechanisms. Of particular interest is
predicting systems for which it is possible to verify the existence of complex
diffusion mechanisms, that is, those mechanisms involving more than simple
tracer-vacancy exchanges, through direct observation of the signals induced by
the transient defect complexes formed during cooperative jump sequences.
Candidate systems under consideration include Cd, Fe, Hf, In, Ni, Pd, Rh, Ru,
Ta, and Ti tracers in B2- and L12-structured compounds. Other activities of this
project include examination of the change in diffusion mechanism across the
series of rare earth tri-indides, as was discovered experimentally, and laying
the groundwork for future experiments through PAC measurements of Cd-111m jump
rates in Pd3Ga7.