* 1508666
* Collaborative Research: Computational Methods for Stability Assessment of Power Systems with High Penetration of Clean Renewal Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Konstantin Turitsyn, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 170,000.00

Collaborative Research: Computational Methods for Stability Assessment of Power
Systems with high penetration of clean renewable energy

The electrical power grid is currently undergoing the architectural revolution
with the increasing penetration of renewable and distributed energy sources and
the presence of millions of active endpoints. Introduction of these novel
components affects the stability of the system, i.e. its ability to return to
normal operating conditions after disturbances. Lack of stability may compromise
the reliable power supply and result in cascading blackouts in the most dramatic
scenarios. The key intellectual merit of the project will be demonstrated
through the development of a theoretical foundation for the problem of stability
assessment of future power grids with high levels of renewable energy
penetration. Interdisciplinary team of researchers from 3 US institutions will
bring in cutting edge innovations from a number of fields like power systems
dynamics and control, numerical algebraic geometry, and nonlinear systems in
order to develop the computational tools to analyze the highly nonlinear dynamic
behaviors and to certify stability/feasibility of operating points in the next
generation power grids. From broader impact perspective the project addresses
some of the most difficult and important challenges of modern society. The
technology transfer of the results to public and private companies will provide
direct benefit to the society by providing new open source tools for better
economic decision making, protection of national security and informing of
public policy. Other broader impacts include but are not limited to: 1) raising
awareness of the stability related problems among applied mathematics and
controls community, 2) Organization of a joint seminar between the applied
mathematics and electrical engineering departments at University of Notre Dame,
3) Organization of special sessions and workshops on power system modeling and
control in upcoming conferences, namely American Control Conference 2016 in
Boston 4) engagement of underrepresented groups in research and education
activities and development of custom tailored summer research projects for
interested students. 5) Development of new graduate level specialized classes on
advanced topics in smart grids.

In heavily stressed operating conditions, the nonlinear interactions play a
critical role in power system dynamics and its response to disturbances.
Introduction of renewable generation will affect both the structure of operating
points and their stability properties. Implicit assumptions in traditional
stability analysis techniques developed for conventional hierarchical nature of
power grid structure may be violated and the techniques may not be applicable to
future power grids. The goal of this project is to develop a new generation of
computationally tractable but engineering wise accurate approaches to help the
operators to assess the stability of operating points in renewable-integrated
power systems. More specifically, the project will develop new techniques for
constructing Lyapunov functions-based stability certificates for large-scale
power systems, and novel ways of representing the complicated switch-type
nonlinearities in polynomial form. New generation of efficient and robust
homotopy algorithms will be developed and applied to practical problems in power
systems. PI Chakrabortty and his group will be responsible for the development
and validation of tractable but at the same time accurate dynamic models of
power systems with renewable generations. The group of Turitsyn and Vu will be
studying and exploring new approaches to construction of stability certificates
for large scale dynamic model of power systems, and will be analyzing the
nonlinear sensitivities of operating point with respect to generation levels of
renewable generators and other uncertain parameters. PI Mehta will be leading
the effort on the advancement of recently developed Numerical Polynomial
Homotopy Continuation algorithms that will be used for the analysis of operating
conditions of nonlinear systems developed in the first two thrusts.