* 1508494
* Probing and manipulating strained interfaces with oxide superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Judy Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 618,819.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Superconductors are capable of carrying electric
current without loss, one of the most exotic physical phenomena in nature. This
capability is described quantitatively by critical current density Jc,
superconductivity. Enhanced Jc will provide powerful new opportunities for
restoring the reliability of the power grid and increasing both its capacity and
efficiency, regarded as an engineering grand challenge. As energy demands
increase and our existing grid ages, the USA will face a crisis situation to
provide abundant, reliable clean energy power to meet the nation's future
productivity, economic growth and quality of life. The discovery of oxide high
temperature superconductors (HTSs) made superconductor applications possible at
liquid nitrogen temperature, but also presented a fascinating research topic due
to their unusual physical properties, resulting in profound effects on Jc.
Raising Jc in HTSs has been the focus of world-wide efforts in the field of
applied superconductivity during the past two decades. In particular, a long-
standing question is whether the theoretically predicted maximum Jc (so-called
depairing limit) can be reached in practical HTS conductors through precise
control of material microstructures with nanoscale precision. Recent advances in
nanoscience have provided fresh opportunities in engineering the microstructures
of HTS materials. The approach undertaken in this project of designing physical
properties via controlling the electric current at the nanoscale represents a
leap forward from the traditionally empirical method in which the HTS materials
have been developed without a precise guidance of fundamental physics. Such a
research also provides the forefront of education for the next generation in the
fields of nanoscience and material science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: Controlling microstructure with nanoscale precision is the key to
achieving materials with extraordinary functionality and has been a major
challenge in material research of HTS and other technologically interesting
materials due to lack of understanding of fundamental physics and approaches for
engineering atomic arrangement at such a scale. An integrated modeling-
synthesis-characterization approach is being used to address such a challenge to
understand, predict and manipulate the strained interfaces in functional
nanocomposites of artificial pinning centers (APCs) embedded in HTS films of
YBa2Cu3O7-d (YBCO). The goal is to achieve controllable self-assembly of APCs
with precisely designed morphology, orientation, density and controlled APC/HTS
interfaces to function optimally based on the basic physics design rules. Four
integrated themes are proposed; all are focused on understanding and
manipulating interface strains towards controllable growth of APC/YBCO
nanocomposites for high Jc. Theme 1 focuses on the study of this configuration's
phase diagram with a linear arrangement of APCs through understanding the
microscopic controlling mechanisms at different dopant concentrations and YBCO
matrix strains. The role of strain on the relevant interfaces will be
quantified. Theme 2 investigates the effect of strained interfaces of linear
APCs in a YBCO matrix on the Jc of the APC/HTS nanocomposites and explores ways
to reduce or eliminate the detrimental effect of the oxygen disorder at such a
strained interface on superconductivity of the nanocomposites films. Theme 3
focuses on a search for linear APCs with smaller diameters that approach the
superconducting coherence length as well as higher density, correlated linear
APCs for higher Jc at very high magnetic fields. Theme 4 investigates the
kinetics of the spontaneous self-assembly of nanostructures.