* 1508692
* An Electrical Transport Spectroscopy (ETS) Approach for in situ Probing Electrochemical Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Yu Huang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Yu Huang of the University of California Los
Angeles is establishing an electrical transport spectroscopy (ETS) measurement
approach for in situ probing electrochemical surface of metallic nanomaterials
during electrocatalytic reactions. Their study can offer new fundamental
insights on the correlation between the structural/compositional/chemical
characteristics of diverse electrocatalysts with their electrocatalytic
performance, leading to the development of a new generation of highly efficient
and stable electrocatalysts for diverse energy technologies and improved energy
efficiency, including fuel cells, batteries, and other important electrochemical
and photochemical processes. The research program will actively recruit female
students and students from underrepresented groups to participate in the
proposed research. Through existing school programs, Professor Huang will
continue to design science projects and offer research opportunities for local
and national high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a specially
designed device structure based on metallic nanowires and electronic measurement
configuration, Professor Huang's group will conduct in situ electrical transport
measurement of the metallic nanowires, simultaneously with in-device cyclic
voltammetry. This method exploits the surface-adsorption induced diffusive
scattering to produce an electronic signaling pathway for in situ monitoring of
the electrochemical interfaces between the metallic nanostructures and
electrolyte under different electrochemical conditions. After initial validation
on the ultra-fine platinum nanowires (PtNWs) model system they will conduct
systematic investigations of a wide range of nano-electrocatalysts for
fundamentally and/or practically important electrochemical processes.