* 1508897
* Quantum Plasmonics for Low-Photon-Number Nonlinear Optics and Quantum Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Edo Waks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 360,273.00

Title: Quantum Plasmonics for Low-Photon-Number Nonlinear Optics and Quantum
Circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic nanostructures can confine light to
nanometer length scales in the form of surface-plasmon polaritons, which are
electromagnetic waves that propagate at the interface between metallic and
dielectric surfaces. Surface plasmons can miniaturize optical devices to the
nanoscale, and also generate extremely high electromagnetic intensities that
create strong light-matter interactions. These properties open up the
possibility for ultra-compact active optical devices such as optical switches,
modulators, and wavelength converters, that operate at very high speeds and low
energies. To achieve these capabilities, however, requires plasmonic
nanostructures with a strong nonlinear optical response.&lt;br/&gt;Recent
theoretical work has shown that when surface plasmons interact with single
quantum emitters the two systems can hybridize to form new coupled modes of
light and matter. In this hybridized regime, a single plasmon can produce a
nonlinear optical response, paving the way for nonlinear plasmonic circuits
operating at the fundamental quantum energy limit. To date, however, this
hybridized regime remains elusive because quantum emitters typically suffer from
large dephasing due to phonons and spectral wandering. &lt;br/&gt;In this
program, we will investigate the interaction between metallic nanostructures and
indium arsenide quantum dots to study the hybridized regime and develop ultra-
fast nonlinear and quantum devices. Indium arsenide quantum dots exhibit a
spectrally pure emission making them ideal for achieving hybridization. We will
use these high quality quantum emitters to demonstrate hybridization, and
explore its nonlinear and quantum optical properties. This program could
ultimately pave the way towards nanoscale photonic devices with ultra-low energy
dissipation, as well as compact quantum circuits that provide exponential
computational speedup and unconditionally secure communication. The program will
also support an outreach effort that provides research opportunities for
undergraduate and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonic nanostructures can strongly enhance light-matter
interactions by confining light to the nanoscale in the form of surface plasmon
polaritons (or simply plasmons). Recently, it has been theoretically predicted
that when a quantum emitter is placed in the high field region of a plasmonic
nanostructure the two systems can hybridize. In this hybridized regime, the
emitter and plasmon form new coupled modes that take on both atomic and photonic
properties. These hybridized modes exhibit strong optical nonlinearities near
the single photon level, making them a highly compelling system for developing
opto-electronic and quantum devices with ultra-low power dissipation.
&lt;br/&gt;Hybridization between single quantum emitters and plasmons has yet to
be demonstrated because quantum emitters usually exhibit rapid dipole dephasing
due to phonon scattering and spectral wandering. This dephasing destroys the
quantum interference that creates the hybridized mode. We propose to overcome
this problem using indium arsenide (InAs) quantum dots that exhibit a narrow and
nearly transform limited optical emission, making them promising systems for
attaining the hybridized regime. &lt;br/&gt;A key challenge to coupling these
InAs quantum dots to metal nanostructures is that they are embedded in a gallium
arsenide matrix and cannot be easily deposited onto plasmonic devices. We will
address this challenge through a combination of device design and state-of-the-
art nanofabrication techniques. We will characterize the linear and nonlinear
properties of fabricated devices. We will then utilize the hybridized regime to
demonstrate a nanophotonic optical transistor where a single absorbed control
photon can switch many signal photons. We will also utilize the hybridized
regime to create an interface between a single trapped spin in a quantum dot and
a surface plasmon, which could serve as a fundamental building block for
nanoscale quantum circuits. This program could ultimately pave the way towards
nanoscale nonlinear photonic devices with ultra-low energy dissipation, and
compact quantum circuits that provide exponential computational speedup and
unconditionally secure communication.