* 1508464
* Production and deployment of environment-controlled enclosures for the Network of Robotic Echelle Spectrographs
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Timothy Brown, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 11/30/2017
* USD 285,057.00

A large number of planets around other stars ("exoplanets") are being discovered
or will be discovered by space missions like Kepler and TESS. There is a
shortage of ground-based instruments that can follow up on these discoveries and
measure the properties of the exoplanets themselves. This significant bottleneck
is being addressed by the construction of the Las Cumbres Observatory Global
Telescope (LCOGT), a worldwide network of primarily 1-meter telescopes. The
LCOGT project is active in education, operating an extensive program of student
observing on their telescopes. Numerous students from high-school to university
seniors are employed as interns. Designs developed for LCOGT are open-source,
and science data are made available to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will fund the construction of 6 identical environment-controlled
enclosures for the LCOGT Network of Robotic Echelle Spectrographs (NRES), which
is currently under construction with NSF funding. These thermal enclosures will
ensure that the NRES reaches its original design requirement for radial velocity
stability. Timely completion of NRES will enable follow-up observations of
planetary system candidates as well as a wide range of science requiring high-
resolution spectroscopy of relatively bright targets. Each spectrograph is
coupled to two independently-targetable 1-meter robotic telescopes that function
as a single, global instrument with flexible scheduling capabilities.