* 1508898
* Atomic-Scale Modeling of Defect-Mediated Device Degradation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Sokrates Pantelides, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2018
* USD 380,000.00

Most electronic devices are made using silicon, but silicon is not suitable for
high-temperature and high-power applications that are needed for many
applications in the military (e.g., all electric ships), the electrical
distribution grid, etc. Other semiconductors, notably gallium nitride (GaN) and
silicon carbide (SiC) are more suitable, but devices fabricated using materials
degrade under operating conditions. Atomic-scale defects such as impurities or
missing atoms are responsible. Such defects are often rendered benign by
hydrogen atoms that are bound to the defects. Under operating conditions, "hot
electrons" can kick the hydrogens off these defects. Much progress has been
achieved in identifying the pertinent defects, but device-design engineers need
modeling software that can predict the lifetime of devices. The Principal
Investigators have extensive experience in the device reliability and
degradation area. Pantelides and Zhang recently developed a theory for the
calculation of the rates of defect activation by hot electrons, while Pantelides
and Schrimpf have been working on the identification of defects through
electrical measurements and quantum mechanical calculations, developing simple
engineering-level models. The objective of this proposal is to fully implement
the newly-developed theory for the rates of hot-electron defect activation, to
perform pertinent calculations, and combine them with available and new
electrical data on real devices in order to develop more sophisticated
engineering-level models for hot-electron degradation of power devices. The
proposed research is also relevant to the degradation of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) and solar cells. Engineering-level models will be made available to the
engineering community and software developers. Students and post-docs will be
trained on the bridge area between physics and electrical engineering. An annual
workshop for high-school teachers will make them aware of the new developments
and their significance. We will also participate in the NSF-funded Tennessee
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TLSAMP) by funding one
minority undergraduate every summer to participate in our research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-electron-mobility transistors (HEMTs) based
on wide-gap materials such as GaN hold great promise for high-power, high-
temperature applications, but their use is currently limited by reliability
issues. Device-reliability modeling is currently done by phenomenological models
that rely primarily on correlations between device failure and device
parameters. Modeling based on physical phenomena re-quires knowledge of the
underlying physical processes. In recent work by the lead-PI and collaborators,
parameter-free quantum-mechanical calculations were combined with electrical
stress data to demonstrate that hot-electron degradation of III-V high electron
mobility transistors (HEMTs) is caused by either the release of H from specific
defects or by a reconfiguration of specific impurities. A simple engineering-
level model was developed to fit stress data and predict long-term degradation
under operating conditions. The model relies on sophisticated Monte-Carlo
solutions of the Boltzmann equation in the real device to get electron densities
in space and energy, but uses a crude step function for the capture cross
section for hydrogen release. The Principal Investigators have had extensive
experience in these areas. Pantelides and Zhang recently developed a theory for
the calculation of inelastic scattering cross sections of hot electrons by
defects, while Pantelides and Schrimpf have worked on the identification of
defects through electrical measurements and quantum mechanical calculations,
developing simple engineering-level models. The objective of this proposal is to
fully implement the newly-developed theory of cross sections and perform
pertinent calculations that can be used to model available and new experimental
data on device degradation. The objective will be to develop accurate,
validated, engineering-level models to describe and predict short term and long-
term hot-electron-induced device degradation. The results will also be useful
for understanding and modeling the role of defects in the performance and
degradation of solar cells and light-emitting diodes.