* 1508006
* Design of self-assembling bio-inks for cell-based 3D printing
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Sarah Heilshorn, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3D printing is a fast-growing field that
aims to create intricate three-dimensional structures of very precise
specifications for a broad range of applications. Currently, 3D printing of
plastic is a relatively common process and is often available in public
libraries or service centers for a nominal fee. 3D printing has tremendous
potential for applications in biology and medicine. For example, with a 3D
printer, one could create structures of multiple cell types placed together with
a precise geometry in a single Petri dish to replicate the types of cell
interactions that are present in human organs. These engineered tissues could be
used outside of the body to predict how different types of drugs may interact
with humans or could be used inside the body to replace damaged tissues.
However, the use of this technique to print cell-containing materials remains a
difficult challenge. This is in part due to the unavailability of bio-inks that
are both cell-compatible and have the physical and chemical properties required
to be printable. Here, the PIs plan to develop a family of bio-inks with the
properties required for printing as well as the ability to protect cells and
maintain their viability during and after the printing process. This project has
the potential to develop a novel, sophisticated family of bio-ink materials that
may have great therapeutic impact. Additionally, women and under-represented
minority (URM) graduate and undergraduate students will be introduced to a
variety of scientific careers as well as the skills that may be required for
these careers. This award will also facilitate the establishment of a 3D bio-
printing facility at Stanford University, which will introduce students at the
undergraduate and graduate level to novel processes in the field of engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While 3D
printing of thermoplastics is now routine, the rapid prototyping of cell-laden,
polymeric constructs for biotechnology and medical applications is still
restricted to specialized research laboratories. A key limitation preventing the
widespread use of cell-based 3D printing is the lack of suitable bio-inks that
are cell-compatible and have the required physico-chemical properties for
printing. Here, the PIs plan (1) the design of a novel family of biomaterials
with tunable biochemical and mechanical properties with the appropriate physico-
chemical properties for use as cell-laden bio-inks, (2) the exploration of a
two-stage crosslinking strategy to provide mechanical shielding during flow and
to improve the resolution of printed structures, and (3) the spatial patterning
of multiple biochemical and mechanical cues within an open-channel construct to
guide cell behavior. During the course of this project, women and under-
represented minority (URM) graduate and undergraduate students will be
introduced to a variety of STEM careers as well as the skills that they may
require through visits to local high schools, preparation of a 3D printing
module for high school science teachers, and a summer intern research
experience. Additionally, through the establishment of a 3D bio-printing
facility at Stanford University, students at the undergraduate and graduate
levels will be trained in the process of 3D bio-printing and the design and
production of novel materials, preparing them for entry into engineering career
paths in the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;