* 1508417
* Dynamic Atomic-scale Metal Oxidation to Correlate with Multi-scale Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Judith Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important properties for
materials exposed to air or water is their environmental stability. As the
dimensions of materials systems approach the nanoscale, it is critical to
understand on a fundamental level how they interact with their environment at
these length scales. Surprisingly, the initial stages are the least well-
understood regime of oxidation. Classic models of oxidation assume uniform film
growth. This is because classic oxidation analysis relied mostly on
thermogravimetric techniques, which measure the weight change of the material
during oxidation, and, hence, do not provide information on the materials'
structure. Yet, structural changes are well-known to occur during metal
oxidation. The potential impact of the proposed research project is the
development of a fundamental understanding of nanoscale oxidation processes.
This research team expands the experimental understanding of nanoscale oxidation
using in situ and ex situ environmental transmission electron microscope to
directly compare with a current theoretical effort on the atomistic simulation
of oxidation of copper. The results from the in situ and ex situ experiments
accelerates the development of computational tools needed to enhance the
emergent field of predictive materials design for a critical reaction,
oxidation. Oxidation is of world-wide importance, not only for corrosion but
also as a bottom up approach to nano-oxide processing. Furthermore, a critical
aspect of this project is the education and training of students and post-doc.
The combined partnership between complementary experimental and theoretical
tools, especially in situ, enriches the education of all participants involved
in this project and the development of future leaders who are better equipped to
bring to success the emergent field of predictive science and engineering.
Results from this research are also incorporated into graduate courses and high
school community outreach projects, such as Pennsylvania Junior Academy of
Science workshop that has been held annually in Pittsburgh since
2007.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Much is known
about oxygen interaction with metal surfaces and about the macroscopic growth of
thermodynamically stable oxides. At present, however, the nanoscale stages of
oxidation - from nucleation of the metal oxide to formation of the
thermodynamically stable oxide - represent a scientifically challenging and
technologically important terra incognito. As engineered materials approach the
nanometer regime, control of their environmental stability at this scale becomes
crucial. As environmental stability is an essential property of most engineered
materials, many oxidation theories exist to explain its mechanisms. However,
most classical oxidation theories assume a uniform growing film, where
structural changes are not considered due to the lack of traditional
experimental procedure to visualize this non-uniform growth under conditions
that allow highly controlled surfaces and impurities. Yet, recent studies by
this research team reveal that the Cu oxide islands form during the early stages
of Cu oxidation, and thereby challenge the common assumption of a uniform oxide
formation. This research team correlates experimental results with theoretical
predictions where the impact could be a paradigm shift in the fundamental
understanding of oxidation where surfaces and defects control the early stages
of oxidation. Specifically, this research team integrates experimental in situ
and ex situ transmission electron microscopy and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy with theoretical simulations in order to gain critical insights
into the nucleation behavior, morphological evolution of oxide islands during
oxidation and coalescence, and quantitative fundamental physical parameters such
as diffusion barriers. Although the focus is on oxygen-metal reactions, the
methodologies developed are applicable to any epitaxial system and gas-surface
reaction. The understanding obtained from combining the unique experimental
results and directly correlated theoretical models leads to smarter design
paradigms for nano- and mesoscale materials, devices, and processes that utilize
surface gas-metal reaction. This is essential to many technical areas, such as
high temperature corrosion, electrochemistry, gate oxides and thin film
formation, catalysis used for environmental protection, energy generation and
storage, and fuel cell reactions.