* 1508856
* Electrically Pumped complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)-compatible two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide materials nanolasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Linyou Cao, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2018
* USD 332,714.00

Abstract Title: Electrically Pumped complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor
(CMOS)-compatible two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide materials
nanolasers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This project addresses the
biggest challenge for the development of chip-scale optical interconnects. Chip-
scale optical interconnects, which relies on optics process instead of
electrical wires for intra-chip communication, is believed able to overcome all
the problems of the existing electrical interconnects and substantially improve
the speed of computers. The broad impact of this project to society is obvious
given the importance of computers at every aspect of human society. The research
component of this project is integrated into multifaceted educational and
outreach activities that aim to inspire students (high school, undergraduate,
and graduate), underrepresented minorities in particular, to pursue careers in
the science technology engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines and aim to
enhance the secondary school and university curricula in materials science. In
addition to providing research training for students at both undergraduate and
graduate levels, the education plan includes mentoring high school students to
participate in pre-college scientific competitions and guest lectures in high
schools AP chemistry classes. The proposed research may also provide students
with unique opportunities to develop solid expertise that will be valuable for
their careers in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This
project is to develop electrically pumped nano-lasers with centimeter-scale two-
dimensional (2D) MoSe2 monolayers grown on silicon-based substrates. The 2D
materials provide opportunity to break away from the requirement of lattice
matching to enable high-quality integration of luminescence materials with
silicon for lasing. It can be integrated to substrates with arbitrary lattice
mismatch without compromising crystalline quality because the materials may only
interact with substrates by weak van der Waals forces, which can substantially
relax the requirement of lattice matching. We will develop techniques that can
be used to grow centimeter-scale, high-quality, and uniform MoSe2 monolayers on
silicon substrates and will pursue fundamental understanding for the
photophysics and lasing dynamics of the synthesized monolayers. By leveraging on
the fundamental understanding, we will design a prototype electrically pumped
CMOS-compatible 2D MoSe2 lasers with nanoscale footprints.