* 1508127
* I-Corps:  The Commercialization Potential of Pyrazolate Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs)
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Metal-organic frameworks (MOF) are a class of materials built of inorganic
clusters and rigid organic linkers to form open, three-dimensional frameworks
that possess unique pore geometries and functionalities for novel material
engineering. The use of MOFs provides safe alternatives for electrolytes,
mitigate electrolyte degradation, and enable the use of high-energy electrode
materials, such as sulfur, metal fluorides, and lithium that are traditionally
limited by reaction with liquid electrolytes. They also enable the separation of
alkane isomers by shape, which can be applied to gasoline upgrading, and enhance
the margins of oil refineries by enabling them to either sell high octane
gasoline for a premium or mix it into cheaper gasoline to reduce production
costs. This I-Corps team has developed a class of conductive Metal-Organic
Frameworks (MOFs), three-dimensional structures built of inorganic clusters and
rigid organic linkers that display high ionic conductivities and electron
mobility, as well as extraordinary selectivity for separation of alkane isomers.
These properties make them suitable for applications in batteries and gasoline
upgrading.

Compared to traditional porous materials such as zeolites and activated carbons,
MOFs have the wide diversity of pore structures and chemical properties that can
be obtained by the judicious selection of metal ions and ligands. They can be
further tailored by post-synthetic treatments to maximize conductivity or
selectivity for separations. Upon chemical reduction, the electron mobility of
the conductive MOFs becomes comparable to amorphous silicon and organic
conductive polymers. By altering the ligand to access ligand-based redox
couples, the capacity of MOFs could be drastically increased to values greater
than materials used in lithium ion batteries. Thus, chemical modification can be
used to enhance the conductivities of MOFs so that they can be applied to
specific battery applications. At the same time, in contrast with the obtuse
pore angles of zeolites, Fe2(BDP)3, a pyrazolate MOF has acutely angled pores.
This enables the selection of molecules based on their shape, which provide
varied adsorption enthalpies for linear, di and mono-branched alkane isomers for
separation. As a result, separations currently carried out inefficiently, such
as separating di-branched hexane isomers from mono-branched and linear isomers,
could be performed with a substantially increased efficiency.