* 1508082
* I-Corps:  Drone-Carried WiFi Communication Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Shengli Fu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

The drone-carried WiFi communication system aims to provide WiFi infrastructure
where commercial infrastructures such as AT&amp;T and Verizon are destroyed or
not available. Examples of such situations include earthquakes, rural areas and
battlefields. The drone-carried WiFi communication system can provide fast-
deployable and highly-flexible long-distance WiFi link for real-time text,
phone, and video transmission. Potential customers include emergency response
agencies such as FEMA and fire departments. With the drone-carried WiFi system,
people in the emergency zone will be able to connect to outside world for
information exchange through email, twitter, facebook, etc. The rescue team can
also utilize the WiFi networks for task coordination and information sharing.
Comparing to other existing solutions such as telecommunication trucks, the
drone-carried WiFi systems can be dispatched to the destination faster, more
flexibly, and with lower cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has
completed the drone-carried WiFi alpha-prototype and successfully tested the
WiFi signal transmission in the air. The key technology to enable long-range
WiFi transmission is to use directional instead of omnidirectional antennae by
focusing all the energy in one direction. While directional antennae increase
the transmission range, they require the transmitter to always face the
receiver. To achieve this, the team has developed a heading control to
automatically align the headings of the two antennae, despite the high mobility
of drones. In this project, the team aims to transfer the demonstrable drone-
carried on-demand information infrastructure to the market place. The success of
this project will lead to a new start-up on the design, development and
commercialization of communication infrastructures for drone networks.