* 1508504
* EAGER: The Involvement of Blue Light in Plant Immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* James Alfano, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2019
* USD 264,899.00

Plants are dependent on light for their survival and can perceive different
colors of light with various sensors. Phototropins are blue light sensors that
trigger a variety of plant responses that poise the plant for efficient
photosynthesis. At daybreak plants are particularly susceptible to microbial
pathogens so it would be logical for plants to evolve the use of light sensors
to cue the immune system of the potential threat of a new day. The investigators
have compelling data that suggest phototropins are components of the plant
immune system. These data concern a protein from a plant pathogenic bacterium
which the pathogen injects into plant cells to facilitate infection. The data
suggest that the injected protein blocks phototropin function and thereby
inhibits immune responses and promotes infection. This project will determine
the extent to which phototropins contribute to plant immunity. The investigators
will determine the molecular consequence of the interaction of phototropins with
the injected bacterial protein and will determine whether blue light, through
its influence on phototropins, has an effect on plant immunity. The
investigators will determine where phototropins localize in the plant cell after
plants are treated with pathogens or inducers of plant immunity. The experiments
of this project will offer broad and comprehensive training for students and
postdoctoral associates. The PI is involved in educational programs that will
provide high school students and undergraduates research and training
experiences in plant pathology and plant immunity at the University of Nebraska.
The findings of this project may lead to the development of crops with improved
tolerance to biotic stress.

Phototropins are blue light receptor kinases that trigger a variety of plant
responses that poise the plant for efficient photosynthesis which is critical
for the success of the plant. In Arabidopsis there are two phototropins,
phototropin 1 (Phot1) and phototropin 2 (Phot2). These receptors control several
responses that ensure that plants are poised to carry-out photosynthesis. The
investigators have compelling preliminary data that suggest that phototropins
also act as components of plant immunity. They will determine the extent that
phototropins affect the plant immune system. The specific objectives of the
project are: (1) Determine the molecular consequence of the interaction of
phot1/2 with the Pseudomonas syringae effector HopK1; (2) Determine the extent
that blue light affects plant immunity; (3) Investigate dynamic cellular
localization of phototropins after biotic stress.