* 1508950
* UNS:Role of Cell-Mediated ECM Remodeling in Pluripotent Stem Cell Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Sean Palecek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

1508950&lt;br/&gt;Palecek, Sean P. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant roadblock
impeding realization of the promise of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) is
the inability to efficiently biomanufacture normal cells from hPSCs, in a large
part resulting from an incomplete understanding of how hPSCs decide how to
differentiate to more specialized cell types. These cell fate decisions are
influenced by chemical and mechanical signals present in the cell environment.
This project will investigate how cell remodeling of their extracellular matrix
(ECM) environment affects differentiation to various testbed lineages including
heart cells, blood vessel cells, brain cells, and skin cells. This deeper
understanding of mechanisms of stem cell differentiation will then inform design
of more efficient, defined protocols for guiding stem cells to cells in desired
lineages. Thus, the project outcomes will have direct implications on producing
stem cell-derived cells and tissues at lab scale or in biomanufacturing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that
extracellular matrix remodeling by hPSCs during differentiation is a key
regulator of stem cell differentiation fate. The project will identify novel
autocrine/paracrine mechanisms of regulation of hPSC fate via ECM remodeling,
and demonstrate the importance of designing materials and scaffolds that enhance
or inhibit ECM remodeling during hPSC differentiation. To test this hypothesis,
proteomic analysis will be used to identify ECM components produced during hPSC
directed differentiation to cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, neurons, and
keratinocytes. These experiments will identify candidate cell-synthesized ECM
proteins that regulate specific hPSC differentiation fates. To test the
prediction that ECM synthesis is necessary for efficient directed
differentiation, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated ECM gene knockout experiments will be
employed to assess how inhibiting matrix production affects hPSC differentiation
to cardiomyocytes, vascular endothelial cells, neurons, and keratinocytes.
Finally, to test the hypothesis that matrix remodeling via proteolytic
degradation of ECM affects hPSC differentiation efficiency, matrix
metalloprotease expression and activity will be monitored during directed
differentiation, then chemical inhibitors and genetic knockouts will be used to
quantify the contributions of these proteases during directed differentiation.
Education and outreach activities described in this proposal will also train
stem cell engineers at the graduate and undergraduate levels, and will provide
outreach to K-12 students, K-12 teachers, undergraduate students, and the
general public on technical, ethical, and political aspects of stem cell science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program of CBET is co-funded by the Biomaterials Program
of the Division of Materials Research.