* 1508907
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Integrated Antenna System Design for High Clutter and High Bandwidth Channels Using Advanced Propagation Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jeff Frolik, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 241,600.00

The Internet of Things (IoT), also referred to as the Industrial Internet, is
projected to be modern society's third great revolution following the Industrial
Revolution and the Communications Revolution. A great proportion of the
communications performed in the IoT will be between devices, in so-called
machine-to-machine (M2M) systems, and in an increasingly automated manner. The
environments in which IoT devices will operate will often be more complex,
cluttered and challenging for wireless communications than either today's
ubiquitous mobile communications or wireless data networks. This research
addresses a critical component of the IoT wireless communications link, namely
the antenna systems for these small, inexpensive devices. New antenna designs
are needed, along with new methods for low-cost digital manufacturing and for
testing the devices under realistic operating conditions. The research findings
of this project have potential to positively impact the robustness of not only
M2M systems but also systems utilized in dynamic environments such vehicle-to-
vehicle, first-responder and military field operations. Furthermore, the
underlying knowledge could influence the future designs of medical devices, on-
body sensor systems, robotic systems, un-manned ground and air vehicles and
similar applications where customization, form factor, production volume or
other considerations make direct digital manufacturing (DDM) an attractive
option. Graduate students from the University of Vermont and the University of
South Florida will collaborate with the industry participants from Harris
Corporation. The investigators will also work closely with STEM programs
targeting high school students, in particular those students from
underrepresented and disadvantaged populations, to develop activities that
provide insights on the foundations that make wireless communications possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will lead to techniques and
technology that enable wireless devices for Internet of Things (IoT)
applications operating at 2.45, 5 and 60 GHz to determine and adapt to the
channel impairments using new antenna system designs. Advanced manufacturing and
integration approaches will be studied with the goal of reducing the size and
cost of these devices and systems. The intellectual merit lies in the fusion of
ideas from propagation modeling, antenna design and direct digital manufacturing
(DDM). Previous work by the investigators, who have a long and productive
history of collaboration, has contributed new understanding of channel
conditions for highly cluttered environments, 3D antenna designs, and the use of
DDM for microwave circuit and antenna fabrication. The work will leverage this
expertise in the investigation of new channel models and the resulting theory
that will inform the study of next generation, adaptive antenna systems. A new
approach to quantifying antenna system performance based on collecting and
analyzing antenna responses to a wide range of channel conditions is the basis
for the proposed propagation studies. The orientation, spacing and
reconfiguration of antenna elements in a multi-polarization system will be
studied using a statistical characterization method. Advanced DDM processes will
be investigated using a unique 3D printer that combines plastic extrusion, paste
micro-dispensing and laser processing in a single tool. The new processes will
provide the ability to realize 3D structural electronics that comprise package-
integrated antenna systems that include ferroelectric tuning networks. The
realization of electronically-tunable DDM devices requires a new process to
merge a technology with length scales on the order of 10's of microns (DDM) with
one having length scales on the order of microns (integrated circuits). The
eventual goal of demonstrating, in collaboration with GOALI partner Harris
Corp., high performance mm-wave (60 GHz) antenna systems of this nature
necessitates tight control over feature sizes and the quality and surface
features of printed conductors; the use of pulsed laser processing will be
studied as a means to address these challenges.