* 1508433
* New phenomena at the interface between 2D materials and liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Sokrates Pantelides, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 04/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

NONTECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the interface between
two very different systems: two-dimensional materials (2DMs, e.g.: graphene,
single monolayer of carbon; phosphorene, a single layer phosphorus; monolayer
molybdenum disulfide) and liquids (e.g.: water, biofluids, ethanol). The project
pursues two main scientific goals. First, interactions between electrons in 2DMs
are modified and studied by controllably changing the chemical composition,
dielectric constant and flow velocity of liquids in contact with 2DMs. This line
of investigation is expected to reveal the approaches to suppress electron
scattering in 2DMs. Better understanding of carrier scattering, in turn, should
advance potential applications of these materials in future electronic devices.
The second thrust of the project employs 2DMs as ultrasensitive probes of
chemical composition, flow velocity, and nanoscale structure of liquids. Better
understanding of these parameters can pave the way towards more efficient water
filters and biosensors capable of recording electrical activity of individual
neurons. The project includes a significant educational component. The PIs
continue their participation in the Bridge program, one of the most successful
efforts in the nation to involve underrepresented minorities in cutting-edge
research leading to the PhD degree. The PIs continue to involve undergraduates
and high school students in their research through their participation in
Vanderbilt's Research Experience for Undergraduates and Vanderbilt's Summer
Science Academy programs. Finally, the multidisciplinary nature of the project
spanning the fields from condensed matter and computational physics to
chemistry, biology, and imaging helps preparing PhD students for successful
careers in science and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the interface between two-
dimensional materials (2DMs, e.g. graphene, MoS2, phosphorene) and liquids (e.g.
water, hexane) to (i) study and engineer the effects of the microenvironments of
2DMs on their properties, and (ii) understand the behavior of nanometer-thick
interfacial liquid layers. To tackle these problems, the PIs developed a
flexible setup that allows placing electrically contacted suspended 2DMs into
liquids with controlled chemical composition, electrical potential, ionic
concentration, and flow velocity. The 2DMs are interrogated via electrical
transport, Hall effect, and optical measurements and studied through state-of-
art electron microscopies and computational modeling. In the first part of the
project, the setup is used to controllably "tune" multiple parameters in the
Hamiltonians of 2DMs. The effective strength of interactions between electrons
in 2DMs is tuned by controlling the dielectric constant of liquids surrounding
the devices. Hitherto unattainable carrier densities up to &gt;1015 cm-2 are
achieved by applying an electric potential between ionic liquids and 2DMs
suspended in them. Defects are induced in 2DMs by applying large electric
potentials between devices and the liquid. These approaches are expected to
reveal multiple exotic phenomena in 2DMs including gate-controlled
superconductivity and excitonic collapse. In the second part of the project, the
2DMs are used as ultrasensitive sensors to study properties of a nanometer-thick
interfacial layer of liquid in contact with a solid. By measuring the current
induced by the Coulomb drag between ions in the flowing liquid and electrons in
graphene, the "slip" velocity of the interfacial layer is determined. By
measuring the 2DM/liquid capacitance, the dielectric constant of the interfacial
liquid layer is probed.