* 1508070
* RUI: Functionalized bis(morindone-C,O-glycosides) for the molecular recognition of DNA in the major groove
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Thomas Minehan, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 08/31/2020
* USD 286,748.00

Investigators in the field of molecular recognition study the non-covalent
interactions between two (or more) molecules with the aim of understanding the
driving forces behind these associations. With this information in hand, it is
possible to develop a set of rules for the design of molecules (ligands) capable
of specific binding interactions with other target molecules (receptors). DNA
has long been viewed as an important macromolecular target for the binding of
small molecule ligands, and indeed there are numerous examples of natural and
designed molecules that associate with the minor groove of DNA. However, no
general paradigm currently exists for the design of major groove-binding small
molecules. Since most of the DNA-binding proteins that regulate cellular
processes associate with the major groove of DNA, a great need exists for the
development of major groove ligands that may directly influence DNA binding-
initiated cellular events. Using the tools of fluorescence spectroscopy and
isothermal titration calorimetry, this study helps uncover a set of design
principles for crafting such ligands from simple carbohydrate and aromatic
starting materials. The project also provides hands-on training in organic
synthesis, molecular spectroscopy and microcalorimetry for undergraduate and
graduate students, including those from groups traditionally underrepresented in
science. Furthermore, it is anticipated that the project may lead to new
procedures and protocols that can be adapted for use in the undergraduate
chemistry laboratory curriculum at Northridge, which is expected to increase
student interest in interface sciences such as chemical biology, bioorganic
chemistry and medicinal chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bicyclic aryl
C,O-glycosides are naturally occurring molecular wedges that may be used as
rigid intercalating scaffolds to position functional groups in proximity to the
discriminatory edges of the A/T and G/C base pairs in the major groove of DNA.
The unique architecture of this ligand allows an examination of the utility of
base-complementary functional groups at C.2 and C.4 of the carbohydrate unit for
sequence specific DNA binding. The research project involves: (1) the synthesis
of a series of bis(morindone-C,O-glycosides) containing patterns of carbonate,
carbamate, guanidine and carbamimidate recognition elements complementary to the
4 base-pair sequences 5'-CGCG-3', 5'-CATG-3', 5'-CGGC-3', 5'-CAAC-3', and
5'-CGTG-3', respectively, (2) the assessment of both the DNA binding affinity
and sequence selectivity of the ligands for diverse nucleic acid polymers and
DNA hairpins using fluorescent intercalator displacement assays, (3) the
measurement of the thermodynamic parameters (deltaH and deltaS) for the tightest
ligand-DNA combinations using isothermal titration calorimetry in order to
optimize the structure of the ligands, and (4) the evaluation of the ability of
these ligands to inhibit the binding of the transcription factor AP-1 to its
consensus site by EMSA assay, which may shed light on the potential usefulness
of this class of compounds for regulating cellular processes.