* 1508627
* Synthesis of Chemically Stable Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons for High-Performance Organic Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Alejandro Briseno, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2018
* USD 385,205.00

Nontechnical Description: Organic semiconductors are of growing importance for
solution-processed transistors, for lighting applications, and as materials used
to generate solar energy due to the prospect for low-cost production of these
materials. For all these applications, it is crucial that the organic
semiconductor materials exhibit high performance and chemical stability. This
project aims to develop a new class of organic semiconductor materials for use
in high-performance electronic applications. Specifically, this project explores
how molecular design will affect chemical stability, crystallization, and device
performance. Understanding the structure-property relationship in these
molecular systems will allow scientists to rationally design even better
materials for use in real-world consumer electronic devices. In addition to
providing research opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers from diverse backgrounds (utilizing the Graduate Students for
Diversity in Science & Engineering at University of Massachusetts - Amherst that
the PI created), the new scientific concepts created in this project are
discussed in tutorials and workshops at international conferences, and also
taught to high-school students from two nearby schools that serve a population
of minority students in western Massachusetts.

Technical Description: This project explores the hypothesis that the addition of
one or more aromatic pi sextets (benzenoid rings) in angular polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon semiconductors can improve the molecular packing in crystalline thin
films, charge transport properties, and chemical stability due to increased
resonance stabilization energies. The hypothesis is being verified through the
characterization of crystalline thin films via x-ray analysis, transistor
measurements, and theory/computational methods to explore transition states of
pericyclic/cycloaddition reactions. The unique approach and use of a new class
of aromatic semiconductors combined with theory and sophisticated scattering
methods contribute to connecting fundamental principles of molecular design to
charge transport at organic-organic and organic-substrate interfaces.