* 1508422
* Functional Glycopolymer Tissue Engineering Scaffolds from a Natural Glycolipid with Chondrogenic and Anti-inflammatory Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mariah Hahn, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is to
develop an effective strategy to repair cartilage defects associated with
osteoarthritis while also treating chronic inflammation which often propagates
joint deterioration. Current clinical treatments for cartilage defects can
temporarily restore joint function. However, these methods fail to treat the
chronic inflammatory cycle that contributes to tissue degeneration associated
with osteoarthritis. A tissue engineering scaffold will be developed that not
only restores the function of locally damaged cartilage but also provides for
the sustained release of anti-inflammatory molecules into the surrounding
lubricating synovial fluid as the scaffold degrades. Toward this goal, the PI
will further develop a unique family of biomaterials derived from a natural
building block produced by yeast cells that consists of fatty acid and sugar
residues. The polymers, prepared by a "green chemistry" approach, will be tuned
so that they have the required biological properties needed for the tissue
engineering scaffold. Furthermore, after the biomaterial performs its function,
it will hydrolytically degrade to safe molecules. Ph.D., undergraduate and high
school students participating in this program will gain critically important
skills in modern organic and polymer synthesis, biocatalysis, cell-biology
methods and in the fabrication of biomaterials into desired forms. Students will
work in teams, learn critical communication skills and will develop a deep
appreciation for interdisciplinary research problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to
develop a tissue engineering strategy to repair cartilage defects associated
with osteoarthritis while also treating chronic inflammation which often
propagates joint deterioration. Objectives in the proposed studies are to: 1)
develop a library of glycopolymers synthesized by the ring-opening metathesis
polymerization (ROMP) of a yeast produced lactonic glycolipid that is decorated
with a range of specific chemical moieties that are known to be chondrogenic
and/or anti-inflammatory, 2) generate and characterize porous glycopolymer
biomaterial scaffolds and 3) evaluate through in vitro investigations the
chondrogenic and anti-inflammatory properties of these scaffolds to identify
scaffolds warranting future in vivo evaluation. A key strategy in this work is
the use of lactonic sophorolipids (LSLs) as building blocks since they are
easily produced by fermentations in high yields (&gt;300 g/L). Furthermore, LSLs
are amenable to a wide range of selective modification reactions both prior to
or after polymerization that provides a platform for bioresorbable biomaterials
whose structure and, therefore, functional properties, can be "tuned" as
required. High school, undergraduate and Ph.D. students will be organized into
teams in order to: i) provide mentoring opportunities between students at
different levels and ii) to simulate today's workplace that increasingly
utilizes interdisciplinary teams to solve complex problems. In this way,
students in the program will gain an understanding and appreciation of high-
level teamwork and communication between disciplines.