* 1508496
* Perceiving Function in Geometrical Beauty:  Chemical Pressure as a Link between Structure and Properties in Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Daniel Fredrickson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Intermetallic phases are a class of metals and alloys
that exhibit a vast range of materials behaviors valuable for technological
applications. Examples include the catalysis of reactions for chemical synthesis
or energy generation, the conversion of temperature gradients into electrical
energy, the maintenance of strong and permanent magnetic moments, and the
ability to recover an original geometry after drastic mechanical deformations. A
pressing problem is relating these desirable behaviors to the often complex
atomic arrangements within intermetallics, the solution to which could allow
rational approaches to enhancing these properties. The focus of this research
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program in the
Division of Materials Research is the development of such connections between
atomic arrangements and materials behavior for intermetallics. Theoretical
methods are used to make predictions about atomic geometries within these
compounds, the physical properties arising from these structures, and their
responses to changes in pressure or temperature. Experiments involving the
creation of new materials and the measurement of their properties are then used
to test these predictions and revise the theoretical models. In addition, this
project involves the development of resources for teaching solid state and
materials chemistry, a subject typically underrepresented in the undergraduate
curriculum. New content is being developed for the online textbook Interactive
Solid State Chemistry, which harnesses the interactive capabilities of the
webpage format to enhance students' experience of the material. This resource is
available to a broad range of educators and students through its inclusion as a
Living Textbook in the Chemical Education Digital Library, a pathway in the
National Science Digital Library. Interest and awareness of materials chemistry
is also promoted through the production of Science Through Comics, a website in
which aspects of the field are illustrated in a non-technical and humorous way.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Intermetallic phases comprise a broad family of solid state
materials that are remarkable for both their structural diversity and rich range
of physical properties. Intermetallics thus show great promise for materials
design efforts, in which structural features are adjusted for the optimization
of particular properties. A limiting factor in realizing this potential,
however, is the need for clear relationships between their often complex atomic
arrangements and the physical properties they exhibit. Under prior NSF support,
a theoretical method was developed that offers a way of bridging these aspects
of intermetallics: Chemical Pressure (CP) analysis. In this approach, the output
of density functional theory (DFT) calculations is used to construct maps of the
local pressures within solid state structures, which reveal how conflicts
between electronic interactions and atomic packing constraints underlie a broad
range of structural phenomena in metallic phases. In this project supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program, the CP approach is built
into a predictive conceptual framework that accounts not only for structural
trends within intermetallics, but also their properties and phase transitions at
high temperatures and pressures. The ultimate goal of this research is a unified
understanding of structures and properties in intermetallics, which can be
applied in materials design. Progress toward this aim is being achieved through
three subprojects adapting the DFT-CP method to experimental design: (1) the
synthetic exploration of new structural chemistry driven by CP relief, (2) the
development and validation of principles connecting structure to vibrational
properties, which in turn influence such physical properties as thermal
stability, thermal conductivity, and superconductivity, and (3) the discovery of
new pressure-induced structural transformations. The first subproject involves
the synthesis in intermetallic systems motivated by CP calculations, the
determination of newly encountered structures, and the use of data-mining and
theory to place these structures into family trees whose branches represent
pathways for CP release. The second and third subprojects leverage expertise and
facilities available at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National
Laboratory for Nuclear Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (NRIXS) and high
pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction measurements, respectively, to verify the
predictions of theory.