* 1508607
* Electrostatics and dielectric properties of bio-nano interface by spin-labeling EPR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Tatyana Smirnova, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Tatyana Smirnova of the North Carolina State
University to develop new Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectroscopy
techniques for assessing the local electrostatics and dielectric properties of
lipid-nano-structured hybrid materials. This research project focuses on
designing new spectroscopic probes and developing experimental methods to
investigate the influence of nanostructured support and confinement on
properties of biological membranes and the membrane-protein interface. The
research project is a vehicle for the training of graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds in highly interdisciplinary environment.
Research activities are being integrated with education through designing of a
suite of undergraduate teaching labs based on research and industrial
applications of EPR spectroscopy. The proposed application-based suite of EPR
laboratory exercises aims to improve STEM education and provide skills
appropriate for the present day science and technology workforce.

New pH-sensitive EPR active probes and labels are being synthesized to enable
measurements of proton concentration and local dielectric constant in
heterogeneous nanoscale systems. The new methodology is being applied to profile
local dielectric constant and proton gradients in phospholipid membranes and
along membrane-protein interface. The extent to which nano-confinement of lipid
membranes can alter the polarity, water and proton profiles within the
phospholipid bilayer and at the protein-lipid interface and potentially disrupt
the optimal conditions for the lipid-protein and protein-protein interactions is
being investigated. The methodology being developed is expected to be widely
applicable to an array of novel lipid-nanostructure hybrids that hold promise to
open new analytical and technological applications.