* 1508845
* A High-Resolution High-Efficiency Force Spectroscopy for Measuring Drug-DNA Interactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shoujun Xu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 345,000.00

The molecule-molecule bonds are the basis of molecular recognition and drug
targeting in biology. However, this type of interactions remains difficult to
quantify, mainly because of the lack of a suitable technique to provide a
reliable and characteristic parameter. This proposal will develop a novel force
spectroscopy that uses precisely controlled ultrasound to measure the binding
forces to distinguish different molecular bonds. Tens of thousands of molecular
bonds will be studied simultaneously and resolved based on their different
binding forces. The technique, termed as ultrasound force-induced remnant
magnetization spectroscopy (usFIRMS), will be a new scientific tool for studying
molecular interactions, with high sensitivity, unprecedented resolution, and
high detection efficiency. By overcoming the engineering challenges involved in
the integration of ultrasound and the magnetic detector, the resulting
instrument will be able to identify different molecular interactions precisely,
reliably, and efficiently. The application scope of the new technique will focus
on drug molecules binding with DNA duplexes to precisely reveal their binding
forces and thermodynamics. The results will quantitatively identify the binding
selectivity. Lack of selectivity has been a major setback for DNA-targeting
drugs. Results obtained by the new technique are thus of high scientific merit.
In addition to the engineering advancements and scientific values, the research
activities in this proposal will provide excellent educational opportunities for
students from a broad background, ranging from graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students. In particular, minority undergraduate
students will be actively recruited for participation and ultimately leading a
subset of the projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at establishing
the novel usFIRMS technique that uses acoustic radiation force generated by
precisely attenuated ultrasound to selectively dissociate noncovalent bonds
labeled with magnetically particles. The magnetic signal is monitored by an
atomic magnetometer, which is the most sensitive device for magnetic detection.
The proposed usFIRMS technique will open up a new field for characterizing
noncovalent bonding, which is poorly understood but widely encountered in
biochemistry and biology. On the technological front, this technique has three
unique capabilities comparing with existing techniques. First, it possesses high
force resolution that can clearly resolve molecular bonds with less than two
pico-newton difference in the binding forces, which is one order of magnitude
better than that of existing techniques. Second, it represents the first time
that ultrasound is used for distinguishing molecular bonds. By integrating
ultrasound components with an atomic magnetometer, the instrument allows for
efficient and automated biochemical analysis that cannot be obtained with any
other forms of mechanical forces. Third, the concept of broadband force
spectroscopy will resolve different bonds in a single acquisition, instead of
the time-consuming force sweeping. This revolutionary advancement will lead to
high-throughput applications. On the fundamental science front, the application
of usFIRMS in drug-DNA interactions will quantitatively identify the binding
selectivity by establishing a new physicochemical parameter of differential
binding force. It will serve as a new platform for drug optimization. The
binding constants, free energy, and enthalpy can also be precisely determined
because different molecular bonds are completely resolved to remove potential
interference in measurements. Furthermore, the usFIRMS technique will find broad
applications in biological research because of its unique combination of high
resolution, high efficiency, and high applicability.