* 1508135
* RUI: Elucidating interlayer chemistry for design of novel, nontoxic organoclays for contaminant remediation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Molly Costanza-Robinson, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Molly Constanza-Robinson of Middlebury College to
clarify the chemistry of organoclays and apply this understanding to the design
and characterization of novel, nontoxic organoclays for effective contaminant
remediation. Potentially harmful chemicals, including pesticides and
pharmaceuticals, are routinely detected in treated wastewater, receiving
streams, groundwater, and drinking water wells. Using modified clay mineral
(organoclays) as an adsorbent represents a promising approach for removing
harmful contaminants from environmental waters, but fundamental questions
remain. This research team uses spectroscopic techniques to study the details of
the organoclay interlayer chemical environment to understand how the molecular-
level properties of the clay influence its sorption efficiency. In addition to
developing fundamental knowledge and the societal benefit of promoting human and
environmental health, this project supports the training and mentoring of a
diverse group of undergraduates in interdisciplinary environmental chemical
research and additional students through an associated course-based laboratory
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Montmorillonite clay modified with long-chain
alkyl-ammonium cationic surfactants has been extensively studied and
demonstrates the ability to effectively sorb petroleum hydrocarbons, phenols,
nitro- and chloro-substituted aromatics, and other organic pollutants from
water. Although much is known about contaminant uptake into the interlayer of
organoclays, unanswered questions hinder optimization of the organoclays for use
in contaminant remediation. Moreover, the potential toxicity of conventional
surfactants used in organoclays has not been addressed. Using multiple
spectroscopic techniques, sorption isotherms, and additional characterization
tools, this project investigates factors that govern the organoclay interlayer
chemical environment, including its size, crystallinity, and hydration, and how
these properties influence the sorption efficiency of the organoclays. This
insight is then applied to the design and characterization of novel, effective,
and non-toxic organoclays.