* 1508099
* Reconfigurable Molecular Crystals through Solid-State Photochemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Leonard Mueller, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 490,000.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Living matter can change its structure as it
responds to changes in its environment. With support from the Solid-State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the goal of
this research is to replicate this type of responsiveness using artificial
materials that can reconfigure themselves in response to an external stimulus,
in this case light. Reconfigurable matter consists of a structure composed of
smaller elements whose properties can be switched by light. After switching,
these elements can reassemble into a new composite structure that has different
properties. Many workers in the field envision the switchable elements to be
nanoparticles or colloids, but it is clear that the smallest switchable element
is a molecule. A molecule that undergoes a photochemical reaction represents a
switchable element. A crystal composed of photoreactive molecules can then
restructure itself after exposure to light. This proposal is concerned with the
development of molecular crystal materials that can undergo photoinduced shape
changes as a route to reconfigurable matter. Materials that undergo structural
changes in response to light have potential applications a wide range of
disciplines ranging from engineering to medicine to cell biology. Participating
students will receive advanced training in spectroscopy, materials
characterization, and data analysis. Outreach efforts supported by this grant
will improve science education at Taft Elementary, a Title I (&gt;70%
socioeconomically disadvantaged) school that is also &gt;70% underrepresented
minority. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research
program has three main goals. First, new materials and approaches to molecular
crystal-based photoinduced motion will be developed. This motion usually
originates from the presence of a mixture of reactant and product molecules
within the crystal that form a bimorph structure. New halogenated anthracene
derivatives will be synthesized to improve the robustness and reversibility of
the [4+4] photodimerization reaction that powers the crystal mechanical
response. New types of photochemical reactions based on the unimolecular cis-
trans isomerization of divinyl(anthracene) derivatives will also be explored.
The materials development will include efforts to develop novel micron-scale
crystal morphologies that can give rise to new modes of mechanical response. A
second area of focus will be to improve the physical understanding of the
photomechanical response by studying its mechanism and limits. By measuring how
light intensity, direction, wavelength, and crystal shape affect the rate and
magnitude of crystal bending, different theories proposed to explain the
mechanical response can be evaluated. Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance
experiments will measure spin diffusion dynamics to assess whether the reactions
proceed homogeneously throughout the crystal or heterogeneously with domain
formation. These experiments will provide information on both the size and shape
of nanoscale domains that grow during the photochemical reaction. Third, we will
prepare arrays of nanocrystals that can reshape themselves after exposure to
light. Surface patterning followed by microdrop printing will generate separated
nanocrystals composed of photoreactive molecules. These crystal arrays will be
characterized by optical spectroscopy, scanning probe microscopy, and electron
microscopy. Photoinduced shape changes will be measured and correlated with
starting crystal shape and size, as well as light exposure.