* 1508318
* Computationally designed synergistic protein-nanoparticle assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jeffery Saven, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2018
* USD 545,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is funding Professors Ivan Dmochowski and Jeffrey
Saven at the University of Pennsylvania to study nanoparticles and their
interactions with proteins. Nanoparticles are used in a wide variety of
applications, from biomedical diagnostics to consumer electronics. The colors
and electronic properties of these systems depend on their sizes and
compositions. The isolation of particles having targeted sizes and properties,
as well as making such particles more "bio-friendly", remain bottlenecks to
further study and application. This project targets the design and creation of
stable, mutually compatible protein-nanoparticle systems through control of
protein-protein interactions at the nanoparticle surface. These studies seek to
provide general design principles for controlling interactions at protein-
inorganic nanomaterial interfaces, principles that could have broad
applicability in nanotechnology, materials science and biomedicine. Graduate
students, undergraduates, and summer research students will be trained in a
multi-disciplinary environment combining experimental and computational
approaches. Lectures and laboratory exercises will be developed to engage high
school participants in a summer program that features current research involving
bio-nanotechnology, bioinorganic and computational chemistry.

Ferritin proteins will be designed to form stable, reversible, and native-like
assemblies with inorganic nanoparticles. A long-term goal is to selectively
encapsulate and separate nanoparticles, for example, fluorescent CdSe (cadmium
selenide) quantum dots or Au, Ag, and Pt nanoparticles,based on their size,
surface ligands, or composition. In Aim 1, variants of stable ferritin oligomers
will be computationally designed to understand the assembly process and to
accelerate formation of the 24mer holoprotein. In Aim 2, the interaction of
these designed proteins with inorganic nanoparticles will be investigated to
characterize stability and propensities for rapid and selective nanoparticle
encapsulation. The design of these ferritins aims to expand the range of
inorganic materials that can be stably and selectively encapsulated.