* 1508790
* SusChEM: Structural and Mechanistic Insights into the Enhanced Hydrogen Sorption Properties of Metal Hydride Nanoparticles Made via Solution Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Amy Prieto, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2019
* USD 426,000.00

Hydrogen is an ideal fuel for vehicles and other portable applications because
it burns cleanly in air and the only byproduct is water. It also has a very high
energy density, almost three times higher than gasoline. The main challenges to
using hydrogen as a fuel, however, are its clean production and storage. Storing
hydrogen as a gas requires large cylinders, and storing it as a liquid requires
high pressures and very low temperatures. Both methods also present safety
challenges. Dr. Prieto is exploring the use of solid compounds as storage
materials for hydrogen. This approach offers small storage volumes at reasonable
pressures. Light metal hydrides, such as magnesium metal, can store a lot of
hydrogen per unit mass, but the drawbacks are that putting the hydrogen into
magnesium requires high temperatures and pressures, and removing the hydrogen
requires high temperatures and low pressures. Both processes are very slow. Dr.
Prieto and her students have designed a method of making very small particles of
magnesium that display much faster rates for storing hydrogen. The goal of her
work is to determine whether the addition of small amounts of other metals to
the surface of the magnesium can further increase the rates of adding or
removing the hydrogen from the metal particles. She uses techniques such as
X-ray diffraction, thermal analysis, solid state nuclear magnetic resonance, and
X-ray absorption experiments to help model the rates of the hydrogenation
reactions and to provide data that aid in developing kinetic models to describe
these reactions. Dr. Prieto involves students ranging from high school to
graduate levels in her research, and the practical applications of this work
serve as a useful recruiting tool to attract talented students and train them in
research aimed at improving energy sustainability. Prof. Prieto communicates her
knowledge of hydrogen storage and energy sustainability to the general public
through her role as a board member of the Colorado Clean Energy Cluster, which
is directly impacting policy in Colorado for economic development and projects
related to clean energy production, storage, and transportation. This project is
used as an example of basic research that can be easily linked to an application
interesting to a wide audience, that of clean energy production and storage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen is an ideal fuel for portable applications
because it burns cleanly in air to produce water, and it has a very high energy
density. Magnesium (Mg), doped Mg, and Mg alloys are promising materials for
hydrogen storage due to their high theoretical hydrogen storage capacities (e.g.
7.6 weight% for MgH2). However, bulk Mg is less than ideal as a hydrogen storage
material due to the slow kinetics and high temperatures required for hydrogen
absorption and desorption. Dr. Prieto is synthesizing nanoparticles of hydrogen
storage materials in which the reduced size results in significantly enhanced
kinetics for hydrogen storage. She is determining the relative roles of kinetics
and thermodynamics on the hydrogen sorption and desorption of these particles,
particularly upon addition of small amounts of transition metals to the surface.
Although faster hydrogenation rates have been observed for nanoscale metal
hydrides, very little is known about the roles of increased surface area versus
impurities and defects. The targets Dr. Prieto is studying are earth abundant
elements that are light and store large amounts of hydrogen, albeit sluggishly
in the bulk. With control over the particle size and additive type and position,
she can dramatically increase the slow hydrogenation rates observed in the bulk
and, ultimately, be able to lower the temperature required for hydrogenation of
these materials. This research results in recruiting and retaining a talented,
diverse group of students.