* 1508868
* UNS: 3D Air-Grown Lung Cancer Spheroid Models for the Evaluation of Aerosol Anticancer Therapeutics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Samantha Meenach, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2019
* USD 334,399.00

PI: Meenach, Samantha A. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1508868&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the time and expense that is involved in
developing new cancer drugs, these compounds often fail to work during human
clinical trials even after success in animal trials. With aerosol anticancer
drugs in particular, this is usually due to a lack of cell assays available in
the lab to effectively test such drugs prior to moving further in the drug
development process. Therefore, there is a need for better methods to evaluate
the effectiveness of aerosol anticancer drugs before starting clinical trials.
This project aims to develop a novel cell culture assay involving the growth of
mini-tumors in air to mimic lung cancer that will allow the investigators to
evaluate aerosol anticancer therapeutics more effectively. The successful
completion of this project will lead to significant savings in time, money, and
animal subjects in addition to enabling the screening aerosol drug candidates
that might not otherwise be considered for treatment. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Three-dimensional (3D) multicellular spheroid (MCS) models have been
developed over the past several decades due to the improvement they provide in
the physiological mimicking of in vivo tumors. Less than 5% of in vitro MCS
models have been based on lung cancer models despite the fact that more patients
die of lung cancer than any other type. However, current lung cancer MCS models
involve the growth of spheroids in liquid media, which is not representative of
tumors present in the airways of the lung. Thus, there is a need for the
development of air-grown lung cancer MCS models to better represent lung tumors,
as there are currently no authentic methods to evaluate aerosol anticancer
therapeutics in vitro. The objective of this project is to develop air-grown
lung MCS models and to validate these models using dry powder aerosol
therapeutics. This objective will be accomplished by pursuing the following
specific aims: 1) to cultivate air-grown lung MCS models and evaluate their
cellular properties with respect to formation, viability, and proliferation, 2)
to develop a new tissue culture-based platform for the production of lung cancer
air-grown MCS models to allow for the evaluation of deeply penetrating dry
powder aerosols, and 3) to evaluate the efficacy of dry powder aerosol
anticancer formulations for the validation of the newly developed tissue culture
platform and high-throughput lung cancer air-grown models. These aims will work
synergistically to provide novel methods to better evaluate aerosol lung cancer
products to potentially reduce drug failures and increase lung cancer treatment
efficacy. In particular, air-grown spheroids will be cultivated on alginate gels
in well plates. These spheroids will be comprised of one of four lung cancer
cell types, which will vary in tumor origin and genetic mutations. The spheroid
characteristics will be assessed and then the efficacy of dry powder aerosol
particles will be evaluated using the newly developed MCS models. Two types of
MCS platforms will be developed: a high throughput system in 96 well plates and
a multi-spheroid system to be used in a twin-stage impinger. The rationale for
the use of the air-grown in vitro tumor spheroid models is that they will allow
for more physiologically relevant methods for evaluating aerosol
chemotherapeutics, which will result in increased knowledge in drug resistance
and efficacy. Improvement in the drug development process is a vital step to
ensuring that lung cancer patients will have faster access to a multitude of
therapeutics so that this disease can eventually be treated as a chronic
condition. Undergraduate engineering students will be exposed to the project
through independent research projects and lectures given in pharmaceutical
science courses. The proposed research will be incorporated into an outreach
program currently run by the PI serving underrepresented, underprivileged high
school students, where the PI's students working on the project will act as
mentors. This proposal is co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering Program in the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division, and by
the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research.