* 1508644
* Topological Insulators by Band-Gap Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Rui-Rui Du, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 395,838.00

Nontechnical description: Electrical insulators are commonly recognized as
materials that prevent the flow of electricity. However, recent research
demonstrates a type of topological insulators which has novel properties.
Although electricity cannot flow through them, it can flow around their narrow
outer edges. The material, called a "quantum spin Hall topological insulator",
acts as an electron superhighway. It is one of the building blocks needed to
create future electronics and computers. In this project the principle
investigator will perform experiments on the newly discovered topological
insulators made of compound semiconductors indium arsenide and gallium
antimonide, addressing important issues relate to materials science and quantum
physics. Understanding of materials science of this class of material and their
topological properties is directly relevant to spintronics and quantum
information technology.

Technical descripton: The two-dimensional topological insulator, which supports
quantized helical edge modes, is created by band-gap engineering using molecular
beam epitaxy and electrostatic gates. The project is exploring interesting
physics at the messoscopic length scale, with the focus on the helical edge
modes and their interface with superconductors, where proximity effect and
Andreev reflection are being systematically studied. Major focus of the study is
searching for Majorana bound states in hybrid topological insulator-
superconductor Josephson junctions. The experimental research work addresses
fundamental phenomenon and its physics in a very clean model system. The project
supports the education of two Ph.D. students, where they receive a combination
of advanced training in semiconductor materials, nanotechnology, and ultra-low
temperature measurements.