* 1508745
* Ion Sculpting of Multilayer Gratings for Extreme Ultraviolet Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Richard Bradley, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR), and by the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Description: With wavelengths of tens of nanometers, bright beams of extreme
ultraviolet and soft x-ray light in combination with specialized optics are
enabling applications such as nano-imaging and the lithography of advanced
semiconductor chips. Extreme ultraviolet and soft x-ray applications require
optical components, such as mirrors, lenses, and gratings, capable of guiding,
focusing, and dispersing or filtering the light, respectively. There are,
however, enormous challenges in the engineering of these optical components,
from both the materials and design standpoints. In this project, directed ion
beams interacting with the sample's surface create periodic patterns with a
sawtooth form. By depositing stacks of nanometer-thick metal layers on these
surfaces, it is possible to significantly enhance the efficiency of the
multilayers and to produce advanced optics such as blazed diffraction gratings.
Such gratings can generate highly directional beams that are necessary in
important applications such as interference imaging, resonant inelastic x-ray
scattering, and spectroscopy. This exciting new line of research offers ample
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to work on a cutting-edge
scientific and technological problem in a truly interdisciplinary environment.
The breath of the outreach efforts of this project ensures participation of a
diverse group of students at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: "Ion sculpting," i.e., bombarding a solid with a broad ion beam,
can produce a remarkable variety of self-assembled nanoscale patterns on a solid
surface. This project combines experiments and theoretical investigations with
the goal of demonstrating a novel "ion sculpting" method to fabricate multilayer
blazed gratings. This method has the potential to produce gratings of
unprecedented efficiency for use at extreme ultraviolet and soft x-ray
wavelengths. The project encompasses fundamental research aimed at understanding
the interaction of highly directional ion beams with surfaces through
experiments and modeling. The theoretical work facilitates the optimization of
the ion-sculpting process and guides the experiments. State-of-the-art
deposition equipment and at-wavelength metrology provide the infrastructure to
fabricate and test the multilayer metal-dielectric gratings.