* 1508748
* UNS: Shock Tube Measurements of Aldehyde and Ketone Rate Constants Using Enhanced Laser Absorption
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Ronald Hanson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2019
* USD 345,000.00

1508748 (Hanson)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how basic
elements of many commonly used fuels react under conditions typical in an
engine. Laser-based optical methods will be used to track the behavior of these
elements during reaction. The potential outcome of the proposed study will help
to reduce emissions from engine combustion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
proposes to use a shock tube study to address aldehyde and ketone reactions, a
topic having high level of relevance to the combustion of emerging biofuels. The
emissions of aldehydes and ketones have important environmental and health
consequences. Both types of species are formed in significant quantities as
intermediates during the early stages of hydrocarbon oxidation, and significant
emissions of these species can occur from engines if combustion is incomplete
(e.g. quenched) before full ignition. Advanced, laser based diagnostics will be
used for the experimental investigation, including laser absorption diagnostics
for formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, and hydroxyl radical (OH), and laser absorption
determinations for CO by using cavity enhanced absorption with emission from a
quantum cascade laser, providing sub-ppm sensitivity. These measurements will
take advantage of our recent development of an enhanced, ultra-high-sensitivity
CO laser absorption diagnostic that can provide sub-ppm sensitivity in shock
tube experiments.