* 1508419
* Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization of Dienes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Alexandru Asandei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 405,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Alexandru Asandei of the
University of Connecticut to develop new approaches for the synthesis of diene-
based polymers. Polymers have many important applications in everyday life. One
type of widely used polymer is prepared from monomers that belong to the diene
class. Diene-based polymers are important components of synthetic rubbers in
tires of automobiles and high-impact plastics. Professor Asandei aims to develop
a sustainable alternative to the synthesis of diene-based polymers at lower
production cost in an approach that targets the use of biorenewable monomers.
This fundamental research project spans a wide variety of techniques and
methods, providing a multi-disciplinary environment for the education and
research training of graduate students and undergraduate coworkers. Outreach to
high school students from a variety of backgrounds is also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetically, while the production of random
diene copolymers benefits from emulsion radical polymerizations, the synthesis
of corresponding thermoplastic elastomer block copolymers involves expensive,
water sensitive anionic/coordination polymerizations. Thus, inexpensive, water
tolerant, controlled radical polymerizations (CRPs) would be highly beneficial.
In this research, Professor Asandei and coworkers aim to provide quantitative
understanding of the atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) of dienes, a
process that offers the potential advantages of simplicity, low cost, catalytic
nature, tunable, and water tolerance. This research project entails detailed
kinetic investigations carried out in inexpensive pressurized glass tubes, which
enable both photochemistry and a fast, cost efficient optimization. These
studies are expected to provide information on the effect of diene structure,
ATRP type, temperature, initiator, solvent, catalyst, ligand, additives and
reagent ratios on the molecular weight, polydispersity, rate, side reactions and
chain end functionality of associated polymerizations. Such knowledge is
expected to enable the development of emulsion diene ATRP, and facilitate the
synthesis of complex polydiene-copolymer architectures.