* 1508072
* SusChEM: Material and Morphometric Control of Bacterial Cellulose via Genetic Engineering, Post-Processing and 3D-Printed Molding
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Christine Ortiz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in
the Division of Materials Research, co-funded by the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, to Massachusetts Institute
of Technology is for the development of new class of sustainable materials that
are grown using bacteria to have enhanced structure and properties. More
specifically, this research program proposes to gain unprecedented control and
enhancement of the multiscale design of a technologically important living
material system, bacterial cellulose, which has great potential for use as
textiles, drug delivery devices, tissue engineering scaffolds, and sustainable
building components. This research will enable simultaneous tuning of the
material (structure and properties) and macroscopic 3D shape of this biopolymer.
An interdisciplinary approach will be taken involving synthetic biology and
genetic engineering, in-situ extracellular and materials processing, algorithmic
design methods from the field of architecture, as well as powerful new additive
manufacturing fabrication (3D printing with micron-scale spatial resolution).
This study combines three disciplines - synthetic biology, materials science,
and architectural design and has a broader impact contribution for all three.
For synthetic biology, foundational methodologies are created that could be
extended to any biological polymer (e.g. protein block co-polymers, cellulose,
amyloids, etc.). For architectural design, the opportunity to apply methods of
algorithmic design and additive manufacturing to living matter is novel and
opens up new questions about possibilities of design in interaction with
biological growth and material formation to produce sustainable and
environmentally responsive materials and building components from renewable
resources. For materials science, the project suggests systematic study of
combination of material structure, properties and morphometry as a way to design
materials and further enhance their function and performance with specific
functionalization through synthetic gene networks regulated by external stimuli.
Participation in these projects will educate students to cross disciplinary
boundaries and work across scales of resolution to develop sustainable design
manufacturing techniques for microbial production. Additional educational
activities for this study include Independent Activity Period (IAP)
interdisciplinary class at MIT "Designing Shape, Material, and Life",
instruction in the worldwide synthetic biology competition for undergraduate and
high school students iGEM (International Genetic Engineering Machine), and
science exhibitions, such as MIT Museum and Cambridge Science Fair. Lastly,
mentoring of summer students via undergraduate research programs at MIT will be
carried
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program proposes to control and tune the material (structure and
properties) and macroscopic morphometry (3D shape) of a technologically
important model system (bacterial cellulose), which has potential for use as
textiles, drug delivery devices, tissue engineering scaffolds, and sustainable
building components. An interdisciplinary approach is taken involving synthetic
biology and genetic engineering, in-situ extracellular and materials processing,
algorithmic design methods from the field of architecture, as well as powerful
new additive manufacturing fabrication (3D printing with micron-scale spatial
resolution). The first aim of this research is to modulate the structure and
properties of cellulose as it is synthesized by the bacteria Gluconacetobacter
xylinus via the use of UV lithography regulation and synthetic biological
networks encoding fusion proteins production. Secondly, the role of the in situ
extracellular physicochemical environmental conditions and perturbations on the
structure and properties of bacterial cellulose will be investigated. The
resulting macromolecular structure and properties of the produced cellulose will
be assessed by cross-polarized optical, electron and atomic-force microscopy,
X-ray diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance, Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy, multi-directional mechanical testing, and nanoindentation. Lastly,
algorithmic design and 3D printing will be utilized to fabricate increasingly
complex macroscopic structures with tunable geometric parameters of molds which
are subsequently used to cast polydimethylsiloxane substrates for in situ
culture and growth of genetically engineered bacterial cellulose.