* 1508910
* Identifying Generation and Emission Sources for Individual Loads at Specific Locations and Times: Toward Environmentally Sensitive and Guided Electricity Usage
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Carol Miller, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 359,965.00

Climate change due to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has become one of the most
challenging issues in human society. In the U.S., electric power generation
contributes about 40 % of the total GHG, 64% of SO2 emissions, 16% of NOx
emissions, and 68% of mercury air emissions as well as large shares of other
pollutants (such as small particulates) in 2010. It is then critically important
to correctly account for emissions related to electricity generation, delivery
and consumption. The emissions can be monitored and measured directly at the
power plants. However, it has been called "impossible" to trace the emissions
associated with electricity consumption back to generation sources. Because of
this daunting difficulty, an accurate life-cycle analysis of electricity
generation and usage cannot be done so far while such analysis is important to
various products and processes including GHG inventories of different entities
and regions. Moreover, it has also been very challenging or impossible to carry
out clear and unequivocal cost and usage allocation analysis to equally share
the benefit and responsibility for all entities involved in electricity
generation and delivery. The importance of equity can never be overstated when
designing and implementing public policy and engineering practices for
interconnected power systems that include numerous generators and cover a vast
area. The proposed research work will develop the right tools to link loads and
generation/emission sources, to carry out effective cost and benefit analyses,
and to help develop appropriate electric energy and environmental related
policies to share responsibility among different entities, and ultimately
maintain transparency, equity and fairness in electric power industry. The
developed methods will facilitate active customer participation and help
electricity users make informed choices. This project will also help advance
technology and workforce development in electric power sector, which is critical
to our whole nation and future sustainable electric energy development and
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop "disruptive"
methods for real-time identification of generation and emission sources of any
individual load at specific location and time. The following approach is taken:
(1) A transformative, equivalent circuit model will be developed for power
systems. A power system can be represented by the proposed transfer impedance
based system equivalent model, which is transformative and can be used for other
general circuit analyses; (2) A "disruptive" method will be developed to
identify the generation sources of the total demand of individual loads at
specific locations and times based on the equivalent model and phasor
measurement unit or system state estimation data; (3) A novel method will be
developed to identify marginal generators due to incremental demand changes
based on publically available information; (4) Not only the locational marginal
emissions but also the overall emissions will be accurately quantified for
individual loads; and (5) An integrated economic/environmental optimal load
management will be developed to achieve environmentally sensitive and guided
electricity usage. The results of the project will provide the fundamental basis
to ensure equity and fairness in developing and implementing public policy and
engineering practices for interconnected power systems. The underlying power
flow tracing technique will enable clear and unequivocal cost and usage
allocation analyses to equally share the benefit and responsibility for all
entities involved in electricity generation and delivery. Moreover, the outcomes
of this project will quantify customer-specific emissions and enable users to
perform economic/environmental load management to reduce cost and to achieve a
range of environmental benefits.