* 1508931
* UNS:Novel probes to quantify the relative importance of ion and particle uptake when assessing nanoparticle bioavailability
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Marie-Noele Croteau, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2018
* USD 389,768.00

#1508931&lt;br/&gt;Lead, Jamie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles may be an
important environmental contaminant because their use leads to discharge into
the environment and many of them have been shown to be toxic. In order to be
toxic, nanoparticles must enter an organism such as a bacterium or a fish. This
"bioavailability" is governed by the uptake from the environment, loss from the
organism and other processes. However, it is not known if these processes occur
directly with the particle or if the particle dissolves to give ions and the
ions are taken into an organism. This project will develop new nanoparticles
which can distinguish directly between ion and nanoparticle bioavailability
processes; once developed the nanoparticles will be used on environmental
organisms such as shellfish to answer the question: is nanoparticle
bioavailability controlled by particle or ion uptake? The outcome will be a
better understanding of nano-bioavailability as a precursor to
nanotoxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will help to understand the
mechanisms of bioavailability and bioaccumulation, as a precursor to toxicity;
in particular, experimental and modelling studies will allow definitive answers
to be generated on the question: is nanoparticle bioavailability controlled by
particle specific uptake (and loss) or by ion uptake after dissolution. In
addition, a set of tools will be produced, which will be disseminated to the
research community, which will enable these questions of fundamental biological
processes and hazard levels to be answered more broadly for a range or organisms
and conditions. The proposed research will develop a library of novel particles,
which are three layer core-shell materials, isotopically labelled with different
stable isotopes in the core and outer shell, separated by an insoluble central
layer. The tightly constrained and fully characterized nanoparticles will then
be used as probes to perform scoping studies on model organisms to answer
fundamental questions related particle or ion bioaccumulation. The relative
importance of the ion and particle in biouptake and elimination mechanisms, in
food and aquatic exposures and the importance of solution chemistry will also be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed nanoparticle (patent pending)
and the study of toxicity feed directly into the development of a safe and
sustainable industry, which will be of general societal benefit. Two doctoral
students will be trained in interdisciplinary areas involving synthetic
chemistry, metrology and toxicology. The students will be given experience in
both academic and government laboratories. The outputs of the project will be
incorporated into teaching performed at the Center for Environmental Nanoscience
and Risk (CENR) and the students will help in this as a training exercise. The
CENR employs a postdoctoral fellow to specifically aid in outreach and we will
pursue specific dissemination measures to reach the public and the student body
and inform them of the projects scientific and technological advances.