* 1508278
* RUI: Conductivity, diffusion, and dispersion of photoexcited Dirac fermions in cadmium arsenide
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Nikolai Kouklin, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 311,293.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This study aims at investigating key
electronic and optical excitation processes in cadmium&lt;br/&gt;arsenide, one
of the recently discovered "Dirac semimetals". Its electrons behave as though
they are massless and exhibit very high mobilities and velocities, so the
material may be considered the bulk analog of graphene. It is very stable, has a
3-D crystal structure, and can be integrated with existing electronics. It is
also a starting material from which to realize a magnetic Weyl semimetal in
which, unusually, the direction of the electrons' spin would be determined by
the direction of their motion. This research includes the synthesis and
characterization of cadmium arsenide bulk crystals and thin films,
both&lt;br/&gt;undoped and magnetically-doped, using chemical vapor deposition
at reduced temperature. The research&lt;br/&gt;measures electrons' diffusion,
and uses several time-resolved probes including terahertz spectroscopy
and&lt;br/&gt;photoemission. Improved knowledge of growth methods and electronic
properties of 3-D Dirac materials,&lt;br/&gt;as provided by this research, is
important in realizing the materials' technological promise.
Applications&lt;br/&gt;such as fast electronics, fast or broadband optical
sensors, or actively mode-locked lasers all rely on&lt;br/&gt;ultrafast and
optical properties explored in this research. This work supports graduate and
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;researchers (the latter at a primarily-undergraduate
institution), who engage with the growth and&lt;br/&gt;characterization of
cadmium arsenide, operate laser experiments, handle cryogens, write computer
code,&lt;br/&gt;and analyze complex sets of data. Because of the scientific and
industrial relevance of condensed-matter&lt;br/&gt;physics, and the rapid growth
of ultrafast technology, the students become prepared for a wide variety
of&lt;br/&gt;scientific and technical careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The Dirac and Weyl materials host properties including the
chiral anomaly, unusual quantum&lt;br/&gt;magneto-resistance, and predicted
giant diamagnetism. Their near-lack of a Fermi surface
causes&lt;br/&gt;anomalous transport, with the scattering rate, density of
states, and diffusivity strongly dependent on&lt;br/&gt;energy; the conductivity
rises linearly with frequency. The materials' restrictive phase-space suggests,
in&lt;br/&gt;analogy with graphene, that it should be possible to control their
optical and transport properties on subpicosecond timescales, for instance by
doping with photoexcited carriers. The investigators explore
the&lt;br/&gt;nature of these photoexcited carriers: their density and
temperature; their effect on diffusivity and&lt;br/&gt;conductivity; and their
dispersion. Of particular interest is identifying the conditions under which
photocarriers can exhibit the same distinctive Dirac behaviors as their host
material. Selection of different pump-photon energies allow excitation of
massless initial states or the higher-energy massive ones. Transient-grating
spectroscopy measures photocarriers' diffusivity. Terrahertz spectroscopy
measures their conductivity, indicative of scattering rate, chemical potential,
and massive or massless character. Time-resolved photoemission reveals the
transiently-occupied states invisible to traditional photoemission. Another part
of this work improves vapor-based synthesis of cadmium arsenide crystals and
films, exploring methods and effects of doping with magnetic atoms and
contributing toward the effort to make a ferromagnetic Weyl semimetal.