* 1508115
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research - Granular Activated Carbon Supported Gold and Palladium Bimetals Catalysts for Sustainable Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Paul Tratnyek, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 167,870.00

1507707&lt;br/&gt;Jiao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1508115&lt;br/&gt;Tratnyek&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;A team of researchers propose to develop granular activated carbon
supported bimetal catalysts that integrate both physic-sorption and catalytic
decomposition capabilities to achieve sustainable water treatment. The objective
of the proposed project is to design and fabricate a novel class of granular
activated carbon-supported palladium-metal (bimetal) catalysts that provides
rapid contaminant degradation without accumulation of problematic by-products or
significant susceptibility to poisoning (loss of catalytic activity) by common
components of natural water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes advantage
of the fact that catalytic hydrodehalogenation and hydrodeoxygenation by
palladium (Pd) and Pd-based bimetal catalysts are capable of transforming
various classes of organic contaminants to harmless products, this proposed
research is focused on developing Pd-M bimetal catalysts where M represents gold
(Au), copper (Cu), and indium (In) to achieve catalytic reductive transformation
of priority drinking water contaminants such as halogenated organics, oxyanions,
and nitrosamines. The PIs preliminary results show that the types of catalysts
proposed to study can produce very rapid hydrodehalogenation of trichloroethene
as well as hydrogenation of other model contaminants. In the proposed research,
a green chemistry synthesis process will be developed. The link between catalyst
structure and performance will be systematically investigated with catalysts
designed to test specific catalytic mechanisms. Structures of Pd-M hybridized
with both perfect graphene and defect-rich graphene in place of granular
activated carbon will be modeled to determine the optimal surface structures,
charge transfer mechanisms, electronic properties, and energetic distributions.
The kinetics of contaminant reduction by such catalysts will be systematically
quantified and a practical but rigorous kinetic model will be developed to
compare these types of catalysts across a broad range of conditions. The
sensitivity of these catalysts to inactivation by known poisons of noble metal
catalysts (e.g., sulfide and chloride) common in water treatment will be
evaluated and considered in optimization of the catalyst designs. In addition to
advancing the technology of water treatment by catalytic hydrogenation
processes, this proposed research will contribute to the training of new
researchers and practitioners in the field. The PIS will reach out to water
service professionals through a series of planned workshops at Clackamas
Community College, which has a strong training program for water treatment
engineers. Outreach activities to the general public for the demonstration of
the sustainable water treatment through collaboration with the Oregon Museum of
Science &amp; Industry, a local leader in informal education, are also planned.
Furthermore, we are committed to recruiting minority and female graduate
students to participate in this proposed research.