* 1508575
* Measuring rotations of 3D printed particles in turbulent fluid flow
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Greg Voth, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 361,161.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;When particles are transported in a turbulent
fluid flow, their motion is strongly affected by their shape. Most previous work
on particle motion in turbulence has considered the simplest case which is
spherical particles, but an understanding of non-spherical particle motion is
necessary to understand many important situations including ice crystals in
clouds, the processing of wood fibers in paper making, and many biological
organisms such as plankton whose motion in turbulent flow is affected by their
non-spherical shape. Recently, it has become clear that the dynamics of
anisotropic particles also offer a powerful new way to understand some
fundamental properties of the fluid motion in turbulence such as vortex
stretching. In this project, we use 3D printers to create particles with a wide
range of shapes and track the particle motion in a turbulent water flow using
multiple high speed video cameras. We have identified a special particle shape
which we call a chiral dipole that should preferentially rotate in one direction
when it is placed in a random turbulent environment. Such a particle can extract
energy from specific scales of the turbulent flow. We also will measure the
rotational motion of particles formed from several symmetric thin rods connected
in the center. These particles can be made in a wide range of sizes and allow
measurement of the amount of rotational energy at different scales in the
turbulent flow. We will study particles that deform in the fluid flow, and
develop new methods of fabricating small particles in custom designed shapes.
This work will provide valuable foundational science for work on engineering and
environmental applications involving anisotropic particles in turbulence. It
will also provide a new and intuitive way to measure some of the most
fundamental processes in turbulence including vortex stretching and the
rotational energy that exists at different scales in turbulent flows. Methods
for measuring forces on particles and fabricating small particles with
customized shapes should also find use far beyond our work. Education and
research training are central to this project, which will support the mentoring
of a postdoctoral scientist, a graduate student, and undergraduates in research.
The project also supports the PI's work co-directing the Wesleyan Science
Outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The
dynamics of anisotropic particles in turbulent fluid flows are important in many
applications including paper making, icy clouds, and locomotion of micro-
organisms in environmental flows. Recently, it has become clear that the
dynamics of anisotropic particles also offer a powerful new window into
fundamental properties of the small scales of turbulent flows. In this project,
we use 3D printed particles to experimentally measure the rotation and alignment
of anisotropic particles of a wide variety of sizes and shapes in turbulent
fluid flow. Chiral dipoles formed from two opposite handed helices joined in the
center should have a preferential rotation direction in an isotropic turbulent
flow. This should provide an elegant way to observe a fundamental property of
turbulence: on average material lines and vortices are being stretched by the
flow. As chiral dipoles are stretched, they should exhibit a solid body rotation
vector whose projection onto the chiral dipole vector has a non-zero mean.
Particles will also be printed with four arms in tetrahedral symmetry and a wide
range of sizes in order to observe the distribution of rotational energy as a
function of scale in a turbulent flow. The moments of the solid body rotation
rate as a function of particle size may show power law scaling across an
inertial range with corrections to the mean field theory scaling exponents due
to turbulent intermittency. The forces acting on arms of particles can be
measured from the bending of the arms. Particles will be printed from flexible
polymers and tracked in highly viscous fluids to determine the feasibility of
measuring forces this way. Finally, we will explore the use of two-photon
stereo-lithography for fabricating particles with much higher spatial resolution
allowing much smaller particles to be printed. Education and research training
are central to this project, which will support the mentoring of a postdoctoral
scientist, a graduate student, and undergraduates in research. The project also
supports the PI's work co-directing the Wesleyan Science Outreach program.