* 1508191
* Emergent Phenomena at Flat Interfaces between Nitrides and Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Zlatko Sitar, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 01/31/2019
* USD 468,000.00

This project is supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program and
by the Ceramics Program, both in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: The NCSU (North
Carolina State University) research team of Maria and Sitar explores the
junction of nitride and oxide semiconductors with specific attention to the
interfaces that bond them. When correctly prepared, these interfaces can host a
high concentration of high-speed electrons that are confined to a two-
dimensional layer. This new type of material is designed to have controllable
electron density at the interface and opens new possibilities for future
electronic devices. The research project involves graduate undergraduate
students. The team disseminates the research findings through various
educational outreach activities. For example, the annual NCSU Science and
Mathematics Interactive Learning Experience (SMILE) camp engages middle-school
and advanced fifth grade students to explore the principles of materials science
in the PIs' research labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The Maria
and Sitar research team explores semiconductor-grade heteroepitaxial interfaces
between complex oxides (e.g., MgO-CaO) and GaN. The properties and performance
of these heterostructures are regulated by the electronic structure of the
constituent crystals as opposed to unwanted defects, structural imperfections,
or undesired chemical interactions. Seamless integration across two classes of
materials is expected to create pathways to intimately couple their properties.
To accomplish these goals, the team combines two advanced materials synthesis
methods: surfactant-assisted film growth and confined epitaxy. Surfactant
assisted growth overcomes the challenges of oxide faceting, while confined
epitaxy creates step-free surfaces and thus perfectly flat interfaces. Using
these approaches, the team is positioned to superimpose high room-temperature
carrier mobility in compound semiconductors with nonlinear property responses of
electronic oxides. This unique oxide/nitride heterostructure provides access to
a new frontier of electronic, magnetic, optical, and interface physics.