* 1508719
* Positron Spectrosopy of 2-D and Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Ali Koymen, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2018
* USD 75,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a beam of low
energy positrons (anti-matter of electrons) to provide unique information about
novel nano-dimensioned materials including Graphene and nano-porous gold. When
positrons annihilate with electrons both the positron and the electron disappear
and the mass of the two particles is converted completely into energy in the
form of gamma rays. The sudden removal of the electron from an atom can result
in a highly excited state and the emission of electrons called Auger electrons.
The energy of the annihilation induced gamma rays and Auger electrons provide
chemical information about the atoms with whose electrons the positron
annihilates. Previous NSF funded research by the investigators has shown that
low energy positrons can be used to selectively probe the properties of the top
layer of atoms at the surface due to the high probability of a low energy
position becoming trapped at the surfaces of materials at the time of
annihilation. The research in this project is aimed at exploring the use of
positron spectroscopy to probe two dimensional materials like graphene. These
materials are extremely thin. The ability to probe the topmost atomic layers of
these materials provides a unique, non-destructive method for studying these
materials in order to understand the mechanisms by which adsorbed atoms can be
used to change important chemical and physical properties of these materials.
Another important goal of the project is to determine the feasibility of using
gamma rays from positrons annihilating at the internal surfaces of nanometer
sized pores inside a novel class of materials called nanoporous metals to
provide the information needed to understand the reason why these materials can
greatly speed up desirable chemical reactions. The penetrating nature of the
gamma rays permits measurement to be made on internal surfaces. The outcome of
the activity will ultimately enhance the usage of low energy positron beam based
spectroscopic techniques for research in chemical and biological sciences as
well as in engineering. The project provides training to graduate and
undergraduate students in fields of great relevance to high tech industry
surface science, including low dimensional physics, ultra high vacuum
technology, charged particle beams, radiation detection, nanostructure
synthesis, material characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low energy positrons are extremely sensitive to
material surfaces due to a high probability that they will become trapped in an
image potential state at the time of annihilation. The research in this project
is aimed at understanding the interaction of low energy positrons (~ 1eV) with
two dimensional materials including graphene/graphene oxide sheets. The trapping
of positrons on two dimensional materials will be investigated using Auger like
process called Auger mediated sticking as well as through positron annihilation
induced Auger electron emission and Positronium formation. Measurements of
positron sticking probability to graphene and graphene oxide surfaces are aimed
at providing information on the contrasting surface properties of these
materials and demonstrate the feasibility of using low energy positrons as a
multi-parameter spectroscopic technique for two dimensional structures. Low
background emission of electrons from graphene is expected to throw light on the
physical origin of low energy electron tail seen in Auger emission produced by
positron annihilation. A second major goal of this project is to explore the
ability of using Doppler broadening gamma spectroscopy to probe the internal
surfaces of nano-porous metals. The high probability that positrons will become
trapped at the internal surfaces combined with the ability of gamma rays to
escape from the internal surfaces indicate that positrons can be used to
characterize the internal surfaces of the pores. These studies are aimed at
using the unique information obtained from positron spectroscopy to understand
the interaction of gases with the strained internal surfaces of nanoporous
metals. These studies will allow for better control of catalytic activity of
these novel materials as well as contribute to the development of high density
hydrogen storage materials using nanoporous metals. The project represents the
first exploration of the use of positron beams for the investigation of
functionalized graphene, graphene oxide sheets and nanoporous metals.