* 1508626
* Protein analysis by desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Andre Venter, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2019
* USD 298,602.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Andre Venter at Western Michigan University to
investigate various methods to improve the analysis of protein molecules by
desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (DESI-MS). Imaging of
tissue samples by DESI is an important new tool to aid in biological tissue
imaging. DESI-imaging applications are currently limited to the analysis of
small molecules such as lipids, fatty acids, and small molecules. Developing the
ability to analyze proteins would extend the capabilities of imaging DESI-MS to
determine the spatial distribution of proteins in biological relevant tissues.
In addition, Professor Venter will make significant efforts to increase
participation of undergraduate students, especially from underrepresented groups
in research, and educate the general public about the importance of chemistry in
their everyday life through collaboration with the Gwen Frostic School of Art at
WMU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently when proteins are analyzed by DESI-MS,
sensitivity decreases with increasing molecular weight, and poor protein
dissolution has been implicated as the major cause. Methods to improve
dissolution and desorption such as the application of heat, the addition of a
variety of additives to the DESI spray and a delayed desorption DESI sprayer
will be investigated separately and in combination. To decipher mechanistic
aspects of these mitigation strategies, Professor Venter will separately
investigate the effects on dissolution of each, during desorption and ionization
by using their previously developed Spray Desorption Collection, and Reflective
Electrospray Ionization methods. Construction and characterization of a dual-
sprayer DESI configuration will be carried out to determine optimum delay
between localized surface wetting and desorption to maximize signal to noise
ratios of proteins during DESI analysis, while conserving lateral resolution.