* 1508042
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Using Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics to Link Structure, Properties, and Performance in Single-Crystal Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 for Thin Film Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Robert Birkmire, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Non-technical Description: Copper zinc tin sulfide selenide (CZTSSe) is a
promising candidate material for use in solar cells because it strongly absorbs
visible light and is composed primarily of earth-abundant, non-toxic elements.
However, fundamental scientific understanding of CZTSSe has been limited by
difficulties in fabricating thin films of high quality. In this project,
researchers at Drexel University and the University of Delaware grow bulk
crystals of CZTSSe and characterize their response to light. This approach
enables identification of relationships between elemental composition and
photovoltaic response, which can lead to both near-term increases in
efficiencies and improved estimates of the practical performance limits of solar
cells made from this emerging material. Multiple graduate and undergraduate
student researchers participate in this project. Additionally, researchers use a
mobile solar module to bring concepts in solar energy conversion to K-12
students in the Philadelphia and Newark communities, especially from under-
represented groups, through events such as Philly Materials
Day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: CZTSSe thin films
have shown promising photovoltaic efficiencies up to 12.6%, but they are still
far below the theoretical limit of over 30%. Photocurrent and photovoltage in
CZTSSe solar cells are limited by short (nanoseconds) photoexcited carrier
lifetimes. Further improvements in efficiency will require full understanding of
how materials composition, intrinsic point defects, and interfaces affect
ultrafast photoexcited charge carrier dynamics. However, complex defect
chemistry and highly non-equilibrium conditions of thin film growth result in
high densities of grain boundaries and secondary phases, posing a significant
impediment to fundamental understanding. In this project, the collaborative
research team grows high-quality, quasi-equilibrium CZTSSe single crystals and
interrogates them using ultrafast spectroscopic probes to understand how carrier
dynamics depend on composition, defects, and interfaces in CZTSSe single
crystals. This work is expected to lead to new understanding of the
relationships between ultrafast carrier dynamics, processing, material and
interface properties, and photovoltaic performance. Specifically, the project
relies on terahertz spectroscopy and transient reflectance spectroscopy coupled
with finite element transport-recombination models to determine photoexcited
carrier lifetimes, mobilities, and dominant recombination mechanisms. Lifetimes
and mobilities are measured as a function of Cu:Zn:Sn and S:Se ratios and are
correlated to device performance. Additionally, studies of surface/interface
recombination in CZTSSe-CdS heterojunctions and the effects of grain boundaries
in quasi-equilibrium polycrystals enable extrapolation of new fundamental
scientific understanding to thin film photovoltaic devices.