* 1508667
* Vibrational Spectroscopy with Subnanometer Electron Beams: Correlating Chemistry and Atomic Structure on Nanoparticle Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Peter Rez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professors Peter Crozier and Peter Rez at Arizona State
University to develop a tool for probing the nanoscale chemistry of materials
surfaces. This will provide an approach for understanding the way in which
nanoparticles interact and influence their environment. The knowledge that is
expected to emerge from this work could have wide applications in many fields
where nanoparticle surfaces are important including catalysis, sensors and the
life sciences. Graduate students and undergraduate researchers are expected to
gain valuable training at the interface of nanomaterials and chemistry.
Educational outreach programs associated with this project are targeting K-12
children with emphasis on Hispanic and Native American student sub-
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project exploits new developments in the
field of transmission electron microscopy and electron energy-loss spectroscopy
which permit vibrational spectroscopy to be performed with a focused electron
beam of 0.1 nanometer in diameter. A major goal is to develop methodologies for
probing vibrational surface states with high spatial resolution without
significantly damaging the surface or removing surface adsorbates. A combination
of experimental and modelling work is employed to optimize spectral acquisition
and analysis techniques. The ultimate spatial resolution is influenced by the
length scale of the electrostatic interaction between the electron beam and the
sample. The spatial resolution and sensitivity of the approach for detecting a
number of common chemical functional groups on a variety of metal and oxide
nanoparticles surfaces will be determined. This project will provide the
scientific community with a new method for probing fundamental chemical
processes with nanometer resolution.