* 1508177
* GOALI: OP: Incongruent Growth of Single Crystal 3D Architecture for New Optical Functionalities in Glass
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Daniel Nolan, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 690,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Photonic integrated circuits (PICs), the optical
analog of microelectronic circuits, are key to the next major advancement in
communication, sensing, information, display, and other technologies. They offer
several advantages compared to discrete systems including smaller size, lower
power consumption, better performance and reliability through simplification of
component coupling and packaging processes, and lower cost through batch
fabrication. The methods currently employed for fabricating PICs are suitable
for planar geometries, whereas achieving a high density of device elements
requires fabrication of 3D systems that are particularly important for optical
computing, optical communication and new forms of high density optical memory. A
major hurdle toward this goal is the difficulty of fabrication and integration
of transparent, multifunctional micro-optical elements, which must be crystals
of low symmetry rather than glass that is inherently passive. A multinational
team led by researchers at Lehigh University recently demonstrated the proof-of-
principle for fabricating 3D single crystal architecture in glass (SCAG) using a
femtosecond (fs) laser. The present research is extending this method further
for specifically realizing the concept of "principal state transmission"
recently introduced by Corning, Inc. It promises to increase the transmission
bandwidth of an optical fiber by an order of magnitude, thereby facilitating the
next breakthrough in optical communication. In parallel, the project is training
two graduate students in application-driven research through collaboration with
Corning, Inc., engaging a few undergraduate students and introducing K-12
students to the emerging field of laser fabrication of new structures and
devices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Nonlinear absorption of fs
laser radiation allows heating a glass deep inside, at the focal point of the
otherwise transmitting beam. This feature and controlled translation of the beam
have been exploited in a viable method for fabricating ferroelectric SCAG in a
congruently crystallizing lanthanum borogermanate model composition. However,
the glass to crystal transformation becomes increasingly complex for
compositions of practical interest, where the two phases have different
compositions. Therefore, this GOALI collaboration between Lehigh University and
Corning, Inc. is focusing on the fundamental understanding of fs laser-induced
crystal growth process in continuously evolving composition, and applying this
knowledge to fabricate SCAG of shape and size suitable for prototypic devices.
Through continuous feedback and interactions between the teams, a correlation is
being developed between the fabrication process parameters, structure of SCAG
and optical performance. These results are helping to develop a predictive model
that will provide guidelines for making lower optical loss SCAGs in complex
compositions suitable for use in devices.