* 1508048
* UNS: Mechanistic Studies of Hydrodeoxygenation of Lignin-Derived Aromatic Oxygenates over Bimetallic Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2020
* John Vohs, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/29/2020
* USD 330,000.00

1508048 Vohs, John M.

Bio-refining of lignin-based biomass results in production of oxygenated
aromatic compounds that must be further processed by hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) to
produce higher-value aromatic compounds. The study will involve molecular-level
investigation of the adsorption and reaction of several oxygenated aromatics on
bimetallic catalysts ranging from single crystals to supported catalysts. The
resulting insight will aid the discovery and development of catalysts that
convert oxygenated aromatic compounds to useful fuels and chemicals. The work
will also train students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels in skills
relevant to the realization of a sustainable energy and environmental future.
Bimetallic catalysts composed of a group-10 metal (Ni, Pd, Pt) and a second more
oxyphilic metal, such as Fe or Zn, will be chosen based on previous
demonstration of HDO activity in aldehyde and aldose HDO. Specifically, the
proposal will investigate how changes in the metal d-band resulting from the
addition of a second more oxyphilic metal (e.g., Fe or Zn) influence the
interaction of aromatic rings with the catalyst surface and the role this plays
in decreasing overall activity for undesirable ring hydrogenation. The study
will also examine the role of the oxyphilic metal in providing specific binding
sites for the oxygen atoms in the aromatic oxygenates and the role of these
sites in facilitating C-O bond cleavage in HC=O, C-OH, and C-O-C groups. In
addition to the single crystal studies, high-surface-area supported bimetallic
catalysts will be prepared and subjected to spectroscopic characterization of
adsorbed species, and evaluated in a gas-phase flow-reactor to obtain reaction
kinetics and selectivity to desired products.

The proposal clearly addresses a critical step (HDO) in the overall biomass
refining scheme. As such, it will provide fundamental insight that will aid the
development of biomass refining schemes and thereby move lignocellulosic biomass
conversion closer to an economically realizable process, with attendant benefits
for renewable energy and chemicals. The project will also train both graduate
and undergraduate students in the fields of energy conversion, heterogeneous
catalysis, and reaction engineering - skills highly sought by the U.S.
petrochemical industry.