* 1508854
* A pathway to controllable n-type doping in AlGaN alloys for high power devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Ramon Collazo, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Abstract: Control of the electrical conductivity of the wide bandgap alloy AlGaN
for high power applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
extend the applicability of wide bandgap semiconductors beyond the traditional
limits by novel doping and defect control processes. This will lead to effective
control of electrical conductivity&amp;#8232;in materials that were
traditionally classified as insulators. Extending the current limits of doping
extends the functionality of this class of materials to realize applications
that otherwise would not be possible.. This research will provide for a
transformative and disruptive technology for power electronics and also provide
a breakthrough technology for efficient doping to realize efficient deep UV
emitters for water purification. The successful demonstration of such disruptive
technology would revolutionize energy switching and transmission, energy
storage, and related applications in electrical motor drives and other power
intensive applications within the US. As such, the White House has recognized
the need to build America?s leadership in this technology as part of the
manufacturing innovation institutes. In general, this research will directly
lead to materials that will be used for applications that deal with the
preservation and extension of natural resources by: (1) allowing for the
efficient&amp;#8232;use and transmission of electrical energy, (2) availability
of clean potable water through&amp;#8232;disinfection by the use of UV, and (3)
the detection of pollutants and other effluents. This&amp;#8232;program will
provide the opportunity to educate a Ph.D. student with support from an
undergraduate student on the growth and characterization of wide bandgap
materials while participating with the group?s international collaborators
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate technical goal of this proposal is to
demonstrate controllable n-doping in AlGaN over the whole compositional range
and to demonstrate an AlGaN-based power Schottky diode that will exceed the
performance of competing SiC-based devices. The following challenges need to be
met: (1) establishment of dopant incorporation and solubility limits as well as
activation energies for Si and Ge;&amp;#8232;(2) identification of compensating
defects and impurities in AlGaN:Si/Ge; (3) control of the identified
compensators using a supersaturation and a novel Fermi level point defect
control scheme; (4) demonstration of controllable low, intermediate, and high
free electron densities in AlGaN; (5) fabrication of a power Schottky diode.
These challenges can be finally met based on recent advanced in AlGaN thin film
growth on native substrates as well as recent results on Ge-doping of GaN. The
WideBandgap Laboratory at NCSU has been in the forefront of these developments
by demonstrating not only the point defect control schemes but also by
demonstrating its capabilities such as the first demonstration&amp;#8232;of a
deep-UV laser with observable cavity modes. All these achievements have been
realized using the state-of-the-art metalorganic chemical vapor deposition
facility at NCSU. Identification of compensating defects and impurities
will&amp;#8232;lead to better understanding of defect complexes in AlGaN and
defect formation in wide bandgap materials. Since the proposed Fermi level
control scheme is independent of III-nitrides, &amp;#8232;the demonstration of
advanced point level control will promote its application in other material
systems.