* 1508925
* Toward Spin- and Valleytronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Mansour Shayegan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 405,000.00

Spintronics and, more recently, valleytronics, are emerging areas in solid state
science and engineering that utilizes carriers' spin/valley degrees of freedom
to realize novel electronic devices that rely on the creation, manipulation, and
detection of spin/valley currents. Such manipulation is expected to impact the
field of quantum computing, as spin/valley are candidates for registering the
quantum bit of information in quantum computers. The focus of the projects
proposed here is to study ballistic transport in clean carrier systems in
layered semiconductor structures. The goal is to demonstrate and characterize a
number of electronic devices such as spin-interference device, spin-filter, and
valley-filter, whose operation relies on the manipulation of spin and/or valley
degrees of freedom. The project incorporates a comprehensive educational
component, including graduate and undergraduate students training and curriculum
development. Outreach activities involve developing demonstration kits for K-12
students in New Jersey schools, for public libraries and for teachers training
programs at Princeton University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the
proposed projects is to demonstrate and characterize a number of electronic
devices whose operation relies on the manipulation of spin and/or valley degrees
of freedom. These include a spin-interference device, a spin-filter, and a
valley-filter. The devices will be based mainly on two different carrier
systems: (1) two-dimensional hole system in GaAs quantum wells which possesses a
strong and tunable spin-orbit interaction, and (2) 2D electron system in AlAs
quantum wells where the electrons occupy conduction band valleys with tunable
densities, and also have a large Lande effective g-factor so that they can be
easily spin-polarized. The projects will involve fabrication of various devices
using modern crystal growth and lithography techniques, and transport
measurements. The projects will contribute to the fundamental understanding of
the ballistic transport in semiconductor structures. Such knowledge is essential
for advancements in the emerging fields of spintronics and/or valleytronics and
quantum computing.