* 1508549
* Collaborative Research: Imaging planet-forming disks around young Suns using a revolutionary infrared detector
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Theo ten Brummelaar, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 35,530.00

On the summit of Mt. Wilson overlooking Los Angeles sits a Y-shaped array of six
1-m aperture telescopes. Unlike telescopes located on other mountaintops, these
six are not used independently of each other, but are instead used in unison to
effectively form a single larger telescope, an interferometric array, in which
the optical and near-infrared light from each of the telescopes is combined with
the light from its neighbors. Operation of the six 1-m telescopes as an
interferometric array results in the ability to detect finer details (spatial
resolution) in astronomical sources than would be possible if the 1-m telescopes
were utilized individually. With physical separations between the six 1-m
telescopes ranging from 33 to 331 meters, spatial resolutions better than 1
milliarcsecond are achieved. This far exceeds the resolution of the largest
ground-based and orbiting telescopes, and is even an order of magnitude better
than will be possible with the extremely large telescopes (ELTs) currently under
development. The subject proposal requests funding for the development and
implementation of a new backend (detection instrument) called MYSTIC (Michigan
Young STar Imager for CHARA). MYSTIC is an infrared instrument for the CHARA
Array specifically designed to image planet-forming disks around young Suns with
the highest angular resolution in the world. The major advances of the MYSTIC
instrument are realized through the utilization of 1) a high tech beam combiner,
which combines the light from the six 1-m aperture telescopes, and 2) a new
technology infrared detector, which converts the combined light into an
electronic signal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart of the MYSTIC instrument is
the small format (320x256) SELEX eAPD camera and GRAVITY optical beam combiners.
The near-IR camera array is HgCdTe utilizing a Si multiplexer with an order of
magnitude reduction in readout noise, which is critical improving the
sensitivity of the CHARA array to achieve the science goals of the program. The
optical core of MYSTIC will be a highly optimized integrated optics combiner
made available through a strategic collaboration with the Institut de
Planetologie et d'Astrophysique de Grenoble. The proposed program assembles an
international team to provide the CHARA and US communities with an imaging
interferometric telescope that will open up new discovery space for stellar
astrophysics and exoplanet studies.