* 1508290
* RUI: Numerical Studies of Topological Ordered Phases in Realistic Models
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Peterson, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2019
* USD 198,294.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on new electronic states of matter in two-
dimensions. Electrons can be confined to two-dimensions within specially made
semiconductor devices and in some two-dimensional materials. When a high
magnetic field is applied to that electron system at very low temperatures, the
fractional quantum Hall effect emerges. In the magnetic field the electrons
interact strongly and forgo their individuality: the electron system
collectively behaves as if it is comprised of other particles, called anyons,
with exotic properties. For example, anyons can appear carrying only a fraction,
e.g. one-third of the electron charge. This strange behavior, which
fundamentally relies on the cooperation of all the electrons in the system, is a
hallmark of a topologically ordered state of matter; their study is currently at
the forefront of physics, materials science, and mathematics. A particular type
of anyon, called a non-Abelian anyon, has been proposed as a building block for
the construction of a quantum computer, a type of computer that is particularly
efficient for problems ordinary computers would take an unacceptably long time
to solve. Using computer simulations and new theoretical techniques, the PI will
address fundamental questions about the experimental realization of non-Abelian
anyons in topologically ordered phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
elements will involve modern and exciting research opportunities for the
ethnically, culturally, and economically diverse graduate and undergraduate
students at the California State University Long Beach (CSULB). The award will
aim to recruit more high school students from the greater Los Angeles area to
attend CSULB and major in physics or other STEM fields, educate high school
teachers about the many interesting facets of condensed matter, and recruit and
retain physics majors already enrolled at CSULB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education focusing on numerical studies of topologically ordered
phases emerging in realistic condensed matter physics models. The research will
concentrate on two canonical physical systems: the fractional quantum Hall
effect (FQHE), and quantum spin models. Using computationally intensive
numerical techniques and advanced theoretical concepts on realistic models, the
PI will address central and important questions about the realization of non-
Abelian anyons in the FQHE in semiconductor heterostructures and graphene, and
the possibility of topologically ordered states in low-dimensional quantum spin
models. The PI will resolve questions and stimulate future research in the
search for topologically ordered states in realistic systems, contributing to a
foundation of knowledge from which to construct a quantum computer. The research
questions being addressed in this project are: Do non-Abelian anyonic
quasiparticle excitations exist in the FQHE under realistic conditions? Are
there topologically ordered phases in realistic low-dimensional quantum spin
models, and if so, what is their nature? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
elements will involve modern and exciting research opportunities for the
ethnically, culturally, and economically diverse graduate and undergraduate
students at the California State University Long Beach (CSULB). The award will
aim to recruit more high school students from the greater Los Angeles area to
attend CSULB and major in physics or other STEM fields, educate high school
teachers about the many interesting facets of condensed matter, and recruit and
retain physics majors already enrolled at CSULB.