* 1508394
* Ion dynamics and charge transport in ultrathin films of polymerized ionic liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Joshua Sangoro, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 348,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rising energy needs of the
modern society continue to provide a significant impetus for extensive research
and development in energy storage devices. Polymer electrolytes play a key role
in these devices. This project will employ specialized electrical experiments to
gain deeper understanding of the impact of the confinement of the molecules
within extrememly thin films and their interactions with surfaces on their
electrical and mechanical properties. This fundamental understanding will be
useful in guiding the design of novel functional polymer electrolytes with
desirable properties for sustainable technologies, including polymerized ionic
liquids for portable batteries, solar cells, fuel cells, actuators, field-effect
transistors, and electrochromic devices. The information regarding the interplay
between molecular structure, polymer/substrate interactions, ion transport and
dynamics in thin films of polymerized ionic liquids gained from this work will
be beneficial not only within the field of ionic liquids but also to the polymer
science and engineering scientific communities. An important component of this
project also involves several integrated educational activities. The project
will contribute to training and education of specialists in polymer
nanotechnology and materials science through active involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in this research. This integrated research/educational
program also emphasizes work with underrepresented groups and outreach to K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymerized ionic liquids are a novel class of
functional polymers that combine the unique physicochemical properties of
molecular ionic liquids (e.g. wide electrochemical windows, negligible vapor
pressures, and ionic conduction) with the outstanding mechanical characteristics
of polymers. These materials are promising for a variety of applications
including dye-sensitized solar cells, portable batteries, actuators, field-
effect transistors and electrochromic devices. Many of these technologies
involve the use of polymerized ionic liquids confined in one dimension as thin
films. However, fundamental understanding of the impact of one-dimensional
nanoscale confinement on ion transport and dynamics in polymerized ionic liquids
is still very limited. The main goal of this research is to unravel the
mechanisms controlling charge transport and ion dynamics in ultrathin films of
polymerized ionic liquids. The project will focus on: (i) investigating the
impact of film thickness on ion conduction and dynamics in polymerized ionic
liquids, (ii) unraveling the role of the polymer/substrate interactions on ion
transport and dynamics, and (iii) investigating the role of chemical
composition/structure on ion dynamics and charge transport in thin films of
polymerized ionic liquids. The research will primarialy utilize broadband
dielectric spectroscopy measurements of thin polymer films using a recently
developed electrode configuration featuring silica nanostructures and an air
gap. The detailed fundamental understanding of the impact of one-dimensional
confinement on ion transport and dynamics gained in these studies will provide a
firm scientific basis for design of more efficient polymer electrolytes suitable
for potential use in electrochemical power sources and devices.