* 1508122
* Collaborative Research:  Spin Correlations and Spin-Orbit Effects in New Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kevin Ingersent, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 255,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports collaborative research and educational activities carried
out among theory groups at Ohio University and the University of Florida,
working in close connection with scientists in Argentina and Brazil, to combine
techniques and expertise and tackle important and topical problems in materials
research. The project will focus on exploring electronic properties of materials
where the electron's spin degree of freedom is strongly affected by their
spatial (orbital) motion. The coupling of spin and orbital degrees of freedom is
a recently rediscovered phenomenon that has been observed to impact a number of
properties in metals, semiconductors, and insulators, and can be enhanced by
applied electric fields. The research to be carried out is designed to provide a
widely applicable description of how spin-orbit interactions compete with
repulsive electron-electron interactions under different external fields and
microscopic environments. This description will be applied to decorated or
intercalated graphene (a two-dimensional material made of carbon atoms that is
one atom thick), other two-dimensional single crystals, and three-dimensional
materials in which the energy of the electronic excitations is linearly
proportional to their momentum. The project is expected to provide fundamental
insights into the consequences of spin-orbit interactions as well as to advance
the understanding of materials for better experimental characterization and
eventual device applications in magnetism, spin-sensitive electronics, and
quantum information processing. The project team also plans a number of
educational activities across its different sites, including the training of
junior researchers in the US and Latin America, as well as outreach efforts that
bring in writers to produce engaging books for a general K-12 audience on topics
related to the research.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award will support theoretical research and educational activities aimed at
achieving a fundamental understanding of spin-orbit interactions and their
competition with Coulomb repulsion in recently discovered materials that include
graphene and its derivatives, two-dimensional dichalcogenides and Kagome
crystals, three-dimensional Dirac semimetals, and their heterostructures. In
addition to their fascinating and somewhat exotic physical properties, these
materials promise a variety of exciting technological applications, from
magnetics and spintronics to new carbon-based devices, and even quantum
information processing. The project team plans to employ and further develop
appropriate theoretical techniques, including the numerical renormalization
group, the density-matrix renormalization group, and continuous and tight-
binding scattering-matrix approaches, as well as field-theoretical
representations of low-energy effective Hamiltonians for the systems of
interest. These approaches are proven and reliable in treating strongly
correlated problems, and their complementarity gives the collaboration a unique
advantage. The research team consisting of theory groups at Ohio University and
the University of Florida, working in close collaboration with scientists in
Argentina and Brazil, will seek to advance the techniques to enhance their range
of applicability, especially in connection with time-dependent and non-
equilibrium phenomena. Competition between phases of matter, and their control
and modification through external probes, are the two main issues to be
investigated. A particular focus will be on understanding and guiding
experimental developments, with the goal of elucidating the role that intrinsic
quantum symmetries play in the presence of external electromagnetic and strain
fields. The project team also plans a number of educational activities across
its different sites, including the training of junior researchers in the US and
Latin America, as well as outreach efforts that bring in writers to produce
engaging books for a general K-12 audience on topics related to the research.