* 1508300
* Realizing Exotic Quantum States with Cold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Erich Mueller, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2018
* USD 244,000.00

Simple rules can lead to complicated behavior. This maxim is particularly true
in quantum mechanics, the theory describing microscopic objects such as atoms.
Tools of theoretical physics will be used to determine how such exotic behavior
emerges in ultracold atomic gases. While these studies may potentially lead to
novel applications in areas such as quantum computing, metrology, or materials
science, the direct goal of this set of projects is to test fundamental concepts
about emergent physics in quantum systems. There are three disconnected lines of
research. First, when atoms are confined to tight tubes they behave differently
than atoms which are free to move in three dimensions. The cross-over between
this exotic one-dimensional state and more conventional three-dimensional
physics will be studied. Second, an exotic state was recently discovered in
electronic systems. Dubbed "topological insulators," these materials have
insulating bulks, but conducting surface modes. Moreover the surface modes
behave in unconventional ways. The cold atom analogs of these systems will be
studied. Finally, the cold atom analogs of electron systems with magnetic
impurities will be studied. Metals with magnetic impurities display a number of
important phenomena, some of which are not completely understood. The goal is to
produce a controlled system for testing various theoretical
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three research directions which
will advance understanding of cold atoms, and many-body physics. These are
chosen to dovetail with recent experimental and theoretical development. The
first research direction will involve the dimensional crossover between 1D and
3D in a superfluid partially polarized Fermi gas. The 1D system displays a
fluctuating version of the FFLO state. There is hope that true long-range FFLO
order can be stabilized for intermediate confinement. The PI will use the
inhomogeneous Bogoliubov-de-Gennes equations to study this crossover. The second
research direction will involve lattice defects in an artificial atomic Chern
insulator. There is a potentially transformitive conjecture that such defects
are related to the fractional quantum Hall effect. Much of this physics can be
revealed by numerical studies of the single-particle Schrodinger equation. Even
if the conjecture is incorrect, the study will teach us about these defects,
which are important in solid state systems. The third research project will
involve attempts to see Kondo physics in cold atoms. By studying this problem in
cold atoms, the goal is to obtain a more direct insight into this exotic
physics. Greens function techniques will be used for this latter project.