* 1508144
* Heterostructures and Superlattices of Two-Dimensional Layered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Xiangfeng Duan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 12/31/2018
* USD 359,966.00

Nontechnical Description: Two-dimensional layered materials represent a new
class of material systems for exploring fundamental chemistry and physics at the
limit of single-atom thickness, and have the potential to open up completely new
technological opportunities beyond the reach of the existing materials, such as
high-speed electronics, ultra-flexible electronics, photodetectors,
photovoltaics and novel sensors. This project investigates the fundamental
nucleation and growth mechanisms of two-dimensional materials and develops
synthetic strategies for the growth of these atomically thin crystals with well-
defined boundaries in both lateral and vertical directions. The research is
closely integrated with education and outreach activities. The project provides
students with educational and training opportunities beyond traditional
educational boundaries including developing entrepreneurial skills. The
materials and methodologies developed in the research are integrated into
graduate and undergraduate courses to broaden the educational experience beyond
the PI's laboratory.

Technical Description: This project aims to design and synthesize two-
dimensional layered materials, their heterostructures and superlattices with a
precise control of material parameters including chemical composition, physical
dimension, number of atomic layers, and heterostructure interfaces. The project
uses in-situ transmission electron microscopy to investigate the nucleation and
growth kinetics and develops an atomistic understanding of two-dimensional
crystal growth within and between atomic layers. The project also develops a
laser-assisted chemical vapor deposition approach for programmable switching of
chemical precursors to enable the controlled growth of heterostructures with
atomically sharp interfaces. The structural, chemical and electronic modulation
of the resulting materials is studied using transmission electron microscopy and
scanning tunneling microscopy. In addition, the project investigates the
fundamental electronic and optical properties of the resulting materials, and
explores their applications for novel electronic and optoelectronic devices.