* 1508731
* Shape and Dimensional Precision in Polymeric Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Samuel Stupp, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2021
* USD 858,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The goal of this project is to develop novel polymer-based materials that
exhibit unique properties above and beyond what has been available to technology
at large for over half a century. Soft polymeric materials such as plastics,
rubbers, adhesives, and lightweight composites have been extremely useful to
society in consumer goods, transportation, biomedical technology, manufacturing,
and national security, among other areas. In this project new polymeric
materials are proposed that combine the useful characteristics of currently used
soft materials with ability to respond to their environment by delivering
beneficial chemical molecules, changing physical properties as needed, or even
repairing themselves. These novel polymers will be synthesized and their
properities studied by a variety of techniques. The project requires the
integration of materials science, synthetic chemistry, physics, and
computational sciences. The research project is therefore an interdisciplinary
platform not only to advance many technologies, but also to train graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. It will help them for future integrated
research in industry, academia, or government in order to develop the new
materials needed to implement technologies of value in many sectors.
Furthermore, all participants will have opportunities to engage in outreach with
high school students and with the broader community.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The goal of this project is to develop strategies to control the size, shape,
and functionality of polymers based on strong and directional interactions
between monomers of a supramolecular component and of a covalent macromolecular
template. It is hypothesized that the simultaneous formation of the covalent
template and of the supramolecular polymer could yield dynamic hybrid structures
with macromolecular and supramolecular compartments. The key strategy is to
design monomers that have the potential for multiple and strong non-covalent
interactions. The proposed chemistry involves aromatic foldamers or fluorinated
methacrylates as templates and supramolecular polymers containing amino acid
sequences. One potential novel function of the hybrids is delivery of the
supramolecular component into an environment followed by the facile
reconstitution of the hybrid structure with additional monomer. In another
strategy, the formation of complex structures through supramolecular
polymerizations will be seeded by spherical or cylindrical hybrids. In order to
investigate the potential novel functionality of the hybrids, the project will
also investigate systems that incorporate electron donors and electron
acceptors. The challenging synthetic work will be carried by a postdoctoral
fellow and the structural, functional, and any necessary computational work by a
graduate student. The postdoctoral fellow will gain mentoring experience by
working with a graduate student as a team, and both will participate in outreach
activities with high school students and the broader community. At the same
time, the highly interdisciplinary nature of the research will contribute
greatly to all involved.