* 1508511
* Biomimetic Reconstruction of Functional and Hierarchical Microvascular Network
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Hongjun Wang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 389,909.00

Non-Technical: This award by the National Science Foundation to Stevens
Institute of Technology is to explore a sacrificial template-guided approach for
generating functional vascular networks that can be used to form vascularized
tissue constructs. Every year thousands of patients wait for organ
transplantation, however, limited by donors, many of them cannot be treated in
time. In recognition, the idea of creating tissue-engineered tissues/organs
represents a promising solution. Along with extensive progresses in tissue
engineering, effective generation of a functional vasculature network within an
engineered tissue becomes the most prominent technical hurdle, which not only
restricts from the creation of large volume tissues/organs but also limits their
survival after implantation. In this regard, this proposal will provide a
controllable method to form the microvascular networks with a high potential to
be integrated with tissue-engineered constructs. As such, this project will help
to facilitate the development of robust and effective platforms for generating
large tissues/organs with complex and hierarchical structures for foreseeable
applications in reconstructive surgery and other health care, aside from a
wealth of knowledge to advance the rapidly growing fields of tissue engineering
and regenerative medicine. With regard to the broader impacts, this project will
provide the exciting, inspiring and collaborative research experience to: 1)
graduate students via working in an interdisciplinary environment; 2)
undergraduate students through the Stevens Scholars and Innovation &amp;
Entrepreneurship programs; and 3) high school students through the American
Chemical Society's Summer Research Internship Program for Economically
Disadvantaged High School Students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
With this award, the investigators will in vitro reconstruct a functional
microvascular network (&lt; 100 micrometers in diameter), closely mimicking the
functional characteristics and hierarchical organization of the native one, for
vascularization of tissue constructs. To form the microvascular networks with
controlled patterns and diameters, especially the desired patency, sacrificial
templates of various microfiber networks will be used to support the respective
formation of capillary- and arteriole/venule-like networks from vascular cells.
The specific objectives of this project are to: (1) investigate the utility of
localized-dissolution patterned microfiber networks (5-30 micrometers in
diameter) as the sacrificial template for capillary-like vascular network
formation, (2) explore the use of near-field electrostatic printed microfiber
networks with well controlled patterns and fiber diameters (tunable between 30
and 80 micrometers) as the sacrificial template for arteriole-like structure
formation, and (3) form a hierarchical and functional microvascular network in
3D tissue constructs. Successful execution of the proposed research will: (1)
gain further insights on the matrix-regulated reversal of endothelial polarity
and lumen development; (2) understand the fusion mechanism of existing vascular
networks; and (3) establish a strong knowledge base for potential exploitation
of the template-enabled vascularization concept to form large implantable 3D
tissues, a significant leap forward in tissue engineering and vascular biology.