* 1508276
* I-Corps:  Mobile Autonomous Remotely Controlled Observation Node (MARCON) Kit
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* David Fries, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 11/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Current ocean field research activity is dominated by the Research Vessel
paradigm. Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are now available and have been
maturing for ocean sensing but are range limited plus have limits in payload
capacity and duration. Improvements in ocean robotics and their coupling to
manned systems (research vessels) are needed in order to accelerate ocean going
ship activities. The proposed innovation is to enable mobile networks (multi-
agent system) of high speed, high power robotic surface vehicles outfitted with
sensors (real time sensing) and novel robotic samplers for post sample
processing. The robotic surface vessels are enabled by the proposed automation
kit designated MARCON: (Mobile, Autonomous and Remotely Controlled Observation
Node), a cheaper more lightweight and open-source automation system for surface
vehicles. The broader impact of this technology is its ability to impact the
data collection and quality of the various parameters to understand any aquatic
ecosystem. The market for automated mapping of the waterways is growing because
of the push to move observations out of laboratories into decentralized
settings. Implementation of fast automated mapping of key and new parameters
will not only impact the management of ecosystems, but can reduce time in and
costs, which will result in a more efficient environmental management
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed technology
is its ability to transform the field of ocean/lakes/river observations.
Further, deficiencies in ship-based research such as aliasing in time and space,
efficient large area coverage, stress at sea for humans, lack of persistence on
the water, and ability to adaptively respond over a large area, can all be
improved with robotic augmented ship operations. Ocean researchers in the US
will benefit from this work. In addition, the ability to adaptively respond to
fronts, blooms, extreme events (hurricanes, radioactive releases, etc) and oil
spills will be enhanced. The key features of making these proposed kits
available to the market place include: distributed fleets of robotic surface
vehicles to enable a new Research Vessel System; a robotic vehicle for speedy
sensing/sampling of waterways and power for maximum sensor hosting; an end-end
solution for automated high content data generation and visualization; advanced
adaptive sensing and sampling approach; accessible open source technology for
rapid adoption and diffusion of the automation kit and boat platform.