* 1508170
* Collaborative Research:  Photolysis of environmentally-relevant organometallic compounds in aqueous matrices
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Katherine Squibb, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 105,000.00

With this award, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Lee Blaney of the University of Maryland,
Baltimore County (UMBC) and Professor Katherine Squibb of the University of
Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) to investigate the chemistry of organometallic
substances in the environment. This project seeks to understand the
environmental transformations of organometallic compounds due to direct and
indirect solar photolysis. Organoarsenic, -platinum, -selenium, and -tin
compounds are included in this research because they are widespread in
environmental systems. Two PhD-level graduate students and a number of
undergraduate assistants are involved with the associated research. The project
team works with the UMBC Meyerhoff Scholars Program (MSP) and Center for Women
in Technology (CWIT) to recruit students from underrepresented groups who are
interested in environmental chemistry. In addition, the PIs partner with MSP,
CWIT, and the UMBC Office of Undergraduate Education to engage students from
underrepresented groups in workshops, seminars, and demonstrations, with a goal
to promote undergraduate research and education in the environmental chemical
sciences. Select aspects of the research are being incorporated into graduate
level courses in Environmental Chemistry (UMBC) and Advanced Toxicology
(UMB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced analytical methods are being developed
using solid-phase extraction liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry
(SPE-LC-MS/MS) for organometallics to enhance identification and quantitation of
transformation products. The molar extinction coefficients and photo-
transformation kinetics of eight organometallic substances are being determined
across pH and wavelength gradients for direct and indirect photolysis
mechanisms. Furthermore, the transformation pathways for these chemicals from
the organic form to the base metal species are being identified. As the toxicity
of organometallics and their base metals differ, a targeted bioassay approach is
employed to demonstrate changes in toxicity with photolytic degradation. More
specifically, the research aims include: (i)developing solid-phase extraction
liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (SPE-LC-
ESI-MS/MS) analytical methods for these organometallic species; (ii) measuring
the transformation kinetics of the organometallic compounds of concern by direct
and indirect photolysis in urban surface water; (iii)identifying transformation
products formed through direct and indirect photolysis of targeted
organometallic compounds and (iv) characterizing the residual biochemical
activity of solutions containing organometallic compounds and
phototransformation products using a targeted bioassay approach. This research
approach is expected to improve understanding of the photochemical fate of
organometallic chemicals in environmental systems.