* 1508412
* Theoretical Solid State Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Marvin Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* David Rabson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,400,000.00

Nontechnical Description: This project supports theoretical and computational
research and education on condensed matter physics and materials science. The
fascinating properties and phenomena of condensed matter emerge from mutual
interactions of the electrons and ions that constitute the material, many of
which are central to modern technologies such as electronics, optoelectronics,
and energy conversion devices. Often these properties are dramatically altered
or new phenomena emerge from varying the chemical composition or confining the
materials to nanometer scales. This project is centered on using quantum theory,
modeling, and simulations to explain and predict novel materials and
nanostructures. New theoretical approaches and the availability of modern
massively parallel computers allow the team to obtain first-principles (i.e.,
with no empirical parameters) explanations and predictions of the behavior of
atomically thin materials, nanostructures, interfacial and defect phenomena, new
superconductors, and photocatalytic materials. The educational components are
focused on training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows for research
and development in using materials in the current technological revolution. The
research findings are published in scientific journals as well as presented on
the team's website. The computational tools developed from the project are
incorporated into several software packages - Berkeley GW, PARATEC, and EPW -
which are made freely available on the web to the research community. Another
educational activity is related to public education, which is done through
articles and interviews published in lay media and via public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project aims at
understanding the electronic and optical properties of materials and
nanostructures at the microscopic level by performing first-principles quantum
calculations. Topics investigated include: two-dimensional (2D) crystals such as
graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides; nanotubes and nanoribbons;
electronic properties and photophysics of novel bulk (such as topological
insulators) and reduced-dimensional systems; and superconductivity. Emphasis is
placed on using realistic models, close collaborations with experimentalists,
investigations and predictions of novel and useful materials, and development of
new theoretical and computational approaches. Several different approaches are
employed. The ab-initio pseudopotential method and total-energy techniques are
applied within the density functional formalism to compute ground-state
properties. Excited-state (spectroscopic) phenomena are investigated using a
first-principle self-energy approach based on the GW approximation for
quasiparticle excitations and an ab-initio interacting two-particle Green's
function method based on the Bethe-Salpeter equation for optical excitations.
Other studies rely on molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations, dielectric
function methods, BCS theory, and extensions of standard many-body theory.
Augmentation of existing methods to deal with strong electron correlations is
also employed.