* 1508968
* UNS: The intersection of photonics and nonimaging optics in luminescent concentration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Noel Giebink, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 306,910.00

PI Name: Noel C. Giebink&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1508968&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun represents the most abundant potential
source of sustainable energy on earth. Solar cells that capture the sun's rays
and convert this energy into electricity can potentially be improved through the
science of photonics, which uses materials to mold the flow of light. The
overall goal of this research is to combine photonics with traditional methods
of light concentration, such as mirrors or lenses, to enhance the amount of
sunlight delivered to a solar cell. The proposed research will use a combination
of experimental and mathematical approaches to find the best combination of
photonic and optic structures, and then test these new structures on solar cells
to see if they improve performance. The educational and outreach activities
built around this project include an exhibit targeted for middle and high school
students at the USA Science and Engineering Festival held in Washington, DC.
This exhibit will highlight the importance of luminescence in everyday life by
through interactive activities that explain the science underlying fireflies,
glow-in-the-dark paint, luminescent rocks, and similar
curiosities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient capture of solar incidence is a
major challenge in the development of new photovoltaic (PV) devices for the
conversion of sunlight to electricity. The field of non-imaging optics addresses
optimum geometric concentration via lenses or mirrors, and is most effective for
collimated light. In contrast, luminescent concentrators (LCs) can intensify
diffuse light incident from any direction by absorbing and re-emitting it into a
waveguide. The overall goal of the proposed research is to combine luminescent
concentration with non-imaging optics to leverage the advantages of both
processes for more efficient capture of light for solar PV applications. Towards
this end, nanoscale photonic structures will be engineered for highly
directional luminescent emission and coupled with macroscale non-imaging optical
surfaces to achieve increases in secondary geometric gain of light collection.
The experimental and theoretical approach will combine electromagnetic
simulation, ray tracing, conformal mapping, fabrication, and testing studies.
Scalable design strategies for photonic materials will be developed to control
spontaneous emission direction, and promising materials will be fabricated and
tested using a range of organic fluorophores and ion-doped inorganic
nanocrystals. Furthermore, discrete mathematical solutions for non-imaging
optics will be developed for several directional emission profiles and validated
using custom acrylic optic models. From this information, the formal analogy
between light propagating in gradient refractive index media and in a constant
index freeform waveguide will then be exploited to harness transformation optics
as an alternative design tool, with the resulting waveguides fabricated through
a process that enables scalable 3D printing of high quality, large area optical
surfaces. Finally, luminescent concentrator waveguides with transfer-printed
GaAs photovoltaics will be fabricated and tested to study how these structures
impact solar PV performance. The optics and photonics themes of this research
tie in closely with the planned educational activities and outreach.