* 1508085
* Instrument Development: Charge Sensing In Fluids With Nanometer Precision
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Fredy Zypman, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 412,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professor Steven Eppell at Case Western Reserve
University and Professor Fredy Zypman at Yeshiva University to develop a
scanning probe-based technique to map charge onto the surfaces of nanoparticles
and molecules with sub-10 nm resolution. Studying charge distributions is an old
problem for which fundamental understanding of the process is still lacking.
Gaining insight into those fundamentals is expected have broader scientific
impact in areas such as self-assembly at interfaces and macromolecular
interactions. The project will also provide training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students through both research activities and the development
of a new interdisciplinary lab/theory course on "SFM (Scanned Force Microscopy)
Use in Basic Science". Both PIs actively recruit and engage talented junior
students, especially those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses high speed digitization
of passive sensors coupled with a theory that reliably converts sensor position
into force curves and maps charge onto surfaces of nanoparticles and molecules
submerged in electrolytes with sub-10 nm resolution. The proposed research
objectives are (1) to develop a measurement process that converts experimental
scanned force microscope force-distance curves into charge density measurements
on an object of interest with sub-10 nm spatial resolution; (2) to calibrate the
system using known charged nanospheres; and (3) to demonstrate the proposed
approach to study the self-assembly and mechanics of collagen nanofibrils, the
formation of nanochains and the creation of rechargeable heavy metal cation
chelators using magnetic nanoparticles. The technical approach being developed
has the potential to impact the discovery process for new materials by allowing
existing theories to be matched with experimental measurements of charge
distribution, and by allowing synthetic chemists to identify sub-populations of
desired products existing within a larger group of otherwise undesired
byproducts.