* 1508399
* Bioengineering Single Crystal Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Derk Joester, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 544,922.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Northwestern University is to study the deposition of
single crystalline elements, spicules, made from calcite, a form of calcium
carbonate. Many different organisms, from bacteria to humans, use sophisticated
organic/inorganic composite materials for mechanical support (e.g., bone),
feeding (tooth enamel), defense, and sensing of light, gravity, and the magnetic
field. Work in the researcher's laboratory revolves around developing a
biotechnological alternative to material synthesis, i.e. modifying an existing
biological system rather than re-creating it in the laboratory. Earlier studies
by this researcher have demonstrated that the shape and crystallographic growth
direction of spicules deposited by primary mesenchyme cells (PMCs) could be
controlled using a recombinant protein, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). Building on these results, the team aims to increase the understanding
of, and mastery over, the crystal growth process in PMC culture. For this
purpose, the effect of VEGF concentration on the structure and composition of
the spicule at length scales from nanometers to hundreds of microns will be
determined, using sophisticated characterization techniques such as atom probe
tomography, tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray microscopy. Special
attention will be given to the distribution of proteins in the biomineral and
the surrounding vesicle, using a combination of proteomics and specific
antibody-based imaging. Possible functional roles of proteins on nucleation and
growth will be established in in vitro assays. In this manner, the team hopes to
learn how biological regulation and processing of a complex composite material
are connected, essentially linking the biological and the materials genome. This
knowledge could impact a wide range of areas from programmed synthesis of bone
grafts to large-scale carbon dioxide sequestration. Research findings will be
disseminated not only to technical audiences through publications and at
conferences, but also through integration in undergraduate laboratory exercises
and by engaging undergraduate students in the research as paid laboratory
assistants. Finally, members of the team will reach out to local schools and
perform experiments with high and middle school students using a mobile
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Mineralized tissues are
sophisticated hybrid materials with highly hierarchical architecture and
remarkable control over crystal growth at multiple length scales. Despite great
recent progress in bio-inspired material synthesis, many of the hallmarks of
biological crystal growth have yet to be reproduced in vitro: polymorph control,
curving and/or branching single crystals, and nm scale control of organic-
inorganic composites. Clearly, much could be gained by developing a
biotechnological alternative to materials synthesis. This researcher's team
earlier has developed an in vitro culture system of sea urchin embryo primary
mesenchyme cells (PMCs) to control the deposition of single crystalline spicules
made from calcite (CaCO3). A fundamental discovery of the prior funding period
was that vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling controls the shape
and crystallographic growth direction of spicules deposited by PMC; the protein
does so without directly interacting with the mineral. This provides the unique
opportunity to investigate the mechanism underlying this remarkable example of
biological control over crystal growth in a well-characterized in vitro cell
culture system. The team will do so at three different length scales. At the
sub-micron scale, the team will investigate, using a combination of atom probe
tomography, tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray microscopy, the role of
organic-mineral interfaces in crystal growth and the impact of the VEGF
concentration on the micro/nanostructure and composition of spicules. At the
submicron to subcellular length scales, the team will use a combination of
quantitative proteomics and imaging using specific antibodies to elucidate the
distribution of spicule matrix proteins. Possible functional roles of proteins
on nucleation and growth will be established in in vitro assays. Finally, at the
system scale, the impact of temporal patterns of VEGF signaling on the crystal
branching will be determined. The proposed research will impact the
understanding how skeletal elements arise from biological processes at different
length scales and how biological processing affects crystal growth. This is a
first step to connect developmental biology to the materials genome. This
knowledge could impact a wide range of areas from programmed synthesis of bone
grafts to large-scale carbon dioxide sequestration. An important component of
the proposed activity is an education and outreach-plan that complements the
research objectives and is well integrated; its elements are dissemination of
research results and methods in the undergraduate curriculum, engagement of
students in the research activities, and outreach to local middle and high
schools using a mobile laboratory.