* 1508722
* Formation of Non-Pathogenic E. Coli Biofilms on Silicone
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Chengzhi Cai, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Houston is to carry out research that will
provide new insights to the process of biofilm formation, which will be
invaluable for the development of strategies to prevent pathogen colonization
and to promote the formation of benign or 'antimicrobial' biofilms. Colonization
by pathogenic bacteria and the subsequent formation of biofilms on hosts,
materials, and devices have a tremendous negative impact on human health and the
environment. The proposed research is to develop a new strategy that uses benign
bacteria to form a high coverage and stable biofilm on silicone surfaces to
prevent biofilm formation by pathogenic bacteria. Graduate and undergraduate
students involved in the project will be trained in many cutting-edge research
skills and fields. Additionally, one undergraduate student per year will be
recruited and mentored under the 'teachHouston' program at the campus to train
as K-12 teachers in STEM topics. This program was established to address the
critical shortage of K-12 science teachers. Students in the program not only do
research in the researcher's laboratory, but also teach at local schools from
their first year. The goal of the program is to provide high quality research
experience to the future teachers so that they can better inspire young minds to
scientific inquiry. Towards this end, this investigator will help these students
to develop education modules related to their research projects for use in high
school science classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Biofilm formation by
pathogenic microbes is involved in most bacterial diseases, especially
biomedical device-associated infections. Pathogens enclosed in biofilms are
protected from host immune defense and antimicrobial agents. Hence, they are
difficult to eradicate, resulting in recurrent infections and facilitating the
development of multidrug resistance. The overarching goal of the proposed
research is to develop a new strategy to prevent biofilm formation on silicone
surfaces used in urinary catheters and associated bacterial infection. This
strategy uses benign bacteria to form a high coverage and stable biofilm on
silicone surfaces as a live base to fight against pathogens. The objectives of
the proposed research are to modify silicone surfaces with adhesion molecules to
enable benign bacteria to form high coverage and stable biofilms, and to
investigate the bacterial responses to the immobilized adhesion molecules during
the biofilm formation process. The new understanding will guide the development
of benign biofilms to fight against pathogens. Students involved in the project
will be trained in this multidisciplinary area. To train future science
teachers, one undergraduate student per year will be recruited from the
'teachHouston' program at the campus, and will be trained as teachers in
education modules for use in high school chemistry and biology classes, in
addition to their research activities in the researcher's laboratory.