* 1508717
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Mimicking mussel adhesion with periodically sequenced polypeptides
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* J Herbert Waite, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2017
* USD 76,731.00

1506539 (Tu) / 1508717 (Waite)

The proposed work emphasizes discoveries in bioadhesion, which has the potential
to have "far reaching effects" in a number of technologies. Moreover, the
ability to generate a significant quantity of a non-toxic biomimetic adhesive
has excellent potential for STEM education, where simple demonstrations can be
developed to engage students in fundamental science questions as well as the
engineering of materials. Additionally, CCNY is a Minority Serving Institution,
and the proposed interdisciplinary work is ideal for engaging students at the
high-school, undergraduate and graduate levels. The PI has developed a
"community" of science teachers at Harlem area schools, where area teachers can
work together with high school students in the research lab during the summer
and school year. Taken together, the proposed work can both broaden
participation in the local STEM community as well as lead to a significant
impact in the adhesion and interfacial science community.

Marine mussels use the catecholic amino acid 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (Dopa)
in mussel foot proteins to mediate robust wet adhesion in the turbulent
intertidal zone. The objective of this EAGER proposal is to quantitatively
explore the role of high fidelity sequence periodicity in Dopa-rich polypeptide
on the dynamics of coating and adhesion. Moreover, the PIs propose a
nonbiological synthetic protocol for the synthesis of a high molecular weight
periodic sequence with a low polydispersity, allowing us to synthesize bulk-
scale inexpensive polymer. Our approach is based on the application of a
transport-limited polycondensation reaction to define both the periodicity and
the polydispersity. Subsequently, the PIs propose to quantify the coating
dynamics and work of adhesion as a function of the sequence parameters. They
will use developed synthetic protocols to precisely control the role of
Dopa/proline frequency and the spatial distribution of peptides. This research
team has established expertise in both the synthetic methods and the
characterization tools, but the proposed work aims at EAGER funding because the
vision of marrying polymer-scale synthetic tools and biomimetic adhesion is
untested and involves a radically different approach.