* 1508105
* Stationary Phases for Liquid Phase Separations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Luis Colon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2019
* USD 490,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professor Luis A. Colon of the University at Buffalo to
develop stable separation media based on highly crosslinked polymeric layers on
silica for use in separation techniques in chemical analysis. Separation media
are indispensable analytical tools in chemical analysis, which is itself central
to the chemical, biological, and related sciences. The proposed crosslinked
polymeric layers are designed to possess high chemical and physical stability,
with the goal of improving upon currently used separation materials. The
proposed research is targeting a universal platform on which different
separation media could be prepared, opening up possibilities for their use in
specific practical applications. Broader impacts are addressed through the
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students, including members
of traditionally underrepresented groups. Research on this project will provide
skills in chemical analysis that are very useful for the modern-day workforce in
the academic, pharmaceutical and industrial chemical sectors. Experiments will
be developed for the undergraduate laboratory so that more students can
experience an authentic research experience in this setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will exploit the chemistry of
diazonium salts to assemble organic molecular entities on the surface of silica
substrates, rendering materials with highly desirable properties for liquid
chromatography (LC) and other separation techniques, dictated by the newly
assembled layer on the material's surface. The strategy consists on attaching
functionalized aryl groups on the silica surface, from which molecular layers
will grow by means of diazonium chemistry, and then crosslinking the layers to
create a highly stable polymer layer on the silica surface. During the different
stages of optimizing the synthesis of the new layer on the silica surface, a
systematic evaluation will be performed to assess the physical, chemical, and
chromatographic properties of the material using a battery of techniques (e.g.,
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, elemental analysis, gas
adsorption analysis, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, thermogravimetric
analysis). LC will be used to examine the chromatographic performance of the
newly synthesized materials. The assessment will include the use of standard
published protocols that will provide information on the retentive behavior
(i.e., selectivity) and stability of the materials under liquid chromatographic
conditions. These investigations are part of a long-term research program
focused on the study of new and improved materials for chemical analysis,
particularly in chemical separations.