* 1508440
* SusChEM: Design and Evaluation of Soybean Oil Based Adhesives for Aqueous Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Ali Dhinojwala, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adhesives are extensively used in several
applications and are almost always made from petroleum based starting materials,
which is a depleting resource. Therefore replacing these resources with widely
available and sustainable materials such as soybean oil for the synthesis of
adhesives is a national need. In medicine, adhesives are a critical component,
and in several instances such as in a cardiac surgery, medical adhesives are a
necessity. However, the performance of human-made adhesives is often less than
optimal when it is applied in surgical or wet environments. Nature provides
spectacular examples of adhesives that work extraordinarily in wet and harsh
conditions. Mussels are able to secrete protein based adhesives that enable them
to stick to boats and docks underwater. The PIs have developed an adhesive that
is made from readily available and sustainable soybean oil which demonstrates
superior adhesion to surfaces in wet conditions. This award is aimed at
providing a better understanding of the chemical processes that are responsible
for strong adhesion of this soybean oil based adhesive in wet conditions. The
PIs will systematically modify the chemical composition of these adhesives and
examine the nature of the adhesion. Such studies will enable design of adhesives
that perform in challenging environments and which are translationally viable.
The award enables graduate students to gain expertise in techniques and
methodologies that are at the cutting edge of their field. In addition, the
award will provide research opportunities for undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adhesives such as those secreted by mussels and sandcastle
worms are impressive for their ability to function in harsh conditions such as
sea water and high winds. Synthetic polymers fall far short in their ability to
mimic this ability to perform in wet environments. This award is aimed at
gaining a better understanding of the interactions at the interface that enable
adhesion under wet environments. The PIs have designed a modular polyester
platform that enables the incorporation of various functional groups into the
designed polyester. The major monomer for the synthesis of the adhesive
polyester is derived from soybean oil - a widely available and sustainable
resource. The designed polyester will contain long-chain pendant groups derived
from soybean oil, which will provide the hydrophobic character to enable
exclusion of water. In addition, the adhesion to a substrate will be provided by
catechol units. Cohesive strength will be provided by coumarin units that
crosslink upon photoirradiation. It will also contain various functional groups
such as hydroxyl and amine groups that will affect the adhesion. The
contribution of these functional groups will be examined by techniques that
probe the substrate interface. Sum-frequency spectroscopy, soft contact
mechanics (JKR) and solid state NMR will provide insight into the processes that
account for the improved adhesion of these polyesters in wet environments.
Students trained through this award will gain expertise in polymer synthesis,
polymer characterization using cutting edge surface characterization techniques,
and the opportunity to work collaboratively on teams that bring complementary
skills.