* 1508186
* Instabilities, asymptotic isometry, and energy condensation in elastic sheets under twist
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Arshad Kudrolli, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 02/28/2021
* USD 385,623.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop a deep
understanding of how thin elastic materials undergo buckling and creasing when
subjected to twist. This knowledge is essential in obtaining the maximum
functionality from devices made with new materials such as graphene sheets,
nanotubes, semiconductor nanoribbons, and various biomaterials. Theoretical
understanding of how thin sheets buckle and crease under stress is just in its
infancy and these experimental studies will provide both guidance to and tests
of these theories. Ultimately, this research will impact determination of
strength and failure of thin materials under stress, and manufacturing of
flexible structures and yarns by developing widely scalable techniques to
pattern slender materials. The proposed research will also have a significant
impact on educating students pursuing careers in STEM related disciplines. The
dissertation research work of graduate students will be impacted by the grant.
The project will enhance research experience of undergraduate students in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to understand the buckling instabilities of thin elastic sheets
subjected to twist which lead to wrinkling, stress focusing and energy
condensation into creased structures. The fundamental role of elasticity and
geometry in organizing the shape of the post-buckled structures will be
investigated with experiments which will measure the shapes of the structures
using micro x-ray tomography techniques and laser-aided optical imaging
techniques. The phase diagram anticipated by a newly developed co-variant form
of the Foppl-von Karman equations for thin plates will be investigated as
function of sheet aspect ratio and elastic modulus. Development of minimal ridge
structures and their interactions observed during the twisting of thin ribbon
shapes will be used to study the scaling of the associated energy as a function
of sheet thickness and applied deformation. Understanding formation of self-
scrolled yarn and fabric structures under twist will provide an alternate
reliable and efficient strategy to build mesoscale hierarchical structures with
novel materials including graphene sheets, nanotubes, semiconductor nanoribbons,
and biomaterials. Peer reviewed scientific publications will increase scientific
knowledge in the field of condensed matter physics and will be disseminated on
the web. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the field of
elasticity and soft matter, and in using sophisticated imaging techniques and
analysis towards careers in STEM.