* 1508613
* RAPID: Near Real-Time Quantifiable Social Media Data for Improved Modeling, Tracking and Mitigating the Spread of the Ebola Virus
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Yelena Yesha, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 03/31/2017
* USD 99,969.00

The research enables the development of new quantitative crisis maps to
approximate local regional rates of infectious Ebola virus spreading in near
real time thereby enhancing the effective distribution of limited availability
of recently developed vaccines to mitigate the spread of Ebola. It will also
provide a mechanism for validating and improving operational forecast models of
the CDC by comparisons with regional social media observations. It may allow for
disease surveillance and early detection among third-world countries, which will
in turn have impacts globally as evidenced by the rapid global spread of the
recent Ebola outbreak. The work should be generalizable to other infectious
virus conditions. Furthermore the research will be capable of exploiting social
media health data from future hand held devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this project is developing methodology for utilization and
augmentation of quantifiable social media data from Twitter into epidemiological
infectious virus spread model, with the aim to validate the model forecasts and
provide additional channels of suspected EVD cases not available through
traditional sources. The work is based on a need to collect real-time
quantitative media data related to Ebola-exposed regional populations in the
three sub-Saharan African countries. Although publicly available partial data
exists on Internet sites, the complete source of public data is available only
by purchase from organizations that manage and control such sites as Twitter and
Instagram. The developed methods would contribute in evaluating the
effectiveness of model forecast based on the social media data for future
improvements in the prediction of infectious disease spread and
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work, coordinated with and submitted in
parallel with respective RAPID proposals, in coalition with researchers at FAU,
FIU, and UMN, aims to jointly address public health problems of national and
global significance, particularly the problems of big data for mitigation of
public health emergencies. Specifically, the proposers will work with FAU and
FIU on modeling Ebola spread through use of innovative big data analytics
techniques, integrating quantifiable social media data from Twitter. Beyond the
present issue of Ebola, the proposed methodology and the coalition-building
effort aims to enable support solutions in a wide range of public health issues.