* 1508505
* Quantitative Determination of Dislocation Core Structure and Mobility Using Atomic Resolution Microscopy and Multiscale Modeling: Application to High Entropy Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Peter Anderson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 515,001.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt; Dislocations are linear, mobile defects
in crystals that control the strength and ductility of metals. Despite
tremendous advances to model the structure and movement of dislocations at the
atomic scale, the ability to validate these model predictions is significantly
lagging. For instance, multiple microscopy methods have not been applied in
concert to characterize dislocations. This research will develop innovative
analysis techniques that help shape the future of defect analysis and are
transportable to other metallic materials, ceramics, and semiconductors.
Historically, top-down approaches have been employed whereby macroscopic
measurements are used to deduce forces on defects and their mobility. This
research enables a bottoms-up approach to determine these fundamental
quantities, by leveraging revolutionary advances in electron microscopy with
advanced atomic-scale modeling and multi-scale probes. These advances are
applied to the high entropy alloys -a new class of materials with attractive and
unusual properties, including increased strength and fracture toughness at lower
temperatures. This research advances experimental and computational approaches
to understand the origin of these remarkable properties at a fundamental defect
level. This project synergizes new educational approaches that cross-cut
microscopy and computational content. It also provides opportunities for
undergraduate students to participate in interdisciplinary senior capstone
projects. This research impacts pre-college education, through participation in
the Ohio Department of Education Math and Science Program. It also offers
professional development for high school science teachers, through an annual
'Materials Camp for Teachers' and an on-line repository of instructional
materials targeted for grades 8-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt; Atomistic and first principles calculations of dislocation structure
and behavior have become an essential part of 'bottoms-up' modeling of the
mechanical behavior of metals and alloys, and they are a key component of
computational materials design in the Materials Genome Initiative. However, an
inherent problem exists: atomic-scale calculations often lack validation at an
appropriate length scale. The aim of this project is to transform bottoms-up
modeling, by developing a coordinated approach for quantitative, experimentally-
informed measurements of dislocation core structures and mobility. This is
achieved by coupling recent advances in atomic resolution scanning electron
microscopy with atomic-scale computations and multi-scale modeling. The
experimental data are analyzed with computational techniques that quantify
errors and extract local deformation, local strain energy, and thermodynamic
forces on dislocations and other defects. Thermo-mechanical studies are
conducted using in-situ heating and nano-drilling of holes in specimens to
create non-equilibrium dislocation configurations. This opens up exciting, new
possibilities for both static and dynamic study of fundamental dislocation
behavior. This innovative approach is applied to a material system of keen,
current interest, for which dislocation-level structure and behavior is
important but presently unknown - namely the 'high entropy' alloys. Exciting
preliminary results for a five-component fcc solid solution alloy have been
obtained and are extended during initial studies. The applications are expanded
during the program and as new alloy behavior is discovered. Experimental and
computational procedures for the proposed dynamic measurements are developed
initially using low-angle Al bicrystal structures that offer a simple 'model'
system with well-defined dislocation structures. This transformative research
establishes robust protocols to guide the emerging aspects for both static and
dynamic dislocation analysis. For instance, the proposed microscopy methods are
applied in concert to characterize the same type of defect structures. This
research, when combined with the proposed innovative analysis techniques, helps
to shape the future of defect analysis and is transportable to other metallic
materials, ceramics, and semiconductors.