* 1508172
* Scandium Nitride Crystal Growth and Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* James Edgar, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 349,526.00

Nontechnical Description: Scandium nitride is a semiconductor, which like
silicon can be used for electronic devices, but has rarely been studied. This
project focuses on making single crystals of scandium nitride that are free of
defects and with low concentrations of impurities, as this is necessary for
studying intrinsic properties of this material and determining its potential for
future device applications such as light emitting diodes and high-temperature
electronics. Scandium nitride crystals have been difficult to produce because of
its very high melting temperatures. The crystal growth method used in this
research, physical vapor transport, produces larger, better quality scandium
nitride crystals than previously employed methods. Graduate students supported
by this project are receiving hands-on research training while making new
scientific discoveries and developing new technologies. This project also
introduces young women (12 to 14 years old) to the science and technology of
crystal growth and semiconductors, through the K-State Girls Researching Our
World summer workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Single
crystals of scandium nitride (ScN) with no or significantly fewer defects are
grown to explore the intrinsic electrical properties of this semiconductor. To
achieve this goal, the specific activities of the research are as follows.
First, the process of crystal growth by physical vapor transport is optimized by
adjusting the furnace temperature, pressure, and configuration to produce
material with low defect densities and low impurity concentrations. These
experiments are guided by thermodynamic and transport phenomena modeling.
Second, the electrical properties of ScN are measured and correlated with the
temperature and impurity concentrations, to reveal its electrical conduction
energetics. Specifically, the electron mobility and charge carrier
concentrations are determined by temperature-dependent Hall effect measurements
and are correlated with the crystal defect densities (determined by defect
sensitive etching), deviations from stoichiometry, and impurity concentrations
(measured by secondary ion mass spectrometry). Third, selected impurities are
intentionally added to scandium nitride to determine how they change its
electrical properties. Differences in the properties caused by the crystal
orientation and polarity (nitrogen or scandium) are investigated. By correlating
these measurements with the process conditions, methods of controlling ScN's
electrical properties are under development. This study provides valuable
intrinsic electrical properties of ScN for future device explorations.