* 1508567
* Electrical Properties of Single Molecules; from Switches towards Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Eric Borguet, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Eric Borguet of Temple University designs and
performs experiments to investigate the characteristics of single molecules with
a particular focus on the effect of external physical and chemical parameters on
changing the electrical resistance. To meet this challenge, target molecules
whose properties depend on their immediate surroundings are investigated with
state-of-the-art techniques. This research advances our understanding of the
electrical properties of molecular components of sensors and electrical devices.
The broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits from the
discovery of single molecule sensors and switches which can help to miniaturize
electronic devices as well as the education and development of a diverse
scientific workforce trained in a multidisciplinary environment. In addition, by
providing participants from the diverse student body of Temple University that
includes underrepresented minorities and first generation college students, and
allowing local high school students the opportunity to engage in this research,
the preparation of the next generation of scientists is advanced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the use of scanning tunneling
microscopes to create nanoscale junctions that can trap single molecules for
electrical measurements. Specifically selected probe molecules, whose electronic
properties are sensitive to the characteristics of the environment in which they
are located, are investigated. In addition, molecules are oriented in the
measurement junction to determine the anisotropy of the electrical properties of
the molecules.