* 1508331
* I-Corps:  Tissue-engineering vascular grafts using autologous cell sheets
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Joyce Wong, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

There are approximately 10 million people in the US with peripheral vascular
disease (PVD), and 460,000 vascular bypass surgeries are performed annually
using either synthetic or autologous venous grafts. Saphenous vein, the most
commonly used autograft material, has a 50% failure rate within 18 months due to
intimal hyperplasia. For patients who no longer have veins available for bypass,
the vascular surgeon must use synthetic grafts (PTFE or Dacron) which are
associated with a higher rate of complications such as occlusion and infection.
Furthermore, these synthetic grafts can typically only be used to bypass vessels
with an internal diameter greater than 6 mm. The proposed technology/product
consists of a novel cell sheet-derived engineered autologous vascular graft that
can meet this urgent clinical need for biologically responsive vascular grafts.
This has the potential to overcome the current problems of autologous and
synthetic grafts: limited supply; restricted length of autologous grafts, and
poor biocompatibility of synthetic grafts.

The proposed cell sheet culture and stacking system was optimized to produce
biologically responsive, living vascular grafts at low-cost. Confluent and self-
assembled cell sheets of any physiologically relevant cell type, size and 2D
pattern can be achieved within 10 days after seeding. Hydrogel substrate
stiffness, which fundamentally affects cell phenotype and behavior, can be
accurately matched to the stiffness of individual layers of the vessel, e.g.
tunica media or tunica adventitia. Cell sheets grown on a hydrogel substrate
platform demonstrate high cell viability and a high degree of native tissue
recapitulative properties (e.g. blood vessel) such as cell alignment,
extracellular matrix composition, and mechanical strength. The cell sheet
stacking and rolling process preserves individual cell sheet patterns and cell
viability (>99%) to produce structurally and biologically similar vascular
graft. This system is scalable for high throughput manufacturing processes to
lower the cost and fabrication time. Fully vascularized three-dimensional living
tissue remains an unsolved challenge in tissue engineering. The proposed system
can be utilized for the design of tissue replacements that require complex
structures for proper tissue function. This versatile technology may be further
expanded beyond the current cardiovascular application to create tissue
engineered solutions for other disease states.