* 1508827
* Thermal Field-Flow Fractionation of Nanoscale Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kim Williams, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 472,500.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Kim Williams of the Colorado School of Mines to
develop thermal field-flow fractionation (ThFFF) as a versatile platform for
separating and characterizing complex nanoscale materials. Thermal diffusion in
liquids is a transport phenomenon that presents fertile ground for developing
new measurement capabilities because it is founded on different principles than
existing methods. The planned close collaboration with synthesis and engineering
groups is ideal for maximizing research impact across different fields. Given
the significant rise in the synthesis and application of polymers and
organic/inorganic/metallic nanoparticle hybrids in fields such as energy,
biomedicine, and coatings, the platform being targeted has significant potential
for broad scientific, educational and environmental impact. In addition, an
outreach program developed by Professor Williams introduces activities related
to nanoscale materials to K-12 teachers of disadvantaged Denver school districts
and the Rocky Mountain Camp for Dyslexic children.

This project focuses on understanding of the relationship between thermal
diffusion and polymer-solvent or nanoparticle-solvent parameters for the purpose
of developing thermal field-flow fractionation (ThFFF) as a central tool for the
analysis and study of currently intractable systems. Thermal diffusion in
liquids continues to represent a fertile ground for developing separations and
analyses that are founded on a different basis than existing methods. The
proposed work is aimed at enhancing understanding of thermal diffusion and
polymer-solvent or nanoparticle-solvent parameters that drive this transport
process. Strategic libraries of materials with specifically chosen levels of
complexities have been chosen, e.g., polymers with a varying set of controlled
backbone lengths, side chain lengths, and grafting densities have been selected
in order to enable the Williams research team to identify the main analyte
properties that contribute to thermal diffusion in different solvents and to
assess existing thermal diffusion theories. The overarching objectives include
identifying specific co-polymer architectures and their distributions, assessing
thermal diffusion trends of organic and metal hybrid nanoparticles, and
demonstrating surface composition-based separations and analyses. The proposed
studies are also expected to shed light on which of the prevailing models best
describes polymer dynamics and dynamics of polymer systems that are confined.