* 1508410
* Link between Temperature-Dependent Elasticity and Viscosity of Glass-forming Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2022
* Yunfeng Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 668,035.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Despite the enormous importance in areas such as
processing control in the glass industry, and understanding the geological
processes in the Earth interior, very little is known why the viscosity of a
glass-forming liquid rises dramatically as it is cooled toward the glass
transition. This project addresses this issue by synergistically combining in
situ experimental and advanced computational approaches to provide a structural
understanding of viscosity of glass-forming liquids through the link to the high
temperature elasticity. Understanding the atomic processes involved in the
viscous flow process is of critical importance for developing glasses with
vastly different chemistries that are increasingly demanded for applications
such as personal electronics, automobiles, solar panels, buildings, and
submarine communications cables. The integrated educational effort introduces an
undergraduate level computational materials science course into the Materials
Science and Engineering curriculum. This course is making students aware of the
importance of computational techniques to the future of science and technology,
and is training the next generation of workforce with the capabilities to
utilize computational tools for materials design and testing. Continuous efforts
are being made to inspire and encourage K-12 students to pursue science and
engineering as a career path, by igniting curiosity in young minds and
instilling confidence in women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The structural origin of the
non-Arrhenius temperature dependence of viscosity of glass-forming liquids
remains elusive and constitutes an important, but unsolved problem in condensed
matter physics. Consequently, processing control in glass industry is largely
empirical, and understanding the geophysical processes in the interior of the
Earth is hindered. The poor structural understanding of viscosity is mainly due
to the lack of in situ analysis of the microscopic events during the viscous
flow process. It has become increasingly clear in recent years that high
temperature elasticity and viscosity of glass-forming liquids are strongly
correlated; however, temperature-dependent elastic moduli, especially the shear
modulus, of supercooled liquids are scarcely available due to the experimental
difficulties. This research bridges this gap by using in situ Brillouin light
scattering technique to measure high temperature elastic moduli of a wide range
of supercooled glass-forming liquids spanning the full breadth of strong and
fragile glass-formers. Complementary computational study aims to illustrate the
structural developments above the glass transition temperature that gives rise
to the strong correlation between the temperature-dependent elasticity and
viscosity of glass-forming liquids. Understanding the viscous flow of glass-
forming liquids at the atomic scale will shed light on the glass transition, and
help reveal magmatic processes such as magma generation and transport and
evolution of igneous rocks.