* 1508645
* Low energy electrodynamics of strongly interacting disordered systems: quantum phase transitions and many-body localization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Norman Armitage, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 12/31/2018
* USD 367,620.00

Nontechnical description:&lt;br/&gt;It is hardly an exaggeration that most of
what we know about physical systems comes from their response to perturbations
at their characteristic frequencies. For instance, the fundamental tone of a
plucked violin string depends on the length of the string, the tension in it,
and its thickness. This is true from the acoustics of a violin to the energies
of atoms. Unfortunately the natural frequency scales of many solid materials
fall in a spectral range, which has been prohibitively difficult to access
technically until recently. This project takes advantage of recent dramatic
technical advances in THz and microwave spectroscopy to characterize the natural
frequency scales of disordered solids. Material systems like superconductors,
which can conduct electricity without resistance and various insulating states
are being studied. The investigations performed herein give essential
information to develop new materials with important technological implications.
These technological developments are coupled to a broad initiative in education
and outreach. The work is of particular educational value to students owing to
the low frequency electrodynamics techniques that are employed and which are
finding broad application in research and private industry. Public outreach
activities in the form of the Johns Hopkins Physics Fair is also being realized.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Interactions, disorder,
and their interplay is a central theme of modern condensed matter physics. This
project is exploring two areas of intense recent interest where strong
interactions and disorder conspire to create exotic low temperature states of
quantum matter: the 2D superconductor insulator quantum phase transition and the
phenomena of ``many-足body localization". They are being investigated by a number
of novel low energy electrodynamic probes available in the PI's group. The 2D
superconductor-足insulator transition (2D SIT) is a paradigmatic example of a
quantum phase transition (QPT) -足 a topic of much interest in the condensed
matter physics. Recent advances in low temperature microwave spectroscopies are
being exploited to provide the first true dynamic information about this phase
transition in thin superconducting (InO) films. The phenomena of many-足body
localization is also being investigated. Recently Basko, Aleiner, and Altshuler
demonstrated that for systems with strong enough disorder, localization can
prevent energy or particle transport, so that the system fails to equilibrate
and to be its own heat bath. This implies that (in the absence of delocalized
degrees of freedom like phonons) there should be a finite temperature
localization transition. We are investigating the relaxation dynamics of both
electron glass systems and disordered Ising chains and among other things
looking for changes in the THz relaxation as function of optical &lt;br/&gt;pump
parameters.