* 1508110
* Nanoparticle Monolayer Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles offer special opportunities for
the design of advanced, next-generation materials. This project investigates the
ultimate limit of such nanoparticle-based materials, when their thickness is
reduced to that of just one particle. In this limit, single layers (monolayers)
of closely packed nanoparticles combine extreme flexibility with remarkable
strength. The research exploits these desirable mechanical properties to develop
nanoparticle membranes for covering corrugated or porous surfaces and for novel
coatings. The availability of highly conforming, ultrathin membranes has the
potential to open up a wide range of new applications, including in
nanofiltration. The project provides a natural platform for integrating research
with training and outreach. It will train one postdoc and one graduate student
in vital nanoscience know-how, and during the summer months introduce
undergraduates to forefront science. In collaboration with a major science
museum, the project will develop and prototype small-scale, hands-on activities
for exhibits and demonstrations to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on a new class of ultra-thin membranes, fabricated from single layers of close-
packed metallic nanoparticles, each particle surrounded by a thin coat of short
organic molecules (ligands) that act as inter-particle spacers. The membranes
are self-assembled in a single processing step from solution onto a solid
substrate and can drape themselves over open holes that are hundreds to
thousands of nanoparticles wide. The resulting freestanding membranes can be cut
and manipulated by ion and electron beams, and they can be rolled up into
tubular structures. Monolayer membranes make it possible to investigate the
material properties of large assemblies of nanoscale building blocks without
interference from a substrate, and at the same time allow for direct
experimental access, via a range of probes such as electron or scanning probe
microscopies, to the individual building blocks themselves. The research
consists of three closely related experimental efforts that investigate
different aspects of the mechanical behavior of the membranes. The first
investigates the elastic response of hollow tubular structures formed from
rolled-up membranes. Its goal is to identify the origin of the large bending
stiffness that exceeds predictions based on standard continuum elasticity by up
to two orders of magnitude. The second studies the mechanical response in the
regime beyond elastic deformation and investigates how details of the local
particle-molecule arrangements affect the onset of yielding and fracture in flat
membranes as well as tubular structures. The third explores the use of
nanoparticle membranes in new applications such as "shrink-wrapping" of surface
features for plasmonic amplification and coating of porous substrates for
nanofiltration.