* 1508485
* A New Flavin Redox State in Enzymology
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Bruce Palfey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 09/30/2019
* USD 540,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Bruce Palfey from the University of Michigan to
explore a newly uncovered flavin redox state. The unexpected and reactive form
of vitamin B2 (riboflavin) was recently discovered. This new chemical form has
an extra oxygen atom. The extra oxygen atom is necessary for the generation of a
compound found in a bacterium that makes numerous antibiotics. Although the
chemistry of vitamin B2 has been studied for at least eight decades, how the
enzyme could use this oxygen atom, or transfer it to another compound is not
known. Also there may be more examples in nature where this newly discovered
form of riboflavin is involved. It is also possible that the chemistry catalyzed
by this enzyme could be harnessed to accomplish reactions of technological
value. The research will address these issues by using a multidisciplinary
approach. The investigators engaged in the work will become expert in the latest
methods in chemistry and biology, and will help develop web-based curriculum
modules that will be useful for undergraduates and graduate students for
learning key concepts in biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flavin-N5-oxide,
a stable over-oxidized form of flavin, is the oxygenating species used by an
enzyme in enterocin biosynthesis, EncM. This work will take the first steps in
answering questions about the chemistry of the N5 oxide in enzymology. The
mechanism of the formation of the N5 oxide on EncM will be studied in detail to
test different mechanistic hypotheses, including the possibility of a novel
flavin N5-hydroperoxide intermediate. The mechanism of transfer of the oxygen of
the N5 oxide of EncM to substrates will also be investigated. Possible
mechanisms invoking 1,3 dipolar cycloadditions or radicals will be tested. An
understanding of how EncM directs the reaction of molecular oxygen and reduced
flavin to the N5 oxide will be obtained through a program of complimentary site-
directed mutations to EncM in order to convert it to an oxidase. Conversely, 6
hydroxy-D nicotine oxidase, the closest structural homolog of EncM, will be
mutated to convert it into a form that could use the N5 oxide. These
investigations will define the biochemistry of the flavin-N5 oxide, and allow
for the detection of other enzymes that might use it as an intermediate. This
will lay the foundation for mapping the evolution of this unexpected chemistry.