* 1508981
* RAPID:  Collaborative Research: Learning about Infectious Diseases through Online Participation in a Virtual Epidemic
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Nina Fefferman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,765.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Epidemics
(whether measles, ebola, or the flu) affect youth, but many of the concepts
related to how epidemics work (and how to prevent them) are hard to convey to
young learners. This project explores how and whether technology can help youth
ages 10-14 years learn about how disease epidemics spread and how to prevent
them by participating in and experiencing a virtual epidemic outbreak in a
massive online community. The project will also provide data to epidemiologists
to help understand how educating kids might change the course of
epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses prominent features of virtual
worlds--persistence, real time, personal representation, and massive numbers of
players--to allow tweens to experience and investigate an epidemic outbreak. A
virtual epidemic will be 'unleashed' on a widely used online virtual learning
space, Whyville, simulating important aspects of disease including movement of
people and contact in social networks, incubation periods, exposure and exposure
mitigation, and the utility of presymptomatic testing. Using an innovative
combination of observational methods and field experiments, this pilot research
will provide insights into how we can design such large-scale online activities
to promote individual and community inquiry. The research will explore how
public health prevention and protection measures are connected to behavioral
changes, conceptual understanding of infection, immunity, and associated social
issues. Measures will include youth behaviors online in the virtual world
(including chat and logfile analysis, use of the virtual 'protective gear' or
'hand washing' features, and engagement with outbreak-related materials online,
including live chats with an epidemiologist.)