* 1508755
* Metal-Organic Liquid Crystals as Single-Source Precursors for Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2018
* USD 354,578.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program is funding
Andrea R. Tao of the University of California, San Diego for research to develop
new methods to prepare semiconductor nanostructures. These structures have a
wide variety of applications in optics, such as wireless telecommunication,
remote sensing, and bioimaging. The ability to synthesize them with precisely
controlled chemical and physical properties is important to understand how light
interacts with matter at the nanoscale and to fully exploit their exciting
technological applications. To achieve broader impact, this work integrates
research with mentoring, education, and outreach. This work promotes nanoscience
education at the pre-college level through research internships and short
courses in nanoscience for high school educators, with particular attention
given to the inclusion of underrepresented minorities and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to discover and develop novel
synthetic pathways for achieving new low-dimensional semiconductor nanomaterials
with precisely controlled chemical compositions and morphologies. The approach
involves the synthesis of metal-organic liquid crystals that are to serve as
precursors for the nucleation and growth of copper chalcogenide nanocrystals.
These materials are being synthesized for the study of localized surface plasmon
resonance in the infrared wavelengths. The carrier density, sizes, and shapes of
the resulting nanocrystals are programmed by rationally designing the chemical
composition, stoichiometry, molecular structure, and supramolecular order of the
liquid crystal precursor. The synthetic techniques developed in this study are
also being extended towards the development of an entire toolbox of metal
chalcogenide nanomaterials with tailored optical, electronic, and chemical
properties.