* 1508272
* Experimental Studies of Nucleon Structure: Commissioning Jefferson Lab Halls A and C
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Christy, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 260,802.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons, protons and neutrons, are made
up of more elementary particles called quarks. While the theory known as Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) has become accepted as describing the strong interaction,
which binds the constituent quarks and gluons in the nucleon, numerous questions
still remain about the quark spatial and momentum distributions. The principle
investigator and students will take a leading role in the first experiment to
take place at Jefferson Lab after the recent upgrade, with the goal of measuring
the quark spatial and momentum distributions in the nucleon, called the F_2
structure function. These distributions will be compared with predictions from
models of the nucleon inspired by QCD theory. In addition to the scientific
focus the research program will address a critical need for training of the next
generation of physicists. As part of an Historically Black College or
University, the graduate physics program at Hampton University broadly supports
the education and training of both undergraduate and graduate
students&lt;br/&gt;from this under-represented group. This project will continue
to provide access to advanced, internationally-competitive, scientific training
for these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study the transition
from the momentum transfer region in which the quarks are asymptotically free to
the region in which the quarks are bound into mesons and baryons. This will be
accomplished through experiments to measure the proton magnetic form factor, GMp
, and the F_2 inclusive structure function of the proton, neutron, and deuteron
at large momentum transfer with significantly better precision than currently
available. The project will additionally support required preparations for a
later-to-run Hall B experiment to measure the F_2 structure function of the
nearly free neutron in the poorly understood large x regime, and which was
chosen by the Jefferson Lab Program Advisory Committee for the "High Impact"
designation.