* 1508400
* New methods development for structure determination of multihelical membrane proteins in their native-like lipid bilayers by solid-state NMR with applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Alexander Nevzorov, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

In this Project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Alexander Nevzorov is studying membrane proteins
(MPs) under their native-like conditions by solid-state Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Membrane proteins perform a plethora of biological
functions, yet the number of their solved structures remains relatively small.
The solid-state NMR technique allows researchers to perform structure-function
studies of MPs that are difficult or impossible to crystallize at nearly
physiological conditions. NMR spectroscopic methods developed during this
research expand capabilities of this technique to multihelical
MPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main purpose of this project is to transform
solid-state NMR of oriented membrane proteins (MPs) by developing new
spectroscopic tools including methods for distance measurements and assignment
of crowded spectral regions. Moreover, new membrane mimetics of flexible lipid
composition based on nanopores and oriented macrodisks are being created to
monitor lipid-induced conformational changes of MPs. Dynamic properties of lipid
bilayers are probed including rotational diffusion of membrane-embedded proteins
and the bilayer viscosity. Potential future applications include structure
determination of the human Acetylcholine receptor involved in the Alzheimer's
disease and other neurological disorders. As broader impacts of this project,
the highly interdisciplinary nature of this research provides versatile training
for the young scientists involved. As outreach activities, via mentorship of a
Kenan Fellow, Dr. Nevzorov promotes the results of his research to high-school
education and STEM programs.