* 1508049
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Identification of the critical length scales and chemistries responsible for the anti-fouling properties of heterogeneous surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Ayse Asatekin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 03/31/2019
* USD 102,022.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professors Meagan S.
Mauter of Carnegie Mellon University and Ayse Asatekin of Tufts University
characterize the fundamental mechanisms of foulant adhesion to naturally
occurring surfaces. The ability to prevent soiling of a surface (prevent
fouling) has many practical applications in both biomedical and marine
applications. This research is leading to a new class of fouling resistant
surfaces that enable energy savings. The ability to use anti-fouling membranes
(i.e., filters that do not become clogged) to remove salt from sea water
(desalinization) is also a potential benefit of this research. Two graduate and
several undergraduate students involved in this research gain interdisciplinary
knowledge and skills, and disseminate their work through publications and
presentations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work involves polymer synthesis,
colloidal force and deposition experiments, and modeling to evaluate the
relative importance of domain size, domain hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity
contrast, and domain chemistry in determining foulant adsorption. A library of
copolymer films with surface heterogeneity on the length scale of 1 to 10 nm are
synthesized and characterized. The material properties are used to model the
attachment efficiency of colloids to these heterogeneous surfaces using three
models of increasing complexity. These models are validated using colloidal
force microscopy and mass-based deposition measurements using a quartz crystal
microbalance with dissipation monitoring. Finally, this project explores the
role of nanopatterning on colloidal release as a function of shear velocity.
Both Professors Mauter and Asatekin are active advocates of broadening the
participation of women in science and engineering fields, and incorporate this
research into their classes which includes topics in environmental policy,
polymer science, and separations.