* 1508538
* Quantum and semi-classical dynamics of random spin chains: models and methods for quantum non-ergodic statistical physics
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Vadim Oganesyan, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on fundamental aspects of
how and whether descriptions of matter, such as fluid dynamics and
thermodynamics presented in textbooks emerge from a system composed of many tiny
interacting particles, such as atoms or electrons. Recent progress on a
phenomenon known as many-body localization highlights the possibility of a
breakdown of the conventional thermodynamic description. The PI will carry out a
theoretical study of model systems to explore and quantify the degree of this
breakdown and to investigate the possibility that interesting intermediate
states of matter interpolate continuously between textbook thermodynamics and
fully many-body localized phases. In a wave picture of particles that do not
interact, scattering from random imperfections leads to destructive interference
among the waves resulting in quantum mechanical states that are localized and do
not conduct electricity. It is thought that turning on interactions among
particles can lead to a dynamical form of localization, many-body localization,
a conceptual ingredient in this research project.

A significant offshoot of this work is the exploration and modelling of quantum
control of localized states, novel experimental schemes for detecting many-body
localization, and design of exotic models particularly favorable to numerical
studies of these phenomena and novel approximation schemes to systematically
extrapolate between classical and quantum mechanical simulations of matter.
These theoretical studies will also complement and guide ongoing experimental
efforts to "imitate" many-body localization using systems like ultracold atomic
gases.

This project will contribute to training undergraduate and graduate students in
the field of condensed matter physics and many-body dynamics more generally. The
PI will continue mentoring diverse students at the undergraduate, graduate
levels and postdoctoral researchers. The PI will continue to organize
conferences and a weekly seminar at the Graduate Center, serving the research
community at the City University, New York and nearby institutions. The PI will
also continue to seek opportunities to contribute to international condensed
matter community including through organization of workshops.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to investigate dynamical
phenomena in excited but isolated many-body systems. The primary physical
motivation here is the phenomenon of many-body localization which is broadly
defined as stalled ergodicity of strongly excited many-body dynamics,
effectively at finite temperature or, better, finite entropy per particle. In
certain quantum models a sharp dynamical transition is expected to separate
localized from diffusive phases. Existence of such a transition in spin models
of classical many-body dynamics is an intriguing possibility previously explored
numerically by the PI and collaborators and tentatively ruled out due to
prevalence of localized classical chaos. There are two complementary parts to
the research agenda. The first part will be focused on developing conceptual and
numerical tools for studying models of many-body localization that overcome
limitations of commonly used methods. The phenomenology of emergent
integrability recently introduced by PI and others for fully many-body localized
spectra will be streamlined but also extended to cases where a nearby mobility
edge might exist. Efficient variational methods, using matrix-product states
will be developed to compute excited eigenstates of very long spin chains, but
also to approximate many-body dynamics near "classical" trajectories. In
parallel, the second part of the research agenda will explore the notion of
many-body localization in novel settings: many-body localization in traps, self-
dual models of many-body localization, adiabatic annealing into the Hilbert
glass phase inside many-body localization. Each of these three model specific
studies is expected to produce general insights into the physics of these
dynamical transitions.

This project will contribute to training undergraduate and graduate students in
the field of condensed matter physics and many-body dynamics more generally. The
PI will continue mentoring diverse students at the undergraduate, graduate
levels and postdoctoral researchers. The PI will continue to organize
conferences and a weekly seminar at the Graduate Center, serving the research
community at the City University, New York and nearby institutions. The PI will
also continue to seek opportunities to contribute to international condensed
matter community including through organization of workshops.