* 1508828
* Controlling and quantifying two-level systems, disorder and ideality in tetrahedrally bonded amorphous thin films
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Frances Hellman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 04/30/2019
* USD 451,414.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the field of Condensed Matter
Physics, materials that lack structural order -- deemed "amorphous materials" or
"glasses" -- are, compared to crystals, relatively unexplored. Crystals consist
of spatially repeated atoms, which permit mathematically simple formalisms that
can be used to calculate and predict properties of these systems. Amorphous
systems, however, have no such structural repeatability, and thus are less
understood. This lack of understanding, however, does not preclude the
applicability or scientific impact of disordered systems; plastics, silicate
glasses, and amorphous silicon photovoltaics are examples that are pertinent to
daily life, industry, and technologies. Amorphous superconductors are a
remarkable example of how a fundamental scientific property transcends
structural imperfection. The properties of a disordered material depend strongly
on how the material was produced, but it is not clear how to describe the
different amorphous structures produced by different methods, even for a single
element material, nor what the nature of a defect is in a fully disordered
material. It is clear that disorder exists on different length and energy
scales, ranging from local, atomic-sized disorder to larger scales.
Intriguingly, there exists the notion of an "ideal glass", which while remaining
thoroughly disordered, lacks imperfections in that disorder and thus approaches
the uniqueness of a crystal, including reproducibility and predictability of its
properties. The project will determine the relationship between types of
disorder and defects produced by different preparation methods and for different
atoms, and the tunability of the "ideality" of disordered materials. Such a
determination will yield improved understanding and control of disordered
materials of technological and fundamental scientific significance. The project
will also educate and train students and help to increase diversity
participation in science; the PI and graduate student are women, and actively
engage in efforts to make physics accessible to underrepresented STEM ethnic and
socioeconomic minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A problem of both longstanding and current
interest is the thermodynamic nature of the amorphous or glassy state. The lack
of structural order makes these systems less mathematically tractable and makes
it a challenge to resolve how disorder affects the thermodynamic properties.
Local and global minima on a broad scale (&gt;&gt;kT) in the energy landscape
are relevant to the configurational entropy. An ideal glass has low
configurational entropy, approaching that of the crystalline counterpart, thus
implying the existence of a unique disordered state that lacks defects. Local
minima on a much smaller scale (&lt;&lt;kT) produce anomalous low temperature
properties of glasses that are well described by tunneling or two level systems
(TLS), which are widely considered universal although disagreement exists as to
what causes these small scale minima. Even more controversial is the connection
(if any) between the low and high temperature thermodynamic properties. In
recent years, significant exceptions to low temperature universal behavior have
been found, suggesting that different classes of disorder exist. A related
question concerns the nature and possible interdependence of defects in an
amorphous system; e.g. in amorphous silicon, both TLS and dangling bonds are
known to exist, and are dependent on atomic density, but are not directly
correlated. This (and other) tetrahedrally-bonded materials are fundamentally
different than the traditionally studied glasses; they cannot be quenched from
the liquid state, their tetrahedral bonding leads to an overconstrained
continuous random network, and the difficulty in producing large quantities for
conventional calorimetry has previously prevented most thermodynamic
measurements. Intriguingly, these are precisely the materials most easily made
as thin films by vapor deposition processes. Various growth techniques will be
used to produce thin films of tetrahedrally bonded materials to study the link
between TLS and density/structure and ideality within disorder; the project will
test the hypothesis that ideal glasses do not have TLS or defects. Using unique
membrane-based nanocalorimeters, heat capacity and thermodynamic properties will
be measured over a wide temperature range, 0.1-1000K. This temperature range
covers the TLS at low T (&lt;1K) and the proposed high T glass transition
temperature for amorphous silicon. The enormously fast heating (&gt;10^5 K/sec)
and cooling (&gt;10^4 K/sec) rates of these calorimeters and wide temperature
range permit these previously impossible experiments, including determination of
zero temperature configurational entropy.