* 1508140
* Lateral Epitaxial Growth of Nanowires for Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* William Wilson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 419,999.00

The project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) in
the Division of Materials Research (DMR), and by the Electronics, Photonics, and
Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications
and Cyber Systems (ECCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: From
mobile phones, to solar cells, to solid-state lighting, semiconductor devices
have enabled our modern life. This research project focuses on establishing the
fundamental and technical foundation of a new III-V semiconductor nanotechnology
platform encompassing nanowires aligned in the surface plane, instead of the
common geometry with nanowires aligned perpendicular to the surface. The
platform is not only suitable for aggressive scaling of future generations of
integrated circuits, but also compatible with the existing planar processing
technology for the microelectronics industry. This project provides a natural
platform for interdisciplinary research and education activities, allowing
curriculum development in nanotechnology, nanomanufacturing, nanoelectronics,
and nanoscale non-destructive characterization. Outreach activities involving
local and nationwide high-school teachers are carried out in conjunction with a
Research Experience for Teachers program led by the principle investigator (PI).
Webinars, seminars, short courses, and summer schools are organized to
disseminate research results to the general public. Both the PI and co-PI are
committed to promoting the participation of underrepresented groups in science
and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project
explores the growth and characterization of a self-aligned planar compound
semiconductor nanowire array for manufacturable nanoelectronics. The nanowire
array grown using lateral epitaxy enables true one-dimensional electronic
transport properties and well-defined p-n junctions and heterojunctions.
Specifically, fundamental growth and doping studies are carried out through
controlled growth, size scaling, doping scaling and control of junction
abruptness as well as electrical characterization at the device level. The
project tasks/goals are: (1) to achieve III-V nanowire-based arrays with true
one-dimensional density of states; (2) to realize lateral p-n junction
monolithically for tunnel field-effect transistors; and (3) to understand
electrical properties and their correlation with morphology at the nanoscale,
using microwave impedance microscopy and nanoscale infrared imaging and
spectroscopy. The findings are expected to shed light on impurity incorporation,
precipitation, and segregation in the lateral growth and transport properties of
alloyed semiconductor nanowires, and ultimately help to accelerate the
advancement of fundamental nano concepts as engineering solutions.