* 1508240
* Advancing 3D Chemical Imaging: FTIR Spectro-microtomography, FTIR Spectro-microlaminography and Hyperspectral Data Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Sarah Patch, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 550,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professors Carol Hirschmugl and Sarah Patch of The
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee to advance three-dimensional (3D) chemical
imaging for biologically relevant materials. To meet this challenge,
modifications to infrared spectral micro- tomography are to be combined with
hyperspectral data analysis tools to evaluate extended two-dimensional samples.
The international collaboration between The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee,
Wesleyan University, and the Norwegian University of Life Sciences combines
novel instrumentation, forefront image reconstruction algorithms, and physically
accurate modeling to produce chemically sensitive 3-dimensional images. The
project is expected to provide multi-disciplinary disciplinary student training
in a collaborative environment with international dimensions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this proposal is to implement
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectro-micro-tomography (SmT) for samples
that are extended in two dimensions and to implement limited angle
reconstruction algorithms and optimize spectrochemical analysis methods to
enhance spectral and image quality. The rationale for this proposal is that data
from improved novel chemical imaging techniques combined with advanced data
analysis may be able to provide new views of of intact, (bio)chemically complex
systems. This project focuses on three-dimensional imaging of biologically
relevant samples (e.g, tissues, extended cell cultures, biofilms) or to
materials for bioenergy (e.g, algae, wood). FTIR-SmT aims to generate high
contrast results through the acquisition of rich IR absorption spectra for
organic materials. Such a capability for sensing chemical distributions for
intact samples may provide the foundation for fundamentally new approaches in
bioanalytical chemistry, well beyond these studies.