* 1508869
* High Energy Physics Research at LHC with the CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Ia Iashvili, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 995,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has. The Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) is the premier Energy Frontier particle accelerator operating at
the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland. It is currently one of the foremost
facilities for answering these Beyond the Standard Model questions and studying
the properties of the Higgs boson. One of the primary functions of the Compact
Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the LHC is to discover new physics beyond the
Standard Model. The work proposed here will analyze data from the CMS experiment
looking for signals of Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund two aspects of the CMS experiment: 1)
further searches for BSM physics and 2) help build the CMS Phase I forward pixel
detector (FPix) upgrade, which will enhance the ability of CMS to discover BSM
physics. Some of the BSM theoretical predictions include several different Higgs
boson that have enhanced coupling to b-quarks. This award will allow an improved
b-quark study using a multivariate regression technique to better estimate the
b-jet energy scale and thereby improve on the Higgs boson mass resolution. This
so-called jet substructure technique is important for all the physics results
coming out of CMS, as many decay channels require improved jet energy
corrections. Another BSM search that this award provides is the search for a
heavy vector boson (generally referred to as Z prime) predicted to decay to a
ttbar pair of quarks. The final state of this ttbar decay is b-jets, again,
benefiting from the jet energy correction work in this award. The award also
provides important parts of the FPix upgrade which are being tested at FermiLab.
The CMS Forward pixel upgrade will allow the precise vertex location, needed for
all physics studies, even in the harsh environment (very high luminosity)
expected in near future LHC running. The CMS Forward Pixel Detector uses state-
of-the art silicon technology for particle detection combined with equally
sophisticated readout electronics. Innovative techniques of radiation hard
technology and bump bonding have been used in the current detector to meet the
real estate challenges in a high radiation environment. These techniques would
greatly enhance the life span of detectors used in outer space research and
improve bio-sensing miniature devices for medical applications.