* 1508634
* Glassy Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloys: Interplay Between Disorder,  Phase Transitions, and Multi-Physics Couplings
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,622.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs) are a special type
of crystalline metals that can recover their deformed shape upon heating, as a
result of the reversible solid to solid structural phase transformations, i.e.
martensitic transformations. Few recently discovered SMAs are also magnetic, and
demonstrate simultaneous martensitic and magnetic transitions. The principal
investigators have recently shown that careful manipulation of defects in these
alloys can bring about novel glass-like behavior in which the 'amorphous'
structure is defined in terms of magnetic spin and/or strain. Such multi-
functional coupling, the appearance of various types of solid states, and the
resulting properties may provide completely new functionalities such as magnetic
actuation, efficient magnetic refrigeration, thermal management, harvesting of
waste mechanical energy, and cell growth stimulation via remotely actuated
active tissue scaffolds. This award supports fundamental experimental and
theoretical research and education to understand how different types of solid to
solid phase transformations, glassiness, and crystal defects interact in
magnetic SMAs and influence their functional properties. The new understanding
is expected to positively impact future design and development of
multifunctional smart materials. The award supports the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art experimental and
computational materials techniques. An integral aspect of this project is the
open dissemination of research results through a Materials Data Repository based
on the National Institute of Standards and Technology's Materials Data Curation
System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;NiMnIn-based Magnetic
Shape Memory Alloys (MSMAs) exhibit a wide range of complex phenomena resulting
from the interplay between configurational disorder and different types of phase
transitions (ordering, magnetic, structural) including spin glass and strain
glass transitions. These phase transitions result in multiple coupling modes
involving thermal, magnetic and mechanical thermodynamic conjugate pairs. In
turn, the alloys demonstrate rich responses that result in unique behavior such
as magnetic exchange bias, tailorable thermal expansion, giant magneto-caloric
and elasto-caloric effects. The principal investigators have shown that the
degree of order and the presence of point defects and anti-phase boundaries play
a fundamental role in controlling the stability of multiple competing phases but
much remains unknown regarding the specific effect of configurational disorder
on the magneto-thermo-mechanical properties of MSMAs. The goal of the combined
computational-experimental approach in this project is to elucidate the
mechanisms and microstructural features that determine the stability of the
different competing phases, the onset of the phase transitions and their
couplings. The focus is to use state-of-the-art multi-physics characterization
and modeling to investigate the nature of magneto-thermo-mechanical couplings in
NiMnIn MSMAs as a function of configurational order and various external stimuli
(temperature, stress, and magnetic field or their combinations). In-situ
investigation of micro and magneto structure coupled with neutron diffraction
measurements in combination with first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo
simulations are used to examine the effect of configurational disorder on the
magneto-structural phase transitions and the onset of glassy behavior. The major
scientific impact of this project is expected to be the development of sound,
multi-physics-based alloying and heat treatment guidelines for tuning magnetic
and structural responses in magnetic SMAs.