* 1508603
* Collaborative Research: Study of Strain-Dependent Auger Recombination Processes in III-V Materials Using Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Seth Bank, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 245,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Auger recombination is a process that degrades the
performance of III-V materials for optoelectronic devices, ranging from lasers
and light-emitting diodes, to solar cells and photodetectors. In particular,
lasers emitting light in the mid-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum
are impacted heavily by Auger recombination. Mid-infrared lasers are important
for sensing, free-space communications, and medicine. This collaborative
research project between the University of Colorado at Boulder and the
University of Texas at Austin seeks to understand and control the Auger
recombination process in III-V materials to ultimately enhance the performance
of mid-infrared lasers. The research efforts are well integrated with the
educational activities. The efforts include providing interdisciplinary research
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students, integrating research
findings with college coursework, and K-12 outreach through optics-related
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Strain can greatly reduce
the negative effects of Auger recombination in quantum confined active regions
in III-V materials. However, the fundamental understanding of the strain effects
on the recombination processes has been hindered by the critical thickness
limitations imposed by strain, complicating analysis and often necessitating
unrealistic approximations. The collaborative project takes an orthogonal
approach to the challenges associated with understanding and characterizing
recombination processes by examining the active strained regions of the
materials. Specifically, semiconductor membranes made of III-V materials are
released from their host substrate and bonded to a flexible polymer. The
membranes are biaxially strained by stretching the polymer substrate in two
dimensions to mimic the effect of biaxial strain from lattice-mismatched growth.
This permits strain-dependent studies of Auger recombination using ultrafast
spectroscopy on a single sample, isolating the intrinsic effects of strain from
those due to compositional change or growth kinetics. This study could shed
light on the roles of Auger and other loss processes in III-V material systems,
an ongoing 30+ year debate across the device and materials communities, and
enable high-efficiency diode lasers and light-emitting diodes in visible regime.