* 1508236
* Decoding Spatial Complexity in Strongly Correlated Electronic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Erica Carlson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education on materials with strong interactions among electrons
which lead to strong correlations in the motions of electrons in the material.
Inside conventional materials like metals and semiconductors, the electrons are
evenly spread out, like tomato soup filling a container. But the electrons
inside these strongly correlated materials act more like an exotic gumbo:
nanoscale images show that the electrons clump into complicated shapes at the
surface. These patterns and their formation may be a key to understanding the
unusual electronic properties characteristic of strongly correlated materials
and to the eventual mastery of these materials leading to technological
applications. Most theoretical and experimental tools are designed for
understanding and detecting homogeneous electronic states, and it is necessary
to envision and explore new frameworks for understanding why patterns form in
the distribution of electrons in strongly correlated materials. Combining
theoretical tools from fractal mathematics and the statistical mechanics of
disordered materials, the PI aims to develop new concepts and methods for
interpreting and understanding the nanoscale electronic textures of these
materials. The nanoscale is about two hundred thousand times smaller than the
diameter of a human hair. The PI aims to develop geometric cluster analysis
techniques that she introduced into the field, in order to better understand and
eventually control these materials so that they can be successfully applied in
the marketplace.

The PI will continue to develop the mentoring program she began for graduate
women in the physics program at her home institution. The PI will also continue
to visit K-12 public schools to discuss her research. This outreach combines
interactive hands-on superconductivity and magnetism demonstrations with
education about current condensed matter research. In addition, the proposed
work will also advance the training of one graduate student.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research,
and education on strongly correlated electron materials with an aim to advance
understanding of patterns formed by inhomogeneous distribution of electrons.
There is growing experimental evidence that many strongly correlated electronic
systems such as nickelates, cuprates, and manganites exhibit nanoscale
variations in local electronic properties. Describing the electronic behavior of
these materials involves multiple degrees of freedom, including orbital, spin,
charge, and lattice degrees of freedom. The interplay with disorder adds another
dimension: not only can disorder destroy phase transitions, leaving mere
crossovers in the wake; it can fundamentally alter ground states, often
forbidding long range order. Especially in systems where different physical
tendencies to order compete, disorder can provide nucleation points for
competing ground states, leading to spatial pattern formation and complexity.
The interplay of many degrees of freedom, strong correlations, and disorder can
lead to a hierarchy of length scales and to pattern formation at the nanoscale.
There is a need to design and develop new ways of understanding, detecting, and
characterizing electronic pattern formation in strongly correlated electronic
materials, especially in the presence of severe disorder effects. Resulting
theoretical guidance will enable more direct contact between theory and
experiment for a number of materials, and provide a path forward for
understanding "disputed" regions of phase diagrams of strongly correlated
materials. The PI aims to further develop the geometric cluster analysis
techniques that she pioneered in the field of strongly correlated electronic
systems, in order to maximize the information that can be extracted from
experiments using these methods, and to facilitate the broad application of
these techniques to various materials and image probes. In order to do this, the
PI will develop theory of geometric criticality in random Ising models through
numerical simulations. The resulting work is expected to connect to several
experimental techniques and to yield new modes of data taking and analysis, and
new methods enabling the detection and characterization of novel phases of
matter.

The PI will continue to develop the mentoring program she began for graduate
women in the physics program at her home institution. The PI will also continue
to visit K-12 public schools to discuss her research. This outreach combines
interactive hands-on superconductivity and magnetism demonstrations with
education about current condensed matter research. In addition, the proposed
work will also advance the training of one graduate student.