* 1508730
* Nonequilibrium States of Topological Quantum Fluids and Unconventional Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* James Sauls, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research made possible with this
award is directed toward prediction and discovery of the thermal, electrical and
magnetic properties of a new class of materials described as "topological"
materials. The properties of these materials are governed by the laws of quantum
physics and organizing principles based on the mathematics of symmetry and
topology, the latter of which can be visualized as the properties of matter that
are insensitive to deformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on
the prediction of the properties of topological phases of matter, particularly
topological superconductors, superfluids, and hybrid systems composed of
insulators and superconductors, which are driven out of equilibrium by electric
and magnetic fields or by contact with other materials. The emphasis will be on
systems that are confined in small regions of space, such as cavities that are
some 100 times smaller than the human hair, droplets or ultra-thin channels and
films, because unique physical properties are predicted to occur on surfaces and
interfaces of topological materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many properties of
condensed matter that have been predicted and discovered as a result of basic
research have resulted in applications and new technologies - from
instrumentation for medical diagnostics to electronic and magnetic devices for
information storage and high-speed computation. These discoveries have led to
technologies that have transformed our society. There is reasoned expectation
that discoveries in topological condensed matter will lead to next-generation
electronic and magnetic devices, with potential societal impacts that range from
significant to transformative. This research project also has strong education
components involving the training of graduate students as next generation of
research leaders, and a continuation of the PI's commitment in recruiting
undergraduates into cutting edge research projects. The proposed research
involves international collaborations with researchers in the United Kingdom and
Japan which will enrich the research enterprise in physical sciences in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and education in theoretical physics of newly discovered and
newly predicted quantum phases of matter, particularly topological superfluids,
liquid helium-three, and unconventional superconductors, including candidates
for topological superconductivity, strontium ruthenate, uranium platinum-three,
copper bismuth selenide, and heavy electron materials exhibiting coexistent
ferromagnetism and superconductivity. The proposed research is focused on
investigations of topological condensed matter out of equilibrium, with the goal
of predicting and interpreting experimental observations on, and signatures of,
topological quantum phases of matter under non-equilibrium conditions. A key
goal of this research is a quantitative and predictive theory of the non-
equilibrium response and dynamics of topological superconductors and
superfluids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific studies that will be pursued with
this award include the development of quantum transport equations for the
distribution functions for edge and surface states, the dynamical equations for
the non-equilibrium spectral functions for these states, the development of
microscopic models for surface and interface boundary conditions, and the
effects of back-action of the bulk, including possible coupling to Bosonic
collective modes. A second thread in this research is the investigation of the
dynamics of vortices, domain walls and impurities, and mechanisms of dissipation
in topological superconductors and superfluids. A third line of research employs
theoretical models and statistical methods for analyzing the interplay between
topological order and extrinsic disorder that is present in virtually all
macroscopic forms of matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is reasoned expectation
that discoveries in topological condensed matter, including matter in confined
geometries, new electronic materials and heterogeneous superconducting and
magnetic materials, will lead to next-generation quantum electronic and magnetic
devices, with potential societal impacts that range from significant to
transformative. This research project also has strong education components
involving the training of graduate students as next generation of research
leaders, and a continuation of the PI's commitment in recruiting undergraduates
into cutting edge research projects. The proposed research involves
international collaborations with researchers in the United Kingdom and Japan
which will enrich the research enterprise in physical sciences in the US.