* 1508244
* RUI: Enabling Rational Design of Smart Interfaces Incorporating Metal-Organic Coordinated Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Mary Anderson, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2018
* USD 209,012.00

RUI: Enabling Rational Design of Smart Interfaces Incorporating Metal-Organic
Coordinated Assemblies (CHE-1508244)&lt;br/&gt;Mary E. Anderson, Hope
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Metal-organic frameworks
(MOFs) are crystalline, porous materials with extremely high surface areas that
exhibit great potential for chemical sensing, reaction catalysis, and gas
storage. For many of these applications, the incorporation of MOF thin films
grown directly on supporting materials is required. To effectively fabricate
devices with smart interfaces that harness the properties of these MOF
materials, it is crucial to understand the fundamentals of film formation. This
research systematically investigates thin film MOF growth and develops design
rules for low-energy processing techniques on a variety of technologically-
relevant substrates. These design rules, for tailoring film structure and
composition, are utilized 1) to tune the optical, electrical, and mechanical
properties of the film and 2) to develop fabrication techniques that integrate
MOF thin films into cutting-edge technologies for chemical sensing and
harvesting solar energy. Undergraduate students are actively engaged in all
aspects of the research, providing them with experience in the interdisciplinary
areas of materials chemistry, surface science, and modern analytical
instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With this
award the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanchemistry Program of the NSF
Chemistry Division supports the research of Dr. Anderson at Hope College to
investigate the formation of surface-anchored metal-organic frameworks (SurMOF)
for integration directly into device architectures for chemical sensing and
photonic applications. Film formation is studied for different systems with
incrementally increasing complexity (i.e. HKUST-1, MOF-14, MOF-5, IRMOF-3).
Effects of deposition variables such as temperature, time, and deposition
methods (i.e. layer-by-layer, co-deposition, seeded deposition) are
investigated. Studies are extended to understand deposition on different
substrates of technological relevance, such as oxide materials (i.e. SiO2, ITO,
Al2O3) and flexible polymeric materials. Rational design rules for growth
initiation as well as inhibition are determined. Scanning probe microscopy (SPM)
and surface-specific spectroscopies (i.e. ellipsometry, FT-IR) are used to
characterize SurMOF film growth to determine the effect of deposition conditions
with particular focus on foundational layers forming at the substrate-film
interface. Mechanical, electrical, and optical properties of films are evaluated
using advanced SPM modes (i.e. quantitative nanomechanical mapping, conductive
probe), electrochemistry (i.e. cyclic voltammetry, chronocoulometry), and
spectroelectrochemical characterization. By following developed design rules,
understanding material properties, and employing membrane-templating techniques,
this research integrates SurMOF films as smart interfaces into test-bed
structures fabricated for chemical sensing and solar energy harvesting.