* 1508757
* Dynamical systems with random influences mixing logic and physics: a framework enabling control engineers to design for resilient autonomy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrew Teel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop the mathematical tools necessary to
describe and analyze dynamical systems that mix logic and physics while
including random influences. These types of systems are sometimes called
stochastic hybrid systems; where stochastic refers to the presence of random
influences and hybrid refers to the mix of logic-based decision making and
physical laws that determine the system evolution. These mathematical tools
would be extremely useful, as they would provide a framework enabling control
engineers to better design autonomous dynamical systems that are resilient in
the face of uncertainty. The results of this proposal have the potential to
impact researchers in a wide variety of application domains, where randomness
interacts with worst-case effects and rigorous analysis tools are needed to
certify desirable behavior in an engineered system. One possible application
domain is the control of gene expression and other particular biological
phenomena. Another application area is multi-agent resource allocation
algorithms where agents invoke randomness in their allocation strategies to
guarantee robustness to malicious agents in the network. Indeed, stochastic
hybrid systems can be used to model complicated biological systems, financial
systems, resource allocation systems, and traffic management systems, to name
just a few. All of the results developed through this proposal will be published
in the leading conference venues and journals, to provide avenues for the
transition of the work to applications. Beyond contributions to the scientific
literature, the proposed work will add to the existing graduate curriculum on
stochastic and hybrid dynamical systems. Graduate students will be trained
through direct financial support, but a broader group of students will be
educated through teaching materials and a course that will be developed around
the produced breakthroughs. These students include graduate students in all
areas of engineering. To reach students broadly, the PI envisions a graduate
textbook on stochastic hybrid systems emerging from this work, to complement the
recent book on non-stochastic hybrid systems. The work will spawn collaboration
with international researchers, and will enhance student exchange programs with
several international universities. The research developments will be applied to
areas that are important to the broad population. Moreover, the PI will use this
opportunity to consider how to expose freshman engineering students to a broad
range of dynamical systems principles. This effort will follow up the previous
experience teaching a freshman seminar, to engineering and non-engineering
students, on the application of optimization principles to real-world problems.
The aim here aligns with the societal goal of keeping younger students engaged
in topics related to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.

The specific technical objectives of the project start with establishing a
mathematical framework and solution concept that is tractable yet general enough
to be widely applicable. Tools from the field of variational analysis are
crucial to this development. The objectives continue with the task of developing
a wide range of analysis tools that can be used to certify appropriate behavior
of an engineered stochastic hybrid system. The techniques will especially focus
on a Lyapunov analysis for stability properties like asymptotic stability in
probability and recurrence; other ideas that have been fruitful for non-
stochastic hybrid systems also will be considered. Next, the aim is to establish
strong sequential compactness results for the set of solutions to the models
considered and, from these results, establish an invariance principle and
converse Lyapunov theorems. These results would parallel recent, very useful
results for non-stochastic hybrid systems. The final task is to begin to show
explicitly how the developed framework and analysis tools can be used to
engineer advanced, resilient, autonomous control systems.