* 1508677
* Energy and Electron Transport in pi-Stacked Multichromophoric Assemblies: Global Dynamics from the Gas to Condensed Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Scott Reid, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Rajendra Rathore and Scott Reid of
Marquette University will examine model molecular assemblies that incorporate
stacked polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Such interactions are characteristic
of many molecular assemblies, including those found in nature (e.g., DNA), and
an understanding of the transport of electrons and energy through such
assemblies is critical to develop new charge-transfer materials of increased
efficiency for applications in photovoltaic devices, molecular electronics, and
nanotechnology. To meet this challenge, the synthesis of carefully designed
molecular assemblies is carried out, and the assemblies characterized using a
variety of experimental strategies based on molecular spectroscopy, supported by
computational chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supramolecular assemblies exploit
a variety of covalent and non-covalent scaffolding interactions. Of these, pi-
stacking is important. The efficiency of long range charge transfer in the
conducting layers of photovoltaic devices is governed not only by the
intramolecular electron transport through the backbone of polymers but also by
the intermolecular electron transport through bulk material, where the amorphous
assembly of pi-conjugated molecules is generally randomized. As cyclophane-like
aromatic dimers and their cation radicals represent the simplest fundamental
units responsible for charge transport in bulk materials, the design and
synthesis of modern organic materials for the emerging area of molecular
electronics and nanotechnology demands a thorough understanding of electron and
energy-transfer processes in carefully designed cofacially-arrayed molecules.
This project addresses fundamental questions concerning the flow of energy and
electron transfer in model multichromophoric systems and developes new
strategies for exploiting such assemblies as light driven actuators, taking
advantage of the molecular rearrangement which accompanies oxidation or
electronic excitation. Examining broader impacts, this work informs the design
and synthesis of next generation organic materials for applications in the area
of molecular electronics and photovoltaics.