* 1508541
* Collaborative Research: Spintronics Without Spin Injection
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Peter Dowben, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 165,000.00

The continued scaling of CMOS technology is being driven by various approaches
including spin-based electronics (or 'spintronics') due to potential gains in
low-power operation, and by the prospect of realizing new forms of non-volatile,
on-chip data storage. However, spintronic devices typically exhibit poor
magnetoresistive values, except at cryogenic temperatures, and there are often
practical issues regarding their manufacturability. Consequently, the full
potential impact of spintronics on technology and society has remained
unrealized. The ability to induce a high degree of spin polarization in
epitaxially-formed graphene layers, deposited on complex oxides, is a major goal
of this research; one that will allow the development of high performance, non-
volatile, spin-based devices, capable of operating above room temperature.
Social and economic benefits of such advances is huge, allowing not only the
continuation of smaller, cheaper, and faster computing, but also making possible
the development of massively-parallel, yet low-power and fault-tolerant,
computer architectures. Graduate students will be trained in the
interdisciplinary aspects of understanding fundamental relationships between
surface/interface chemistry, charge and spin transport, and device physics. This
mentoring also extends to the recruitment of undergraduate and high school
students through existing, proven programs at the University of Buffalo, the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln and at the University of North Texas.

In the interest of a new generation of post-CMOS nanoelectronics, technological
challenges of spintronic devices include achieving high-fidelity spin-polarized
carrier injection into a nonmagnetic semiconductor, and; realization of
electrical schemes for the manipulation of magnetism while not compromising the
possible energy gains offered by spintronics. This program provides a solution
by realizing practical, graphene-based spintronic devices, based on industry-
compatible graphene growth methods and operating at or above room temperature.
These devices feature directly-grown, high-quality graphene on
magnetic/multiferroic oxide substrates, and will exploit the spin polarization
induced in the graphene channel through its interaction with the substrate,
thereby obviating the need for efficient spin injection from ferromagnetic
electrodes. The devices will furthermore be switched by means of the electric
field applied across insulating oxides, thereby ensuring low-power operation.
This project combines studies of the interfacial-chemistry of graphene/oxide
hetero-junction formation, its effects on graphene spin polarization, and the
development and testing of spin-field effect transistors. These devices are
based on the direct growth of graphene/oxide heterojunctions, including
Co3O4(111), Cr2O3(0001), and other ordered multiferroic oxides. The goal is to
have a fundamental insight into how surface chemistry impacts spin transport,
and also to yield manufacturable graphene-based spintronic devices, capable of
exhibiting superior per-formance (MR>200%) in operation above room temperature.