* 1508873
* Using Spin-Polarized Carriers in Semiconductor Lasers for Optical Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Igor Zutic, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,363.00

Spintronics seeks to manipulate and use the spin that electrons and photons
possess to store and process information. Advances in manipulating the spin of
an electron and the associated magnetic moment, recognized by the 2007 Nobel
Prize in Physics, were crucial for a dramatic increase in the capacity of
computer hard drives using spin-valves. Such spin-valves rely on the concept of
magnetoresistance in which the magnetic configuration of a device determines if
the current flow is permitted or restricted. While spin-valves remain valuable
for magnetically storing and sensing information, they are of limited use for
signal processing and digital logic; it would be crucial to consider practical
paths to other spin-based device schemes. One such opportunity is afforded in
this proposal by reexamining how to improve semiconductor lasers, widely used in
DVDs, optical communication, and medicine. In commercial semiconductor lasers, a
sufficiently large number of electrons and holes, having an opposite charge, are
generated and the excess charge carriers recombine to emit coherent photons that
possess the same wavelength and phase. Although photons, electrons and holes all
have spin, the working principle of conventional semiconductor lasers is
completely unaffected by them, because there is no net imbalance between spins
pointing in different directions ('up' and 'down'). The proposed work will
provide a closely integrated educational and outreach efforts by organizing a
week-long Summer Workshop on Lasers, experiment and theory for high school
students and organizing symposia to bridge the gap between the spintronics and
optics communities at the annual SPIE Optics and Photonics
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds on recent
experimental advances demonstrating that the operation of lasers can be strongly
modified by optically or electrically injecting spin-polarized carriers, having
thus a spin imbalance. In the steady-state and low-frequency operation changing
the polarization of injected carriers in such spin-lasers has already enabled:
(a) lasing threshold reduction and enhanced emission intensity as compared to
their conventional (spin-unpolarized) counterparts; (b) strong modulation of the
emitted light, even at a fixed injection intensity. The most important
applications of spin-lasers are still largely unexplored and pertain to an
ultrafast operation and their superior dynamical performance. The bandwidth in
conventional lasers is typically limited by the relaxation oscillation
frequency. However, spin-lasers should enable a large increase in oscillation
frequency , and) a novel and much higher frequency scale governing the
polarization oscillation of the emitted light. The PI will develop a detailed
modeling of spin-lasers and explore how to: (1) tailor the resonant cavity
anisotropy to achieve dynamical bandwidths &gt; 100 GHz, (2) reduce parasitic
frequency modulation-chirp, and (3) improve switching properties and digital
operation; and validate with the experimental data. The PI will study
alternative device geometries focused on the recent advances in GaN spin-
nanolasers. Conventional metallic interconnects are recognized as the bottleneck
in Moore's law scaling and the main source of power dissipation. Since optical
interconnects, having lasers as their key element, could address the underlying
limitations, this work on spin-lasers may have transformative character and
enable novel interconnects.