* 1508573
* Engineering Atomic Layer Deposited Contact Interfaces to Low-Dimensional Nanomaterials for Improved Scaled Transistor Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Aaron Franklin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 11/30/2018
* USD 358,086.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials offer many advantages
for electronic devices, with the potential to enable electronics that operate at
lower power and are transparent or flexible. The foremost limit to nanomaterial
devices of any type is the necessary interfaces to the nanomaterial, primarily
the contacts. Contacts are essential for injecting and extracting electrical
current in nanomaterials, and are the least understand aspect of such devices.
This project takes several new approaches to understanding and improving the
electrical contact to nanomaterials in order to enable their use in exciting
electronic applications. A custom-built material deposition system will be used
to modify the nanomaterial surface and allow for the atomically controlled
growth of various contact materials. The resultant improvement of the contacts
to nanomaterials will provide the nanoelectronics and optoelectronics
communities with key information for improving their device design and
fabrication approaches. From carrier collection interfaces in solar cells to
contacts in scaled low-power transistors, results from this project will impact
the Grand Challenges by enabling more efficient solar energy and lower energy
electronics. Further, an improved understanding of interfaces to nanomaterials
will open the way for new device concepts. This project will also be impactful
in promoting educational diversity as it will be carried out by two female
graduate students, one of whom is a NSF Graduate Research Fellow. Further, the
extensive interest in nanomaterials among high school and undergraduate students
makes this project ideal for attracting involvement of underrepresented
minorities around Duke through several established and new outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate limits of nanomaterial-
based devices are defined by the necessary contact interfaces. Especially when
it comes to van der Waals-type nanomaterials (focus of this project are:
graphene, 2D crystals, carbon nanotubes), where there are no surface states for
interfacial bonding, interaction with contacts is a substantial bottleneck. In
this project, new techniques for enabling atomic layer deposition (ALD)
nucleation at the contact interface will be used to improve understanding and
quality of interfacial electron transport, thereby amplifying device
performance. ALD provides conformal thin films of various conducting materials
with atomic layer precision. Tuning the ALD process conditions allows for
controlled alteration of metal work function and crystallinity. However, ALD on
nanomaterials is typically not possible due to the inert nanomaterial surface.
This project will use an advanced plasma-enhanced ALD system that is linked
through an ultra-high vacuum load lock to a physical vapor deposition (PVD) tool
with a low energy broad beam ion source. This in situ PVD and ion beam will be
used to modify the surface of nanomaterials in a variety of fashions to create
nucleation sites for subsequent ALD. For instance, varying the ion beam energy
will allow tuning between surface adsorbate depositions to dangling bond
creation in the nanomaterial contact areas using various constituents' including
H2, N2, Ar, and O2. The resultant contact interfaces will be characterized
structurally (optical spectroscopy) and electrically (FETs). In addition to
being the first study of ALD contacts to nanomaterials, this project will yield
devices with improved performance, including at scaled contact dimensions for
advanced electronics. The way will be opened for applying these ALD-formed
contacts to nanomaterials in a myriad of promising applications, from high-
performance transistors to solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD)
Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS)
and the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in the Division of
Materials Research (DMR).