* 1508159
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Next generation 2D-LC with greatly improved quantitative performance: Innovations in hardware, software, and methodology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Dwight Stoll, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2019
* USD 212,763.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Dwight Stoll of Gustavus Adolphus College and
Sarah Rutan of Virginia Commonwealth University are studying fundamental aspects
of the quantitative performance of two-dimensional liquid chromatography
(2D-LC). This project uses the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) program of the NSF to form an industry alliance with a leading
liquid chromatography company, Agilent Tecnhologies. 2D-LC is an analytical
methodology used for separation of inherently complex materials including urine,
blood, urban wastewater, and the products of chemical and biological synthesis.
This academic/industrial collaboration among Gustavus Adolphus College, Virginia
Commonwealth University and Agilent Technologies is expected to lead to a deeper
fundamental understanding of these limitations and support the development of
novel technologies to improve the quantitative performance of 2D-LC.The broader
impacts of the work include: wider application of 2D-LC as a high resolution
separation technique across the life sciences and chemical industries;
engagement of students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels in
cutting-edge research; and development of simulations that will facilitate more
efficient and deeper learning about critical concepts in liquid
chromatography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The separation power of 2D-LC is well
suited to better understand complex samples in fields ranging from medicine and
pharmaceutical development to environmental chemistry. However, state-of-the-art
2D-LC currently suffers from poorer sensitivity and precision compared to more
conventional methods, and this limits its scope of application. This project
will leverage the strengths of the collaboration partners to address the
limitations in quantitative performance of 2D-LC through a combination of
complementary strategies. Simulations will be developed to better understand the
underlying fundamental limitations of coupling the two dimensions in 2D-LC,
novel valve technology will be developed and its performance characterized
experimentally, and computer-based data analysis methods will be developed that
enable better utilization of the multi-dimensional structure of data produced by
2D-LC methods. It is expected that the detection limits of 2D-LC will be
improved at least five-fold, and that the quantitative precision will be
improved so that it is competitive with conventional liquid chromatography.