* 1508501
* Hybrid Nanoprobes Of Peptide-Functionalized Quantum Dots And Magnetic Nanocrystals, Interfaced Via Amphiphilic Multifunctional Polymer Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Debra Fadool, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2019
* USD 492,000.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division is funding Drs. Hedi Mattoussi and Debra Fadool at the
Florida State University to develop strategies to modify the surfaces of
inorganic nanomaterials so that they can bind with biological systems. This will
yield systems that can be used to probe specific biological species and monitor
targeted biological processes without affecting the integrity of the host
system. To meet this goal, new multifunctional polymers that strongly coordinate
onto various nanomaterials will be designed, providing water-compatible
nanoprobes that are easy to introduce into biological media/systems. The work at
Florida State University provides a good example where nanotechnology is used to
address important problems in biology. The present project is interdisciplinary
in nature and it provides opportunities for training graduate and undergraduate
students in areas such as growth and functionalization of nanocrystals, peptide
design and synthesis, protein expression, and several other analytical
techniques. Prof. Mattoussi and co-workers will also carry out outreach
activities to undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing amphiphilic
polymers as surface ligands that can tightly coordinate onto the surfaces of
inorganic nanomaterials, including magnetic nanoparticles, luminescent quantum
dots and gold nanoparticles. The chemical design exploits the effectiveness of
the nucleophilic addition reaction to allow the simultaneous insertion of
hydrophilic moieties, metal-coordinating groups and reactive functions on the
same polymer platform. By combining multi-anchoring groups with hydrophilic and
biologically-reactive functionalities in the same amphiphilic polymer, our
design will enhance the ligand-to-nanoparticle binding, while facilitating their
coupling to various target molecules. This approach will allow conjugation of
QDs and magnetic nanocrystals to several target molecules, including dopamine
and the margatoxin (MgTx) peptide. These resulting conjugates will be used to
develop specific biosensors. In particular QD-dopamine conjugates will provide
platforms that can target iron ions and cysteine-rich proteins in vitro and in
cell cultures. Similarly, nanoparticle-MgTx conjugates will be used to control
the current flow through the Kv1.3 potassium channels of mitral cells.