* 1508680
* Transport and Carrier Dynamics Near the Metal-Insulator Transition in VO2
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Sanjoy Sarker, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 503,583.00

Non-technical Description: Vanadium dioxide is a material that undergoes a
transition from an electrical insulator to an electrical conductor just above
room temperature (about 68 degree C). This behavior allows it to act as an
electrical switch, which is an essential functionality required for transistors
in computers. However, a complete microscopic understanding of this transition
is still lacking, hindering future applications of this material. This project
combines theoretical and experimental expertise of the team to develop an in-
depth understanding of the microscopic mechanisms for the transition and
discover new approaches to control it. Experimental characterization acts as a
feedback for the further development of theoretical models, and these models
also make further theory predictions to guide experimental efforts. Various
outreach and education activities include: (1) providing the theoretical and
experimental hands-on research experience in highly topical research areas for
students; (2) participating in an international internship program to bring in
undergraduates during the academic year; (3) disseminating research findings to
industry through long-standing industrial collaborations; and (4) broadening the
participation of under-represented groups specifically through an existing
collaboration with Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Vanadium dioxide transforms from a
low-temperature insulating phase to a high-temperature metallic phase, during
which the electrical resistivity can change by a factor of as much as 100,000,
accompanied by a large change in infrared reflectivity. The fundamental
mechanism of the temperature-driven metal-insulator transition of bulk vanadium
dioxide (VO2) at 341 K is still under debate, over fifty years after its
discovery. Specifically, there is a need to understand the microscopic physics
responsible for the anomalous transport properties, in particular the presence
of metallic clusters in the insulating state. The mixed phase cannot be
explained in terms of a simple phase separation model; nor can a simple
semiconductor or percolation model explain the transport. This project combines
experimental and theoretical efforts, with each providing a crucial feedback for
the other. The approach addresses the relevant physical processes involved,
namely electron motion correlated with ionic displacements, at a microscopic
level. Detailed experimental transport studies of the mixed phase are a key part
of the project, particularly electrical noise and tunneling spectroscopy. The
team is also investigating novel transistor-like structures and piezoelectric-
induced strain effects with a goal of an electrically controlled transition. The
theoretical model contains the essential physics of VO2, by treating it as a
strongly interacting electron-ion system. Non-perturbative many-body techniques
are applied to study how the transition can occur and metallic clusters appear,
beyond the reach of density functional theory,