* 1508404
* SusChEM: Ionic Conduction Mechanisms in Low-cost and Rare-earth-free Fast Ion Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Yan-Yan Hu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 297,570.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Fast ion conductors are an essential component
of electrochemical devices such as fuel cells, solid-state batteries, gas
separation membranes, and chemical sensors. An important criterion for ionic
conductors to be suitable for such high-performance devices is high ionic
conductivity at operating temperatures. In recent years, there has been a
growing interest in developing sustainable, cost-effective, and high-
conductivity oxide-ion conductors for intermediate-temperature solid-oxide fuel
cells, one of the most efficient and cleanest energy conversion and storage
technologies. One strategy is to design rare-earth-free fast-ion conductors.
With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, this project focuses on investigating the
fundamental mechanisms of ionic conduction and revealing the relationship of
chemical structure and conductivity in newly developed fast-ion conductors. The
findings from this study provide valuable guidelines for rationally designing
fast oxide-ion conductors. The research also develops unique characterization
tools and protocols which are to be incorporated into the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory and made available to national and international users.
Students assigned to this project, including undergraduates and a female
minority graduate student, are provided with unique research training
opportunities and guidance to advance their academic careers. The principal
investigator's team disseminates the key findings and technological developments
to the general public by creating educational videos and performing
demonstrations at science events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A new group of cost-effective and rare-earth-free fast ion
conductors has been recently discovered. Some have unparalleled ion conductivity
for intermediate-temperature solid-oxide fuel cells. The mechanism for such high
ion conductivity is nevertheless unknown. This research uses Na-doped strontium
silicates as model systems to understand how ions migrate in this class of fast-
ion conductors. The study involves three major tasks including synthesis of
strontium silicates with controlled alkaline element doping, advanced
characterization with high-temperature high-resolution solid-state O-17, Na-23,
and Si-29 NMR probing of structural defects and ion dynamics, and
electrochemical measurements and computational efforts complementary to NMR
characterizations to establish the important linkage between ion conductivity
and structural defects.