* 1508499
* Physical Chemistry of the spatiotemporal regulation of protein function through phosphoinositide domains and gradients
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Arne Gericke, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 05/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Arne Gericke and Dr. Qi Wen from Worcester Polytechnic
Institute to identify the physicochemical conditions that lead to the clustering
of phosphoinositide lipids in complex lipid mixtures and to characterize the
membrane association of the phosphatase PTEN with such laterally heterogeneous
lipid bilayers. Lipids are major building blocks of cellular membranes and a
subclass of these biomolecules control cellular functions by attracting proteins
to distinct cellular sites at specific times. Such lipid mediated signaling
events require a high degree of organization in space and time, and deviations
from the proper execution of these signaling pathways result in a wide array of
cellular dysfunctions. The cellular requirements for the local accumulation of
signaling lipids are only beginning to emerge and the mechanisms leading to the
time dependent control of these lipid pools need to be determined. The research
funded under this proposal will delineate the mechanisms that lead to the
formation and maintenance of localized pools and gradients of signaling lipids.
Graduate and undergraduate students will receive training in many modern
research techniques, including single molecule microscopy. The principal
investigator will continue to develop inquiry based middle school science
projects and his research group will be involved in a range of STEM outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the research will be to
understand how phosphoinositides, which are minority components of plasma and
intracellular membranes, provide spatiotemporal control of protein function.
Phosphoinositide gradients have been observed in vivo, however, currently there
is no experimental platform available that enables the testing of hypotheses
about how these gradients are created and maintained. This grant supports the
development of a microfluidic device that will be used to systematically
investigate how phosphoinositide gradients are created through the action of
phosphoinositide specific kinases and phosphatases and subsequently stabilized
by other biomolecules.