* 1508192
* Understanding Redox Reaction Mechanism and Dynamics at Single Nanoparticles Using ECL and Scanning Nanoelectrode with Improved Spatial and Spectral Resolution
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Shanlin Pan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2020
* USD 342,899.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division of the NSF, Professor Shanlin Pan of The University of
Alabama is developing electrochemistry and spectroscopy techniques to help
address technical and scientific challenges of conventional electrochemistry
methods for studying redox events at the nanometer scale. Combined methods of
optical spectroscopy, nanoelectrochemistry, and imaging techniques will be used
to address these challenges. The broader impacts are addressed in through
outreach efforts focus on integrating the research project with education and
training of high school teachers as well as education module development. The
students working on this project will be part of an interdisciplinary team, and
will be cross-trained in the areas of spectroelectrochemistry and material
science. These skills will serve them well in their future careers. The proposed
educational activities will help enhance the recruitment and retention of
minority students and faculties in the Alabama area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is designed to address both scientific and technical challenges for
understanding detailed redox reaction mechanism and plasmon interaction with
electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL) at single metallic nanoparticles (NPs)
using improved spectroelectrochemistry techniques. Task-1 of the proposal
involves the study of local electrochemical reaction and its temporal and
spatial heterogeneities using ECL at single metallic NPs. Task-2 is designed to
resolve the shape dependence of single NPs local electrochemical events with a
scanning nanoelectrode probe method that has super-spatial resolution, beyond
the optical diffraction limit, and reliable spectral resolution for probing
local interfacial charge transfer events.