* 1509354
* Exploring lateral photo-Dember effect in two dimensional atomic layer crystals for terahertz generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Zhaohui Zhong, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The efficient generation of long wavelength radiation at the 0.1~10 terahertz
region remains a key challenge for the development and deployment of terahertz
technology for high speed communication, spectroscopy, and imaging applications.
This research project explores a unique lateral photo-Dember effect in
2-dimensional nanomaterials for terahertz generation. The proposed project will
open a door to developing new type of compact terahertz sources with a broad
range of applications. In addition, the knowledge and techniques acquired
through the proposed research can readily be extended to study ultrafast optical
physics of other type of 1-dimensional and 2-dimensional nanomaterials. More
broadly, the proposed project is highly interdisciplinary and should advance
science and technology in areas of nanomaterials, optical science,
nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, and device physics. The project also includes an
outreach and education program promoting awareness of and interest in
nanoscience and nanotechnology among K-12 and undergraduate students. The
knowledge and research findings resulting from this project will be integrated
into a number of new nanotechnology courses currently under development that are
related to carbon nanotechnology, optical science, and nanophotonics. This
project will be further enhanced by proactively recruiting underrepresented
students, which can improve the diversity of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics disciplines and workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project aim to understand the fundamental lateral photo-Dember effect in
2-dimensional atomic layer crystals including graphene and few layer transition
metal dichalcogenides, and to pioneer new terahertz sources based on these
2-dimensional nanomaterials. The project tasks are: (1) to perform fundamental
study to thoroughly understand the ultrafast photo-carrier dynamics in graphene
and transition metal dichalcogenides; (2) to fabricate and characterize the
terahertz emission from metal/2-dimensional nanomaterial junctions; (3) to
design new terahertz emitter arrays based on 2-dimensional nanomaterials and
test their performance. A combination of advanced optoelectronic
characterization techniques for 2-dimensional nanomaterials will be developed
and utilized in this project, including scanning photocurrent measurement,
ultrafast pump-probe photocurrent measurement, and terahertz time-domain
spectroscopy techniques. The success of the project will generate fundamental
and detailed understanding of light-matter interaction and ultrafast carrier
dynamics in low dimensional nanomaterials. In addition, the finding of the
project will truly showcase the advantages of 2-dimensional nanomaterials for
unique optoelectronic applications which are not possible in bulk
semiconductors.