* 1509536
* Achieving Robust Power System Operations under Uncertainty and Price-Driven Active Demand-Side Participation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Xiaojun Lin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,831.00

In order to attain a sustainable energy future with high utilization of
renewable energy, it is crucial that future power systems can utilize the
flexibility of demand to compensate for the uncertainty and variability of
renewable supply. However, while wholesale electricity prices fluctuate
significantly over time, retail electricity rates are often set at a fixed level
(i.e., the so-called flat-rate structure) in most of the U.S. Within such a
flat-rate structure, entities with demand flexibility have neither incentives
nor effective ways to help improve the power system's capability to cope with
renewable uncertainty. To address this issue, it is envisioned that dynamic
price signals will be passed to the demand-side entities, including utilities,
demand aggregators, and distributed-generation/microgrid operators, with the
hope that they will be incentivized to change their consumption patterns to help
achieving more efficient and robust power grid operations. However, such price-
driven demand-side response will in turn affect the price signals. If not
designed properly, this closed-loop interaction, when coupled with renewable
uncertainty, can produce highly volatile system dynamics. The resulted
volatility will increase not only the risk of system instability, but also the
price uncertainty and financial risk faced by consumers, ultimately discouraging
them from participating in active demand response. Thus, there is a pressing
need to understand at a fundamental level how to design price-driven demand
response that can achieve stable, robust and efficient power system operations.
By addressing this open challenge, this project develops the critically-needed
system-level understanding of how to achieve robust power system operations
through price-driven active demand-side participation. On a broader scale, the
results of the project will contribute to the increasing adoption of renewable
energy and to the smooth transition to a clean energy future. The results are
also expected to contribute to control theory and game theory by advancing the
design of competitive online algorithms and decentralized learning algorithms
for managing renewable uncertainty. The results will be widely disseminated
through publications and seminars. Further, the project team will leverage the
Energy Academy program at Purdue for outreach to talented high school seniors
and teachers.

This project will develop the theoretical foundations, especially in terms of
control and learning algorithms, that will enable distributed generation
providers, microgrid operators and demand aggregators to actively participate in
price-driven demand response in a robust, stable, and efficient manner. The key
novelty of the project is its formulation of the robustness and stability
requirements in a rigorous mathematical framework, such that despite uncertainty
in future conditions, the produced system outcome (in terms of efficiency and/or
volatility) will be provably competitive compared to a carefully-chosen set of
benchmark settings/algorithms. Specifically, the project addresses both
regulated utilities that use pre-announced price signals and online algorithms
to offset the uncertainty and variability from renewable supply and demand, and
for deregulated markets where consumers' electricity rates are indexed to the
ex-post ISO/RTO real-time market prices. In both cases, the project team will
develop robust online control and learning algorithms that not only achieve high
energy efficiency and reduce dependency on fossil fuel based generation, but
also lower the volatility of the system dynamics and market dynamics to a
minimum.