* 1509043
* Fiber based Fabric Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Alper Bozkurt, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Proposal 1509043&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Fiber based Fabric
Sensors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
develop computational model supported benchtop and wearable impedance
characterization tools to investigate sensory capabilities of co-extruded
multicomponent fibers in a woven fabric structure for biomedical monitoring
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. textiles industry can only remain competitive by
engaging in technologies that employ advanced materials for emerging smart
textiles. A novel method was proposed to engineer electronic sensing
functionalities into textiles at one or more of the hierarchical levels of
molecules, fibers, yarns, or fabrics. The woven interlacement eliminates the
need for conventional lithography, which is neither scalable to large areas nor
compatible with textile manufacturing. Therefore, a fundamentally translational
and transformative manufacturing method was proposed for numerous biomedical
sensing needs where the limitations imposed by substrate size for processing in
conventional semiconductor- and cleanroom-based sensors are potentially obviated
and a very attractive possibility of low cost roll-to-roll processing of very
large-area flexible sensor systems open up. Beyond its impact on economy and
healthcare, the project will be used to design hands on modules for high school
and college students, especially from underrepresented minority communities, and
their educators to attract attention to wearable electronic textile systems by
(i) learning cutting-edge methods used in fabrication and testing of Fiber-based
Active Sensory Textiles, and (ii) developing design and problem-solving skills
to generate and analyze the sensory response described herein. These students
will be prepared to lead new research to drive the commercial development of
electronic textiles, which promise much-needed economic and employment benefits
as commodity textiles are increasingly manufactured off-shore.&lt;br/&gt;b)
Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Electronic textiles have attracted considerable
scientific and commercial interest recently. While initial efforts were
targeting wearable computing applications, the recent focus has been towards
integration of sensing. A practical, effective, and inconspicuous means to
introduce desired electrical characteristics is at the fiber level, where
processes that are compatible to textiles could be used. To enable textile based
sensing, under this project, the use of highly ordered segments of conducting
and insulating materials in the fiber cross-sectional structure will be
investigated. The unobtrusive integration of electronic sensing capabilities
while preserving all desirable ?textile? qualities requires fundamental
electrical and mechanical understanding of the hierarchical nature of textile
structures and their unique methods of assembly. In particular, the use of
multicomponent fibers extruded from commercially available thermoplastic
polyurethane elastomers will be explored in a wide variety of mechanical and
rheological property combinations as the base polymer. The controllability of
the proposed methods of fabrication, melt extrusion and weaving enables the
readily adaptation and testing of co-extruded multicomponent fibers to the
general development of conformable Fiber-based Active Sensory Textiles based
health-monitoring systems