* 1509592
* WAKE MEDIATED COUPLING IN OSCILLATING HYDROFOIL TURBINE ARRAYS
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Matthew Bryant, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 345,581.00

The objective of this project is to enable scalable arrays of damless
oscillating hydrofoil turbines that will offer higher efficiencies, higher power
output levels, and wider applicability than current hydropower technologies. The
proposed work will take advantage of unique, recently uncovered wake-structure
interactions that can increase power output and efficiency in densely packed
arrays of oscillators. The approach of using oscillating hydrofoil devices that
can be closely arranged together will open new markets for hydropower in
locations previously considered too shallow or cluttered to be feasible. With
many population centers located on coastlines and along rivers, this new source
of clean energy would have minimal transmission costs and losses. Such devices
could also be invaluable in off-grid sites like remote villages or temporary
shelters for people displaced by disasters. Smaller scale applications could
create flow-powered sensing stations that do not rely on short-term and
environmentally hazardous consumable batteries for applications like monitoring
critical infrastructure. At the utility grid scale, when compared to other
renewable energy sources like wind and solar power, oscillating turbine
hydrokinetic power arrays will offer more convenient integration into the power
grid due to the predictable nature of the energy source. While wind and solar
power are subject to daily variation and intermittency due to weather changes,
tidal flows in particular can be accurately predicted well in advance, allowing
the various sources in the utility grid to be readily balanced to cost-
effectively meet demand and production allocations. In addition, the proposed
education activities will serve to help broaden participation in engineering and
inspire children to Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) studies.
North Carolina middle school and junior high school students will learn about
flow energy harvesting and engineering design in a hands-on lab activity the
researchers will develop and run as part of the popular NC State University
summer camp program. The researchers will also broaden participation in research
by providing opportunities for underrepresented undergraduate students from
public colleges across North Carolina to engage in mentored research activities
in the PI's and Co-PI's labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike traditional spinning
turbines, which must be widely spaced to perform most effectively, our
preliminary experiments have shown that oscillating energy harvesting devices
actually perform most effectively when they are closely packed together and
their motions become coupled by the wake flow. This work will determine how
arrays of oscillating turbines can be modeled, controlled, and optimally
configured to take advantage of these synergistic interactions between the wakes
of upstream and downstream devices. Current wind and hydrokinetic energy
research largely focus on the performance of individual devices from a
mechanical or fluid dynamics standpoint, or the interaction and combination of
power sources in a "smart grid" from an electrical perspective. The work
proposed will leverage a different approach that exploits and optimizes
interactions between devices at the mechanics level. Specifically, experimental
and analytic studies will (1) investigate the parameters that govern the
occurrence, strength, and scaling of the synergistic wake-structure coupling and
how it can be used to enhance the performance of 2D arrays of hydropower energy
harvesters. The researchers will also (2) quantitatively compare active,
passive, and hybrid actuation and control approaches for the oscillating
turbines, and (3) quantify the influence of the shallowness of the water body on
the wake structure formation of individual and collective energy harvesters.