* 1509691
* UNS: Thermal Rectification and Heat Transfer Enhancement via Near-Field Radiation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Edgar Meyhofer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 341,938.00

1509691&lt;br/&gt;Sangi Reddy, Pramod&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is to
understand how energy flows between two surfaces placed very close together,
with gaps as small as 10 nano-meters. The resultant data are significant because
knowledge gained will help establish methods of manipulating energy flow
effectively in small devices. There have been many models predicting these
behaviors, but relatively few experimental results exist to verify or disprove
them. This proposed study will facilitate model validations. The proposal also
incorporates extensive outreach activities to engage undergraduate and graduate
students as well as underrepresented minorities in research. Modules for K-12
students will incorporate novel atomic force microscope, which is impressive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to validate and invalidate the developed
theories and numerical studies on the near field radiation between nano-gap
parallel plates. The PIs have successfully demonstrated preliminary measurements
of the 200 nm gap radiation and plan to reduce the gap down to 10 nm. The
experimental setup will be used to validate many combinations of materials and
radiation rectifier and enhance the performance of calorimeter (with pico-Watt
resolutions). The experimental facility is being developed on a current NSF
award. Several significant questions regarding near-field radiation heat
transfer in nano-gaps will be addressed: (1) near field heat transfer polar
dielectrics and hyperbolic materials, (2) thermal rectification, and (3) high
resolution calorimetry.