* 1509260
* Signal Processing--Optics Co-Design for In Vivo Optical Biopsy
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Mark Pierce, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 409,963.00

For cancer and many chronic conditions, detecting early stage disease is the
most critical factor in successfully curing patients and improving long-term
survival rates. Current clinical practice involves taking biopsy samples from
suspicious sites, followed by tissue processing and microscopic examination for
abnormalities. This is a low yield, expensive, painful, and slow process. This
project develops a new approach for microscopic imaging of living cells and
tissues within the body in real time, which will improve the ability of
physicians to detect early stage disease. The developed approach will also
greatly increase the number of diagnostically useful biopsies being collected,
improve the accuracy of margin identification during surgical resection, and
permit non-invasive monitoring of post-surgical sites for recurrence. Lowering
costs associated with unnecessary biopsies, multiple clinic visits, and repeat
surgeries due to undetected residual disease will also positively impact the
economics of healthcare delivery in the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
focus of this project is on the design of a fiber-optic probe that will enable
examination of tissue for signs of disease in real-time, non-invasively, at the
level of traditional pathology. This involves breaking conventional resolution
limitations in fiber-optic imaging to deliver a real-time "optical biopsy". This
is accomplished through integration of mathematical concepts from the compressed
sensing field with hardware design and engineering for the clinical setting. The
main goals of this project in this regard are (1) to design and engineer two
candidate hardware architectures for optical biopsy, (2) to design, analyze and
optimize the computational algorithms required to generate high-resolution
images from these specific architectures, (3) to design and train automated
feature recognition algorithms to assist the physician in interpreting optical
biopsy images in real-time, and (4) to complete benchmark validation of the
system using calibrated test targets and biological
phantoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project stems from
the tight integration between fiber-optic-based endomicroscopy and signal
processing theory and algorithms. This project does not simply apply image
analysis algorithms to previously-acquired data in post-processing. Instead, the
optical hardware components and signal processing elements are co-designed to
enable imaging at 2-4 times higher spatial resolution than possible from
developing the hardware or software alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will thus advance the medical imaging field by developing new signal processing
techniques to increase resolution and field-of-view that do not require
additional breakthroughs in microfabrication methods. This project will also
advance the signal processing field by introducing new algorithms to solve
missing data problems, address ill-posed inverse problems, and implement
compressive sensing theory, all at previously unexplored length scale. However,
the most transformative aspect of this work is that it has the potential to
change clinical practices from reliance on 100 year old pathology practices to
real-time information on tissue status at the patient?s bedside.