* 1509666
* Contingency-Constrained Unit Commitment with High Penetration of Intermittent Renewables
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Reliability is a major concern for power systems, and engineers have been
striving hard to keep lights on under all kinds of uncertainty, including
contingencies caused by a sudden failure of a generator or a transmission line.
The North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) N-1 rule requires
that no such single failure should result in system infeasibility, and this rule
has been embedded in certain versions of the unit commitment process. The
resulting contingency-constrained unit commitment(CCUC) is extremely complex,
and the issue is now compounded by the drastic increase in intermittent
renewables such as wind or solar. In Spain, for example, it is not uncommon that
a drop of wind generation within just a few hours is equivalent to the shutdown
of four nuclear units, and this has presented major challenges to system
operators. Consideration of contingencies in the presence of intermittent
renewables is thus a critical and urgent issue. In collaboration with ISO-NE,
Southern California Edison and Alstom Grid, this proposal is on CCUC with high
penetration of intermittent renewables. The problem is challenging in view of
different types of uncertainties and their magnitudes, the large number of
contingencies, the combinatorial nature of mixed-integer optimization, and the
largeness of power systems. Our focus will be on novel formulations of interval
CCUC, and on advanced optimization methods. The proposed research will have the
broader impacts on managing other uncertainties, e.g., N-2 contingencies, and on
other complex problems such as microgrid energy optimization. For these
problems, difficulties associated with uncertain weather, electricity demand and
microgrid-associated intermittent renewables can be modeled by the interval
formulation. The resulting mixed-integer linear optimization problems can then
benefit from our advanced optimization methods. Furthermore, the research will
educate graduate and undergraduate students and professionals through courses,
seminars, publications and online materials. It will also benefit high school
students through their teachers? involvement in the daVinci summer project at
UConn. The participations of under-represented groups will be actively
sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Task 1 is on formulating CCUC for the
co-optimization of energy and reserve considering N-1 contingencies and
intermittent renewables. The novel idea lies in using intervals to describe
transmission contingencies based on generation shift factors (GSFs), as opposed
to analyzing contingencies one at a time. A line flow is a weighted sum of net
nodal injections, where weights are GSFs. When a transmission line is tripped,
GSFs will be changed. Various transmission contingencies can thus be described
by varying values of GSFs, and be modeled by intervals. Conservativeness of this
modeling will be alleviated through shrinking ranges of GSFs based on
identifying and eliminating redundant contingency transmission constraints, and
through improving interval arithmetic, e.g., by using affine arithmetic.
Generator contingencies and intermittent renewables will then be incorporated
within the interval optimization framework. To effectively solve the problem,
Task 2 is on developing a new generation of optimization methods. The key is to
synergistically integrate our latest surrogate Lagrangian relaxation(SLR), which
exploits separability, with branch-and-cut, which exploits linearity. While SLR
requires iterations, by novel exploitation of the invariant nature of subproblem
convex hulls across iterations, the overall CPU time and solution quality will
be drastically improved. In addition, parallel implementation of our approach
will be explored. The method will be tested using realistic data sets from ISO-
NE and CAISO.