* 1509965
* Fundamentals of Wireless Communication Systems Using Orbital Angular Momenta
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 396,560.00

Wireless data services have seen an enormous growth over the past two decades:
not only has the number of users and connected devices increased dramatically,
but also the connection speed has grown by a factor of 1000. All of this had led
to an unprecedented variety of wireless services that changes the way that
people are working, interacting, and spending their spare time. However, the
continued increase in data rates has also created great challenges, since the
spectrum used for signal transmission is a limited and precious resource. For
this reason, it is essential to both use new spectrum, and to exploit available
spectrum as efficiently as possible. Advances in chip manufacturing have opened
the possibility for low-cost communications systems using millimeter waves,
which have much shorter wavelength than currently used cellular systems, and
where a lot of spectrum is available. Still, given the increase in data usage,
also this spectrum has to be used efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way to
drastically improve spectral efficiency is to transmit multiple data streams
together, using the same spectrum. However, in a normal setting, the receiver
obtains then a mixture of those data streams, and they would interfere with each
other. It is thus necessary to transmit the data streams in a way that allows
the receiver to disentangle them. This project investigates a recently
discovered such transmission method that is especially suitable for wireless
links where the transmitter and receiver can see each other, and are fixed -
such situations can occur, e.g., for wireless backhaul (essentially, the
connection from the base station to the internet), or wireless communication
between servers in a data center. The method transmits different data streams on
waves that have different orbital angular momenta (OAM), which describe the
phase twist of a propagating wave. The current project investigates the
fundamental science, as well as potential practical problems of OAM systems, and
aims to assess their potential as a revolutionary method for drastically
improving speed and efficiency of wireless data
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make the above description more precise,
OAM describes a phase twist of a propagating wave, and is different from the
well-known polarization. Beams with different OAM are orthogonal to each other
when propagating along the same beam axis, so that beams emanating from the same
aperture, using the same time-frequency resources, can carry independent data
streams. The project investigates the fundamentals as well as the real-world
behavior of OAM multiplexing systems operating in the millimeter wave frequency
range, specifically, 1) Explore the basic factors limiting OAM communication
system capacity, in particular the pathloss of different OAM beams, and
investigate measures to optimize the system capacity; 2) Investigate fundamental
issues of OAM beam propagation, including the impact of attenuation and mode
conversion by specular reflection and diffuse scattering; 3) Evaluate residual
crosstalk between OAM channels, arising from various propagation environments;
4) Find new methods for compensating OAM channel degradation, in particular
compensating for multipath propagation and atmospheric distortions; and 5)
Analyze the connection between OAM and spatial multiplexing, and see how they
can be combined in a manner that is most beneficial for implementation.