* 1509022
* UNS: A Synthetic Bacterial Riboswitch Sensor for Microcystin Detection and Remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Wendell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 306,894.00

1509022 Wendell, David &lt;br/&gt;Source water increasingly contains toxins
produced by algal bloom. Easy and effective measurements of the toxins at
concentrations that are toxic are not available. The researcher will develop a
recombinant cell that will visually indicate if the toxins are present in source
water. Successful completion of this project has the potential to reduce hazards
associated with algal toxins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The toxins produced by
cyanobacteria affecting human and animal health. The prevalence and toxicity of
microcystin drives the need to create a sensor that is both affordable and
highly sensitive, with direct applicability to environmental samples. Ribozymes,
self-cleaving tertiary aggregates of RNA, have gained applications in gene
expression. When RNA aptamers are incorporated into self-cleaving nucleic acid
sequences, riboswitches responding solely to a desired ligand can be created.
Using this strategy, riboswitch biosensors can be optimized to indicate the
presence or absence of the toxin. The long term goal of this research is to
produce a riboswitch-mediated biosensor orthogonal to the cyanobacterial toxin
microcystin-LR. This bacterial sensor will optically report the presence of the
toxin in the form of a simple color change and further assist with microcystin
bioremediation by initializing a gene for microcystin-LR degradation (mlrA). The
intellectual merit of this project is the design and construction of a
riboswitch sensor that endows E. coli with a means of controlling gene
expression in response to the presence of microcystin-LR. The central hypothesis
is that a microcystin-LR specific riboswitch can predictably indicate the
presence of microcystin-LR at very low, physiologically relevant concentrations.
The basis for this hypothesis is preliminary results with a compendium of
various ribosensor designs and a demonstrated response within the range of the
World Health Organization required minimum.The broader impact of this project
will be a cyanotoxin biosensor and bioremediation system that can be integrated
into current potable water treatment systems and readily deployed in the field.
In addition, this project will provide for the support and training of a
graduate student, allow for the public presentation of the work at both academic
conferences and a local high school, as well as recruitment of 3
underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students to environmental
engineering. The 2 undergraduate recruits will be competing in the international
synthetic biology competition iGEM, allowing them to build and share their
genetically engineered projects with the global iGEM community.