* 1509890
* Sensory Data Analytics for Securing Wind Farm Generation Against Disruptive Events
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Miao He, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,960.00

Integrating higher levels of wind power is a critical step to building a secure
and sustainable energy infrastructure for the nation. While being green and
free, wind power generation can be quite volatile and intermittent, which
opposes grand challenges for harvesting wind energy in a reliable and on-demand
manner. This proposal aims to address the fundamental challenges of securing
reliable power output from wind farms, through the development of online and in-
situ sensory data analytics tools. By leveraging the rich information contained
in the diverse measurements collected from dispersed meteorological and power
sensors widely deployed at wind farms, the tools developed by the proposed
project would assist in preventive controls and decision making against
impending disruptive weather events or extreme grid conditions that would
otherwise cause dramatic power ramps or oscillations. By bridging wind power
engineering and sensory data analytics for research and education, the proposed
work is interdisciplinary and transformative. The integrated research and
education activities of the proposed project would train future engineers with
diverse expertise for a thriving wind energy industry, and contribute to
fulfilling the DOE's goal of 20% wind energy by 2030 as well as the renewable
portfolio standards legislated in many states of the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project studies wind farm sensory data
analytics in two thrust areas: 1) detection and quantification of impending
front-induced ramp events by using turbine-level power measurements, and 2)
detection and mode analysis of sub-synchronous interactions by using
synchrophasor data. Particularly, front-induced ramp event detection is
formulated as a new class of change detection problems for multiple time series
with spatial dependencies, in which the movement of weather front and the
induced wind power ramp are quantified by using wind farm's geographical layout
information together with the information extracted from turbine-level power
measurements. One intellectual merit of the proposed work arises from the unique
and significant insight into discovering the signatures of front-induced ramp
events from multiple correlated turbine-level power measurements. Another
intellectual merit of the proposed work is the design of model-less and non-
parametric methods for sub-synchronous interaction detection using synchrophasor
data and synchrosqueezing transform. The proposed approaches to both problems
are data-driven, and thus provide novel avenues for non-intrusive condition
monitoring and disruptive event detection for reliable wind farm operations,
which constitutes the transformative aspect of the proposed work.