* 1509735
* 3D On-Chip Hybrid Micropower
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Chunlei Wang, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 277,695.00

The development of miniaturized electronic systems such as smart cards, wireless
sensors and sensor networks, and implantable devices, has stimulated the demand
for miniaturized power sources. For these electronic devices, the power need
ranges from several microwatts to hundreds of milliwatts, and the energy
requirement is from several hundreds of microwatt-hours to several milliwatt-
hours. In this project, an advanced and reliable micropower source with high
energy density and high power density will be developed and investigated. The
nano-enabled miniaturized electrode design is geared to take advantage of the
scaling relationship between interface area and overall volume. This project
will leverage and transform the PI's past and current research effort on
microsupercapacitors and microbatteries into developing and investigating a
novel hybrid micropower system. The fabrication method involved in this system
is compatible with the semiconductor manufacturing process. The novel system
could be integrated with microchips, energy harvesters, power management systems
and sensing components. Through fundamental research, key insights into the
physical and chemical processes that occur in the electrochemical power system
can be obtained. The resulting knowledge is critically needed to achieve
breakthroughs that are required for the development of on-chip level micropower.
This project will engage graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge
research, and broaden the participation of minority students and women in
science and engineering. The newly developed techniques and research results
will be broadly disseminated to the general public.

The objective of this project is to develop a hybrid micropower source with high
energy density and high power density. An asymmetric on-chip level battery type
hybrid microsupercapacitor will be designed, fabricated and investigated. This
device will be a combination of a high power handling double-layer
electrochemical capacitor microelectrode and a Li-ion based rechargeable battery
microelectrode. In this research, an interdigital high-aspect-ratio
microelectrode platform will be constructed by photolithography. Electrochemical
active materials will be fabricated by electrostatic spray deposition. The
design rules of the micropower system will be investigated based on balancing
multiple factors, such as: charge, power, cycle life, and voltage window. The
performance of the hybrid on-chip micropower system will be evaluated and
optimized. The project will deliver a reliable stand-alone power source, that
could be used as backup power for other energy harvesting systems. The unique
electrode array architecture offers exciting possibilities for the optimization
of ion and electron transport and capacity. This project will effectively
integrate research and education in emerging micro- and nano-fabrication for on-
chip micropower applications, and broaden the participation of minority students
and women in science and engineering.