* 1509372
* Distributed Recursive Robust Estimation: Theory, Algorithms and Applications in Single and Multi-Camera Computer Vision
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Nicola Elia, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Many computer vision problems require recursive robust estimation. Some examples
include surveillance applications involving a large indoor or outdoor area
monitored by a network of static cameras; natural background scenes' recovery,
e.g. forest scenes with moving leaves and branches, and their subspace
estimation for texture synthesis applications in animated movies; and multi-site
video conferencing. The surveillance problem requires tracking moving objects;
this can be an easy problem if the background is static. However consider
outdoor scene monitoring on a rainy or very foggy day. As the fog moves and its
density changes, it results in complex and changing backgrounds and the tracking
algorithms need to be robust to this type of 'large' background noise. The
texture synthesis for animation is a well-studied problem if there are no
occlusions (in this case the background sequence is directly available) but
becomes difficult in the presence of severe (large-sized and persistent)
occlusions, e.g. moving and occasionally static animals occluding the background
scenes. We show in this project that the most challenging step in all the above
problems can either be posed as a distributed recursive robust principal
components' analysis (PCA) problem, that is robust to outliers, or as a
distributed recursive robust sparse recovery problem, that is robust to large
but structured noise (noise that is non-sparse and lies in a low-dimensional
subspace). The main goal of this project is to develop distributed algorithms to
solve these problems for the multi-camera setting. The algorithms will be
developed in the context of a multi-site video combining application (needed for
multi-site video conferencing). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing
the first set of online distributed solutions for the decomposition of a matrix
into a sum of a sparse and a low-rank matrix. Robust PCA and robust sparse
recovery are special cases of this more general problem. Our online solutions
will be significantly faster and memory-efficient compared to existing batch
methods. Moreover, unlike most batch methods, these will provably work even when
for slow moving or occasionally static foreground objects (these result in the
sparse matrix also becoming rank deficient and hence batch methods do not work
in this case). This advantage comes because our methods exploit accurate initial
subspace knowledge and slow subspace change (both are usually practically valid
assumptions in real videos). The key novelty of our work within the computer
vision literature is that it is robust to slow changing backgrounds or to
frequent and persistent occlusions (depending whether the foreground or the
background is the layer of interest).