* 1509087
* Scanned Probe Microscopy using Single-Electron Device Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Gregory Snider, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 396,000.00

This project will use ultra-sensitive charge detectors coupled to a scanning
needle, similar to an Atomic Force Microscope, to make nanoscale-resolution maps
of the electrical potential of a surface of solid or soft materials. A novel
sensor, based on high-speed version of the most sensitive charge detector,
single-electron transistor (SET), will be used. This sensor employs arrays of
SETs and radio-frequency reflectometry to give information on fast charging
processes, occurring in a microsecond time frame. The capabilities of this
technique enable experiments that cannot be performed using traditional
measurements of surface potentials. For instance, in existing measurements the
scanning probe disturbs the surface that is being measured, making it difficult
to measure charges, such as electrons, that are only weakly confined to an area
of the surface. In contrast, the measurements made in this project will be much
less disruptive to the surface, making it possible to observe phenomena such as
Wigner localization of electrons. The project also involves an outreach program
that will target middle school students in South Bend Schools through classroom
activities involving faculty and graduate students, and field trips to bring
students to the Notre Dame labs. These activities will contact 50 - 100 students
per year. Middle school aged children are an excellent group for outreach since
they are advanced enough to understand science, but are still making choices
about their areas of interests. South Bend public schools have a diverse student
population with a large number of students from groups underrepresented in the
areas of science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
ultra-sensitive electrometers coupled to a scanned probe system to map the
potential of material surfaces. In surface potential measurements, two methods
dominate: Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) and Electrostatic Force
Microscopy (EFM). Kelvin probe is the more popular technique because it produces
a quantitative measurement of the contact potential difference (CPD) while EFM
can measure only qualitative changes in CPD. This project design and fabricate
scanning single-electron transistor probes (S-SETs) and use them to characterize
the surface charge and potential of semiconductor surfaces. The S-SET probes
will use radio-frequency reflectometry to enable measurements of the CPD with
high charge and potential sensitivity, as well as high spatial and temporal
resolution. Arrays of SETs will be used to provide improved immunity to random
background charge fluctuations, and to provide improved matching to the RF
circuit, eliminating the need for a complicated resonant network. In addition,
the use of an RF SET will enable a Kelvin force measurement, not yet reported in
the literature, that will be less invasive than those made by conventional KPFM.
With the scanned probe system it will be possible to characterize a variety of
surfaces including semiconductors and insulators. In particular, the system will
be used to investigate Wigner localization of electrons within semiconductor
quantum dots.