* 1509294
* ST-ODT:  Spatiotemporal Optical Diffraction Tomography
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Bahaa Saleh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2020
* USD 369,993.00

The development of tools for high-resolution three-dimensional optical imaging
of biological cells and tissues is highly desirable for fundamental and applied
research in biology and medicine. It enables quantitative biology: understanding
complex interactions and functional properties of biological systems through
quantitative measurements, for example monitoring of spatiotemporal activity
patterns in neuronal networks. Since cells and tissues are transparent to light,
existing imaging methods have often relied on foreign contrast agents and
fluorescent markers. Label-free three-dimensional imaging based on light
refraction, i.e., measurement of the spatial distribution of the refractive
index, obviates the need of chemical clearing, thereby preserving the functional
information. However, label-free refractive-index imaging of cells and tissues
is difficult because they are highly scattering. This challenge will be
addressed in this project by use of optical diffraction tomography with
ultrashort laser pulses, together with techniques from digital holography and
processing tools developed for communication systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
proposed approach, called spatiotemporal optical diffraction tomography combines
ballistic imaging and optical diffraction tomography. Optical diffraction
tomography cannot be directly applied to refractive-index imaging of highly-
scattering objects because it is based on the first-Born/Rytov approximation.
Optical diffraction tomography cannot use pulsed illumination because the
inversion algorithm is based on continuous-wave diffraction. We show that with
pulsed illumination, the time-integrated impulse response field is exactly the
same as the diffracted field with continuous-wave illumination. Therefore, by
adjusting the time-integration window for coherently-detected diffraction of
pulsed plane-wave illumination, we not only obtain the equivalent continuous-
wave diffraction field but also reject multiply-scattered and diffuse light,
making continuous mapping of the refractive index of highly-scattering three-
dimensional phase objects possible. Our proposed research includes the following
components: 1) Determining classes of three-dimensional objects suitable for
spatiotemporal optical diffraction tomography through simulation; 2) Optimizing
performance of spatiotemporal optical diffraction tomography and, investigating
the performance limits; and 3) Experimental demonstration of spatiotemporal
optical diffraction tomography. Spatiotemporal optical diffraction tomography is
based on the equivalence of the time-integrated impulse response field and the
continuous-wave diffracted field, a property that has not been heretofore
applied to imaging. The interplay between temporal and spatial propagation
effects represents a paradigm shift in tomography that is uniquely suitable for
three-dimensional imaging in the presence of multiple scattering. The problem is
similar to multiple-input-multiple-output communication systems and can benefit
from that body of knowledge. The idea of characterizing an inhomogeneous medium
with sufficient accuracy to solve an inverse propagation problem is also most
interesting and challenging, and has applications to other disciplines. Since
spatiotemporal optical diffraction tomography can provide continuous three-
dimensional maps of the refractive index, it also enables focusing light onto
specific locations within a highly-scattering three-dimensional phase object.
The implications are far reaching.