* 1509780
* A Framework for Exploring Data in Heterogeneous Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Ioannis Schizas, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Heterogeneous sensing systems consisting of sensors with different types of
sensing and communication capabilities offer flexibility and facilitate the
acquisition of different views of a monitored field by acquiring different types
of measurements. The main challenge is that the often large amount of acquired
raw sensed data does not provide any clue of what lies beneath the sensed field.
The acquired sensor data contain information about different and unknown in
number phenomena of interest. The vision of this project is the development and
analysis of an algorithmic framework that has the ability to learn the unknown
structure of a monitored field and enable the mining and exploration of
information in heterogeneous sensor data. The techniques developed in this
project will enable learning of the sensed field while effectively reducing the
usually large amount of sensor data that need to be processed by removing
irrelevant and non-informative sensor measurements. This research project will
introduce benefits in a wide span of areas including analysis and mining of
ecological and climatic data. The proposed techniques will be capable of
analyzing heterogeneous sensor data sets with different information content and
adhering to different statistical models. It will pave the way for efficient
learning schemes that extract the informative portion of the sensed data, and
remove irrelevant or noisy sensor measurements that can hurt any subsequent data
processing/inference task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the
development of general algorithms that have learning capabilities and can
identify different informative portions, in a data vector sequence, which may
adhere to different data models. The task of clustering data into groups that
contain information about different sources is translated into a sparsity-aware
canonical correlation analysis formulation. Building on this link, a generalized
toolbox is proposed to address settings where the number of information sources
and their statistical behavior is unknown. The proposed framework has the
potential to uncover multiple information data clusters that may exhibit
different statistical behavior, and separate them before applying standard
statistical inference tasks. Different from the notion of outliers which are
present in a small number of data, the project involves the design of a novel
framework that allows the extraction and elimination of corrupted data affecting
an arbitrary in size data portion. The idea is to exploit the low-dimensionality
that informative data usually have, and identify corrupted data by controlling
the rank of the corresponding covariance matrix to be in agreement with the low
dimension of the informative data. Distributed optimization tools are also
explored to deal with high-dimensional and spatially scattered data.