* 1509575
* RAPID Ebola outbreak: A Web Tool for Tracking Pathogen Evolution Impact on Immune Responses
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2015
* Julia Ponomarenko, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The current Ebola outbreak, similar to the swine-origin influenza outbreak of
2009, is characterized by emergence of new strains of viruses that have
previously circulated in animal reservoirs and gained the ability for human-to-
human transmission. As the virus adapts to this new mode of transmission,
multiple mutations occur. Thus, data from previous studies of the parent virus
might no longer be relevant. This recurring situation of viruses mutating as
they adapt makes it necessary to develop tools to rapidly re-analyze existing
data for their relevance as new sequences of circulating strains become
available. The focus of this project is to provide such a tool for monitoring
the effect of mutations in protein sites of immune recognition, also known as
epitopes, in a given pathogen. Applied to Ebola virus, the proposed tool will
have an immediate impact on addressing in real time, as the virus evolves, the
need for monitoring and developing new products for treating, preventing, and
diagnosing Ebola. This project has three goals: (1) To develop a web tool that
will take as input new pathogen sequences and, in the case of Ebola,
automatically gather them from GenBank. These sequences will be cross-compared
for epitope data in the IEDB (Immune Epitope Database), and conservancy analysis
will be run on known and predicted epitopes. (2) To connect the tool to the
University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser to allow visualizing
protein and epitope data. (3) To incorporate into and make the tool available on
the IEDB website to ensure sustainability and broader
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on basic research on how
pathogen evolution impacts recognition by the host immune system. The tool,
which will simultaneously capture, monitor, analyze, and visualize in real time
data on pathogen evolution and immune epitopes, should allow the researchers to
address questions such as which pathogen proteins and signature sites in
proteins enable pathogen evolution and adaptation; do new mutations change
antigenic properties of pathogen proteins; and how do mutation affect the
molecular recognition of pathogen antigens by the immune receptors. The tool
will enable rapid monitoring of any emerging virus strain and provide insight on
how mutations affect conservancy of known epitopes and antigenicity of the
virus. The B and T cell epitopes for each viral protein will be predicted using
the IEDB Analysis Resource and be provided to the community for further
investigation of potential peptide-based products (therapeutics, vaccines,
diagnostics). Integration with the UCSC Genome Browser and IEDB will provide
high visibility and broader access to the tool. The proposed tool will be
applicable to a wide range of pathogens, ensuring the community preparedness for
a rapid response to future outbreaks. The project will also broaden
participation of under-represented groups in science, will be integrated into
courses the PI teaches and will be integrated into the PI?s outreach activities,
including mentoring high-school students. A workshop and lectures on the
project?s topic will be given to K-12 teachers and students through the SDSC
educational programs TeacherTECH and StudentTECH.