* 1509821
* RAPID:  Novel Bioreactor-Based Systems for Producing Anti-Ebola Monoclonal Antibodies  in Nicotiana benthamiana Plant Cell Suspension Culture
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Abhaya Dandekar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 11/30/2016
* USD 199,919.00

This NSF RAPID project will contribute to the development of new
biomanufacturing processes for proteins used in the treatment of Ebola that will
dramatically increase the production capacity during the current crisis.
Currently, antibodies against Ebola (the ZMapp antibodies) are produced in a
relative of the tobacco plant. Antibody production in the whole plant is
relatively slow. In the proposed work, investigators will move production from
the whole plant into plant cells that can then be grown in large fermenters,
much like other biopharmaceutical products. By optimizing the manufacturing
conditions, the investigators believe that they can obtain a 100 fold increase
in productivity for the same mass of plant material. The work will contribute to
the Nation's ability to respond to other global health crises in the future by
creating new biomanufacturing platforms and the capacity to rapidly increase
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This NSF Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) project will support the development of a new biomanufacturing process
for the mixture of three monoclonal antibodies (ZMapp) that has been used to
successfully treat patients infected with the Ebola virus. Currently, ZMapp is
produced in Nicotiana benthamiana (N. benthamiana) in whole plants using vacuum
agroinfiltration. This mode of production is dependent upon transient
agroinfiltration of indoor or greenhouse grown plants, and is severely limited
in production capacity relative to traditional stainless steel fermenter types
of biomanufacturing processes. However, production of the ZMapp antibodies in
more traditional hosts such as Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) had led to less
effective monoclonal antibodies (lower survival rates and higher doses needed in
animal studies) compared to the N. benthamiana produced antibodies. The
researchers in this project will develop methods for large-scale suspension
culture production of ZMapp antibodies from N. benthamiana cells. These methods
will employ novel techniques for culturing agroinfiltrated plant cells in batch
and semi-continuous modes. The work performed will enable the rapid production
of the antibodies in the same types of large-scale facilities available for
other biotherapeutics, while retaining the desirable antibody properties
associated with proteins produced from N. benthamiana. The project is
appropriate for the RAPID mechanism based on the urgency of need to develop
scalable biomanufacturing methods to produce Ebola therapeutics that are already
known to be effective. The project will contribute to our understanding and
ability to design new biomanufacturing platforms that use plant cells, and
enable the advance of synthetic biology in plant cells. Beyond the Ebola crisis,
this work should help develop capacity for rapid biomanufacturing in response to
future threats to global health.