* 1509027
* Geometry, analysis and variational methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Fernando Marques, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2019
* USD 370,974.00

The PI investigates questions concerning the variational theory of minimal
submanifolds and its applications. Minimal surfaces are among the most natural
objects in differential geometry. They have encountered striking applications in
many other fields, like three-dimensional topology, mathematical physics,
complex and conformal geometry, among others. In general relativity minimal
surfaces appear as models for the apparent horizons of black holes. The minimal
surface equation plays a very important role as a model for several kinds of
nonlinear phenomena in nature. Significant progress in this area has always had
a great impact in mathematical analysis and the physical sciences. The research
of this project will advance our basic understanding of minimal surfaces and
their general existence theory. It concerns foundational questions about when
these objects exist and how their properties relate to features of the ambient
space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project contains a number of problems
at the interface between geometry, analysis and the calculus of variations. One
of the project's goals is to develop a good understanding of the Morse-theoretic
properties of the space of minimal varieties in a given Riemannian manifold.
This is to be accomplished by a combination of min-max techniques and
topological methods, where the relevant spaces of cycles are defined by means of
geometric measure theory. The PI will study the existence and basic properties,
like the Morse index, of min-max minimal varieties.