* 1509534
* I-Corps:  Atomic Layer Deposited Films for Protection of Precious Silver Objects
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2017
* Raymond Phaneuf, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Customers in cultural heritage institutions, both large and small facilities,
such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art, hold thousands of silver objects under
their care. The current method for corrosion protection includes the manual
application of polymeric nitrocellulose, which protects objects for 10-20 years
and can take 3 to 40 more hours per object depending on its size and complexity.
The relatively short film lifetime and long application process leaves museums
with thousands of silver objects in a constant cycle of replacing plastic
coatings or leaving many objects unprotected. The proposed atomic layer
deposited (ALD) coating developed by this I-Corps team is expected to fulfill
the rigorous requirements required by cultural heritage institutions such as
museums, archives and libraries, and fine silver jewelry manufacturers such as
artisans or jewelry retailers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ALD films will allow for the
long term protection of cultural heritage objects, as they protect silver
significantly longer than the current coating technology, applying
nitrocellulose films. By reducing the amount of tarnishing and frequency of
polishing, objects can be preserved longer without loss of original surface
details. This I-Corps grant will allow ALD coating technology to be transferred
to the cultural heritage and museum conservation community. As part of this
technology transfer, the team will also develop a better understanding of how
ALD metal oxide films affect the chemical structure and visual characteristics
of the substrate. While ALD films applied to clean, flat, 2D surfaces is well
understood, little work has been completed on the effect of using ALD films on
rough, 3D objects with prior surface treatments. The knowledge and experience
gained through the I-CORPS program will be shared with other potential
entrepreneurs and students through a proposed seminar with the University of
Maryland's Clark School of Engineering, Entrepreneurship and Innovation Program,
and Hinman CEOs program. This seminar would further disseminate the knowledge
gained through I-CORPS to other entrepreneurially-minded students at the
University of Maryland.