* 1509955
* High performance Perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Yang Yang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 449,819.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: The sun provides clean and abundant
energy source for human being, but solar energy has not been widely used due to
the high cost. The key to achieving affordable solar photovoltaic (PV)
technologies is to develop techniques that offer both high performance and low
material and processing costs. This research will combine the strength of two
types of high performance thin film solar cell technologies - copper indium
gallium diselenide (CIGS) solar cells and organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite
solar cells to realize tandem solar cells and address key issue. The research
will significantly enhance the thin film solar cell efficiency from 20% to 30%
and still keep low cost. The proposed research represents a new front in solar
cell research society. It will impact national and global efforts in developing
new and sustainable energy strategies and technologies, thus impacting the
nation's economy and improving environmental quality by reducing the use of
fossil fuels. The education component of in this project offers students (from
high school to graduate-level) the opportunity to experience all of these
trainings and learn the skills to face future scientific challenges. This
project also provides a platform for undergraduate training and showcases the
importance of renewable energy to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The
objective of this research is to advance solution processed perovskite/CIGS
tandem solar cell technology by reducing thermalization losses of hot carriers
generated by photons with larger energies than the bandgap, toward high
performance (a target efficiency of 30%). The approach is to design and
synthesize both perovskite and CIGS subcells with high performances and
spectrum-matched absorption, and a tunnel junction with minimal optical and
electric losses, based on full consideration of charge generation, charge
separation and transport/collection in a monolithic configuration. The
centerpiece of technical approach includes: (1) perovskite solar cell with high
PCEs and spectrum-matched absorption will be designed and synthesized; detailed
structural and spectroscopic characterizations will be performed, which form the
foundation for device fabrication; (2) high performance inorganic CIGS solar
cell will be applied to cover the Near-IR (from 800nm to 1200nm) portion; (3)
single junction devices based on the materials in the two spectral ranges will
be fabricated to achieve optimized performance; charge generation, charge
separation and transport mechanism in these devices will be studied; (4) novel
nano-functional interlayer and novel geometry of hybrid tandem solar cells will
be developed to maximize solar energy conversion; (5) solution processed
transparent electrodes will be will be developed to realize all solution process
hybrid tandem solar cells. Upon success, this will be the first solution
processed solar cell reaching 30% efficiency mark, which is an important
milestone for low-cost manufacturing of high efficiency solar
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) and the Electronic and Photonic
Materials (EPM) Program in the Division of Materials Research (DMR).