* 1509801
* Nanopillar quantum cascade lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* Diana Huffaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 04/30/2019
* USD 464,924.00

Abstract Title: Nanopillar quantum cascade lasers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical description&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the challenge of making
terahertz semiconductor laser sources that operate at room temperature in the
1-5 THz range. Compact chip-scale sources of terahertz radiation that operate
with both reasonably high output power (milliwatts or more) are desired for a
range of spectroscopy and imaging applications. Examples include molecular gas
sensing in the field of astrophysics and atmospheric science (for example
investigation of star formation), imaging in the biological and medical sciences
(for example burn and skin tumor imaging), security screening and illicit
material detection (for example explosive and drug identification), and non-
destructive evaluation (for example corrosion monitoring, delamination and void
detection in films and coatings). Existing THz quantum-cascade lasers only
operate at cryogenic temperatures which requires extra cooling, larger size, and
increased power consumption. The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the
development of a new material system for such lasers "nanopillar quantum dots"
that has the potential to increase operating temperatures to room temperature by
suppressing unwanted interactions of the electrons with lattice vibrations. The
broader impacts are addressed at several levels including undergraduate and
graduate research experiences, dissemination of results, technology advancement.
Outreach to underrepresented minorities will specifically occur through the
development of research projects for a course designed for the recruitment and
retention of underrepresented minority engineering undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this proposal resides in two innovative components: the use of nanopillar
quantum-dots for intersubband cascade lasers, and catalyst-free selective area
semiconductor nanopillar epitaxy of quantum dot heterostructures. Use of quantum
dots to create discrete energy levels can dramatically suppress nonradiative
scattering of electrons by optical-phonon. Hence, a terahertz laser based
discrete states in quantum-dots is expected to solve a fundamental limitation of
conventional planar THz quantum-cascade lasers, where non-radiative phonon-
assisted relaxation prevents room temperature operation. In this proposed
concept, carriers would flow longitudinally down the length of a nanowire
ensemble in a cascaded dot-to-dot tunneling regime without coupling with two-
dimensional states. Selective-area MOCVD epitaxy without metal catalysts will be
used to grow high-aspect ratio InAs/InAsP semiconductor nanopillar arrays using
lithographically defined oxide growth masks. Lateral quantum confinement is
determined by the mask feature dimension and the presence of an InP passivating
shell heterostructure; longitudinal confinement is determined by the axial
heterostructure. A collaborative research effort is proposed in three
overlapping stages: (i) growth of axial and core/shell heterostructures in
InAs/InAsP nanopillars for the formation of coupled-quantum wells and dots, (ii)
investigation of the intersubband optical and transport properties, and (iii)
investigation of nanopillar cascade designs for electroluminescence, stimulated
emission, and quantum cascade laser demonstration.