* 1509721
* Self-Sustaining Tunable Multi-Frequency Oscillators Using Atomically-Thin Semiconducting Multimode Resonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Philip Feng, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 05/31/2020
* USD 419,528.00

Mechanical oscillators are essential and ubiquitous in many critical
applications from fundamental science explorations to communication and sensing
technologies. While miniaturization of devices in recent decades has created
many resonant micro- and nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS and NEMS) as new
frequency references for making oscillators and clocks, major challenges remain
in engineering ultralow-power, low-noise crystal oscillators by utilizing
emerging resonators in new nanostructures. This project aims to discover new
science and engineering principles in multi-frequency self-sustained oscillators
enabled by multimode resonators based on atomic layer two-dimensional (2D)
semiconductors, with a focus on previously unexplored effects and potentially
unprecedented functions and performance. 2D NEMS are based on mechanically
active atomically-thin semiconducting crystals derived from "beyond-graphene"
layered materials that offer a spectrum of attractive electromechanical
attributes. Multimode 2D NEMS resonators are a new class of vibrating NEMS with
intriguing and tunable properties rich in their multiple resonance modes. With
frequency reference and selectivity functions harnessed from multimode 2D NEMS
resonators vibrating in radio-frequency (RF) and microwave bands, the self-
sustaining feedback oscillators are distinct from passive resonators in that
they possess their own stable limit cycles, and can sustain periodic
oscillations without an external periodic drive. The goal of the integrated STEM
educational plan is to educate and motivate youth by (i) a new outreach program
for K-12 students to understand oscillations and learn the fascinating history
of clocks and timing devices, (ii) summer research at Case Western Reserve
University (CWRU) for high-school students, and (iii) actively broadening
participations from underrepresented and economically disadvantaged groups,
especially by extending outreach programs to public schools in Cleveland area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to demonstrate that 2D
semiconductors can enable highly tunable self-sustaining oscillators, to develop
the principles of 2D NEMS oscillator engineering and on-chip integration, and to
explore pathways toward ultimate limits of crystal oscillators in the 2D
platform. This project will establish the fundamental principles of signal
transduction and feedback mechanisms in 2D crystal oscillators, lay the
foundation for ultralow-power and tuning circuit design suitable for 2D systems,
and address critical challenges in small-signal detection, parasitic effect
suppression, nonlinearity, tuning and power handling. It will also explore phase
noise in self-sustaining oscillations in 2D crystals at RF and microwave
frequencies. The research will be enabled by innovative feedback circuit designs
that will go significantly beyond the simple sustaining amplifiers that are
sufficient for single-resonator, single-mode feedback oscillators. This project
features a circuit-device co-design perspective, with the goal of eventually
enabling entirely new, monolithic, multimode oscillators with phase noise
engineering. This project will create and establish a new branch, 2D crystal
oscillators, in the rapidly emerging and growing field of 2D devices and
systems. The research will generate a plethora of new knowledge in both device
physics and engineering principles that govern the 2D crystal oscillators, thus
broadening the horizon of current knowledge of 2D systems. The findings shall
also lead to enabling technologies for 2D timing and frequency control functions
in atomic layers. This will contribute to establishing 2D electromechanical
systems as a new pillar, in parallel to electronics and optoelectronics based on
atomic layers, to support the future 2D semiconductor paradigm.