* 1509001
* A New Design Paradigm for Switch-Mode Power Amplifiers Supporting Concurrent Multi-Band Wireless Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Nathan Neihart, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The total number of worldwide cell phone users surpassed the 5 billion mark in
2010 and annual global sales of cellular telephones is reaching 1.8 billion
units, as of 2013. With mobile technology becoming almost ubiquitous and with
the types of enriched features and services that are available to the end user,
mobile devices are being required to support higher data rates. Unfortunately,
this need for higher data rates is resulting in systems that are now required to
support communication in many different, non-contiguous frequency bands spread
between 0.4 and 6 GHz. The current solution consists of using multiple,
parallel, single-band power amplifiers resulting in modern cellular telephones
having upwards of ten separate power amplifiers. Ultimately, this problem will
result in mobile devices becoming bulkier, more expensive, and unable to support
key new multi-band technologies. The root problem is that, conventionally, a
single power amplifier can support only a single band. Researchers have tried to
address this problem through the design of concurrent multi-band power
amplifiers, but, these systems suffered significant drops in performance that
were largely unexplainable using conventional design theories. This research
will provide a detailed understanding of the design trade-offs in concurrent
multi-band power amplifiers and a new set of design techniques. The proposed
research will give radio frequency (RF) designers a new set of tools enabling
them to address the challenges posed by next generation wireless system design.
In addition, this project will provide methods for increasing overall power
efficiency and thereby increasing battery life in multi-band systems. Moreover,
this project will strengthen the U.S. transceiver industry through research,
through bolstering the number of women and minorities in undergraduate and
graduate STEM programs, and through supporting local industry with presentations
and collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern power amplifier design is
besieged on two fronts: concurrent multi-band communication is becoming a
reality and wireless devices must support a variety of different communication
standards. This is leading to transmitters that must support communication over
many different frequency bands spread between 0.4 and 6 GHz. The current
approach of using multiple, single-band power amplifiers in parallel is becoming
unsustainable and new technology is going to be required for next generation
wireless devices. One promising technique is the use of concurrent multi-band
power amplifiers wherein a single power cell/matching network is capable of
supporting multiple, simultaneous signals. Unfortunately, there is currently no
existing theoretical framework to describe the maximum efficiency, output power,
stability, or linearity of concurrent multi-band power. The continued lack of
such basic knowledge will fundamentally limit the potential of this new
technology to address the needs of future wireless devices. This proposal will
develop both a theoretical framework and a set of practical guidelines for the
analysis and physical implementation of such power amplifiers. Together, these
results will give RF designers a new set of tools with which they can reduce the
current number of power amplifiers in modern devices, and facilitate new
techniques for improving data rates and efficiency in already-designated
communication bands. This, in turn, will result in a more efficient use of the
available spectrum without the complicated regulatory hurdles associated with
techniques such as dynamic spectrum access. The broader impact of this work lies
in the ability of multi-band power amplifiers to reduce the overall cost of next
generation transceivers while yielding a more flexible and robust mobile device.