* 1509748
* Wireless control of implantable microdevices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Samuel Sia, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 424,000.00

Abstract: Non-Technical: Implantable devices have a large potential for use as
sensors, drug delivery, and medical devices. According to the National Academy
of Sciences, 100 million patients in the U.S. alone can benefit from implantable
tissues and systems. However, current implantable technologies still face
central challenges of biocompatibility and facile communication with external
devices. An improved method for building advanced biocompatible implantable
devices could greatly advance the development of implantable sensors, drug-
delivery devices, and drug-eluting stents and devices. Hence, the research
objective of this proposal is to establish the key elements of a fundamentally
new platform for wireless control of implantable devices. Specifically, the
proposal seeks to develop a method for using focused ultrasound to actuate small
components inside microdevices made of biocompatible materials. Ultrasound is
already widely used for diagnostic imaging, and our work will seek to leverage
this imaging modality to actuate implanted devices. In addition to research
goals, this project contains elements that seek to address other potential
benefits for society in education and diversity: - Undergraduate students: new
research opportunities and lab modules on "implantable devices" for
undergraduate students at both Columbia University and George Mason - High-
school students: integration of implantable device research into educational
modules for New York City high-school students - Technology transfer: nurturing
of undergraduate students interested in commercializing state-of-the-art
microdevice research into real- world devices for society

Technical: In terms of specific research goals, this proposal aims to construct
and demonstrate a new paradigm to efficiency control biocompatible microdevices
using ultrasound. Ultrasound is fundamentally attractive because it is non-
invasive, can penetrate through millimeters or even centimeters of dense tissue,
and uses hardware which can be made compact. In our design, ultrasound can
actuate selective microcomponents in the devices by precise focusing of
ultrasonic energy or by employing agents that selectively respond to pre-
specified acoustic parameters. Importantly, ultrasound can impart energy into
implants which themselves contain no embedded biotoxic electronics or power
supply, unlike most printed electronics. Despite these attractive qualities, to
our knowledge, ultrasound has not been previously used to control implantable
microdevices, let alone ones made from biocompatible materials that avoid
biofouling. This research proposal is innovative in a number of specific
aspects. - Fabrication of microdevices with components responsive to ultrasound
- Developing and understanding how acoustic parameters interface with
microdevice components in deep tissue - Developing a method to selectively
actuate components inside a microdevice