* 1509704
* Adaptive Fault Accommodation Based Resilient Control Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Gang Tao, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 347,503.00

The research goal is to build technical foundations for designing resilient
control systems which are capable of maintaining desired performance in the
presence of uncertain system faults such as actuator failures, structural damage
and sensor failures. The research is aimed at developing new fault detection
algorithms and new adaptive and robust control methods and criteria to handle
large and multiple system fault uncertainties. It will create new resilient
control theory and techniques applicable to performance-critical systems such as
aircraft, spacecraft, wind turbines, jet engines and intelligent robots, to
enhance their safety under uncertain fault conditions. It will conduct new
studies on modeling and control of systems under various fault conditions for
which existing control designs are not applicable. For example, aircraft loss-
of-control precursor conditions such as airframe damage, component failures,
icing and turbulence effects may cause large and variant system uncertainties
for which existing feedback controllers are not powerful enough. The research is
expected to advance feedback control theory and technology for the need of
emerging applications which require control systems to be resilient to faults,
that is, have desired capabilities to accommodate uncertain and large system
faults.

This research studies unique metrics of control system resilience, distinct
features of resilient control problems, and key control theory requirements of
performance-critical systems. It develops new control theory and design
techniques to ensure desired control system resilience for multivariable
nonlinear systems under uncertain multi-fault conditions. It solves new control
problems such as fault detection for unstable systems, control of systems with
uncertain structural characterizations, adaptive and fault-tolerant control of
systems with under-actuation or non-minimum phase. These problems have the key
feature that the controlled systems have fault-induced parametric, structural
and functional uncertainties, difficult for most existing control schemes to
deal with (to ensure both system stability and asymptotic tracking). For
example, there can be uncertain failure patterns, uncertain under-actuation,
uncertain system infinite zero structures, uncertain dynamic variations, caused
by uncertain faults. A main goal of this research is to build a new control
system design framework with specific control schemes which are capable of
dealing with such unsolved system uncertainty problems, needed for resilient
control systems technology. Several new feedback control methods will be
developed, including: adaptive multi-layer multiple-model design (to ensure both
fault handling and performance improvement abilities), adaptive multi-design
integration (to deal with multiple faults), adaptive feedback-based fault
detection (to have self-stabilization capacity), adaptive structural uncertainty
accommodation (to deal large system structural damage), and characteristic
parametrization based adaptive approximation control for non-canonical form
nonlinear systems (to design an adaptable and stable controller structure).
Direct control adaptation techniques will be developed for fast and smooth
compensation of large and multiple fault uncertainties. New resilient control
designs, for performance-guarantee fault-tolerant control, will be tested on
some benchmark application system models. New concepts, theory and techniques
for resilient control systems will be used for student training and knowledge
dissemination.