* 1509912
* A BUBBLE GAS SENSOR FOR QUNTITATIVE CHEMICAL ANALYSIS
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Hanseup Kim, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 367,558.00

Proposal 1509912&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: A bubble gas sensor for
quantitative chemical analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kim,
Hanseup&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brief description of project goals:&lt;br/&gt; This
project aims to investigate the science of micro-scale fluidic phenomena and
develop a high-performance gas sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a)
Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantification is one of the most critical
parameters in many analytical applications, especially when interfacing with the
chemical and biological domains, which feature enormous diversity in elements.
Despite remarkable progress, miniature gas sensors still remain incapable of
measuring gas quantity precisely because of issues in response drift,
saturation, and limited specificity. This project proposes the development of a
sensing mechanism that addresses such issues by investigating unexplored fluidic
phenomena in the micro-domain and by demonstrating a microfluidic sensor. The
proposed research will provide a new paradigm in gas sensing and quantification
and will have a broad range of societal impacts in numerous fields, including
occupational safety regulation, environmental sciences, personal and community
behavioral sciences, homeland security, chemical manufacturing, and health
science. In this context, the proposed project will provide a foundation for
highly inter-disciplinary research and education, where students are exposed to
broadly connected societal values among engineering, science, medicine, social
sciences, and public policy. This program will also provide an opportunity to
reach out to the K-12 community in collaboration with a local museum; to
industry via intellectual property generation directed toward commercialization;
and to the undergraduate and graduate students via class development on
important advances in novel sensing mechanisms and microfluidics principles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project aims (1) to
establish a novel class of a gas sensing principle by investigating the science
of microfluidic bubble formation and (2) to fabricate a bubble-based sensor
which improves gas sensing performance by two orders of magnitude in comparison
to existing counterparts. Specifically, this project will investigate the
microfluidic gas/liquid interface properties of various gas types via
microfabricated structures. An optimized prototype of a high performance gas
sensor will be microfabricated to demonstrate high-precision gas quantification.
By combining the fundamental science studies with experimental data, the
proposed research is expected to establish fundamental and comprehensive
understanding on bubble formation phenomena in the microfluidic domain, in
relation to gas-liquid interfacial parameters. Such an understanding will enable
this program to further demonstrate a high-precision micro gas sensor device
that is capable of quantifying gas amounts with outstanding dynamic range,
resolution, and linearity.