* 1509216
* Collaborative Research: Injectable, Biocompatible, Programmed-Bioresorbable Nanosensor Array for Continuous Glucose Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Yu Lei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2019
* USD 344,335.00

Diabetes is a metabolic disorder and major world health problem. As stated by
the International Diabetes Federation, there are over 350 million diabetics
worldwide causing over 3.2 million deaths annually. Consequently, glucose
detection is of paramount importance in the diagnosis and treatment of diabetes.
This project will illustrate how nanotechnology, biomaterials, and biosensing
technologies can be meshed together for injectable, biocompatible, bioresorbable
nanosensor array for continuous glucose monitoring. The work will advance in
vitro and/or in vivo monitoring technology for continuous glucose monitoring in
general and, if successful, will not only have an enormous impact on public
health, but also provide a demonstration from basic science to applications.
This project will impact education of the graduate, undergraduate and high
school students by integrating advanced biosensing into their educational and
laboratory training, and actively interact with the general public and industry
companies through various outreach activities within and outside of the
University of Connecticut and Northeastern University. Moreover, a new course of
Bioanalytical Sensor will be offered to students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary proposal aims to develop an injectable biocompatible and
programmed-bioresorbable surface-enhanced Raman scattering sensor for long-term,
subcutaneous, continuous glucose monitoring. A number of novel features crossing
bio-, nano-, material- and sensing technologies will be seamlessly meshed into
this novel glucose sensing system. A sandwich-like glucose sensing material,
including programmed-bioresorbable glucose-responsive nanosensor array covered
by biocompatible and biodegradable hydrogel with entrapped anti-inflammatory
drug, will be fabricated. Then a sterilized indwelling needle will be used to
deliver the as-prepared sensor subcutaneously for long-term, continuous glucose
sensing. The sensing performance will be systematically investigated. The
synergistic effects of (1) good biocompatibility and biodegradability of
hydrogel, together with (2) good biocompatibility and stability of nanosensor
array, (3) programmable bioresorbability of sensing materials after long-term
use, (4) specific and reversible binding of glucose with sensing material and
its unique and strong glucose-responsive optical signals distinguishable from
those of skin tissue and hydrogel, (5) non-invasive monitoring through Raman
scattering, (6) anti-inflammatory effect provided by anti-inflammatory drug
entrapped in hydrogel, and (7) minimally invasive delivery of sensor through
convenient skin piercing, will accomplish the goal of reliable long-term
continuous glucose monitoring.