* 1509729
* Flexible Reflective Metasurface Displays
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Debashis Chanda, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,012.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The range of colors and hues in
the natural world are amazing, but perhaps even more astonishing is the ability
of certain species to actively mimic them. Though the specific mechanisms are as
varied as the species, each has a set of color producing cells which can span
the visible spectrum. Within this vast set of creatures, cephalopods/octopi
stand out as champions, who are adept to cover vast swaths of color within
milliseconds. The key aspect of these color displays in nature is generation of
color on a thin, flexible and conformally mapped surface whereas our manmade
state-of-the art displays still remained rigid, brittle and bulky in nature.
It's with cephalopods in mind that a flexible reflective metasurface display is
proposed in which each pixel can be actively tuned across the visible spectrum.
The proposed work is important for the development of low cost reflective
displays on flexible substrates. The newly developed printing techniques will
enable large area printing of nanostructured metasurfaces for low cost
manufacturing. The program provides a good platform for interdisciplinary
research (including integrated optics, nanofabrication and materials science and
engineering) and graduate education. The research will generate exciting
scientific content for enriching the PI's graduate and undergraduate teaching.
The program will integrate outreach activities that span autistic students, K-12
students and other underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
The main focus of the proposed work is to develop an angle independent
reflective metasurface with liquid crystals to achieve dynamic color tuning
pixels. The implementation of dynamic pixels will reduce the need for multiple
colored subpixels, thereby eliminating layered processing steps, increasing
resolution, and allow unrivaled color control. Furthermore, the device will
independently tune color and grey-scale within a singular liquid crystal cell
through novel liquid crystal optics design and multiple electrodes. Using
nanoimprint lithography to produce the plasmonic structure over large areas, one
can bypass expensive and tedious electron-beam or deep-UV lithography techniques
used in fabricating many previously reported plasmonic devices. This in
combination with ultrafast direct laser writing, multiple features at varying
size scales can be incorporated into the master patterns. A single device master
can include arbitrarily pixelated plasmonic metasurface, microscopic liquid
crystal cell spacers, and nanoscale liquid crystal alignment gratings. One such
master can produce 100's of polymeric imprinting stamps, and one such stamp can
produce 1000's of imprints without any noticeable pattern degradation.
Nanoimprint lithography has also been translated to roll-to-roll processing
which shows the entire fabrication process can be scaled to factory norms. There
is much to understand and develop in the field of actively tunable plasmonics. A
fast response, angle independent liquid crystal-metasurface based display which
can actively shift the color of its pixels is achievable based on this
interdisciplinary research. An in depth analysis of the plasmonic metasurface,
liquid crystal orientation and how they influence each other will be studied. A
key objective of the proposed system is to design a wide angle metasurface based
on a specially engineered metal-insulator-metal Fabry-Perot plasmon resonance
which doesn't depend on structure periodicity. While apt at producing color,
these plasmonic surfaces cannot produce deep black states needed for displays
due to intrinsic narrow band absorption. The proposed work intends to integrate
plasmonic color tuning and liquid crystal grey state polarimetry within the same
liquid crystal cell. By introducing two sets of electrodes, color and brightness
can be independently tuned through a novel device design. The proposed device
can readily be fabricated on flexible substrates as the low temperature
fabrication process is compatible with low glassing temperature plastics.
Special metasurface patterning allows device flexibility without damage to the
underlying nanopatterns. Such an approach can not only lead to large area skin-
like full color display elements, but can also improve the active tunability of
general plasmonic metamaterial systems.