* 1509706
* GOALI:  Infrared Nanowire Heterostructures: Fundamentals and Emerging Detector Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Infrared Nanowire Heterostructures: Fundamentals and Emerging Detector
Applications

Nontechnical Abstract: This work is funded under the area of Grant Opportunties
for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI). This project is to investigate the
application of a class of infrared active semiconductor nanowire
heterostructures for creation of unique infrared imaging detectors with enhanced
sensitivity. This project is a collaboration between the basic science and
engineering faculty and students at the University of Cincinnati and Australian
National University with the research staff at L-3/Cincinnati Electronics which
specializes in the design and manufacture of infrared detectors. These
nanostructures may provide the basis for unique infrared detectors and infrared
imaging systems spanning a wide wavelength range from 1.5 microns to 10 microns.
The overarching goal of this research is to develop and understand new nanowire
based materials which will allow broad tunability and high sensitivity over the
mid-wave IR and thus provide a foundation to fabricate unique IR detectors and
arrays. This proposal is strongly enhanced by an active collaboration among
L3/Cincinnati Electronics, with experience in effective design, characterization
and manufacture of complex infrared imaging systems, the world-class nanowire
growth group at Australian National University, and the device and optical
Physics group at the University of Cincinnati. Students and faculty at the
academic institutions will be exposed to the dynamics and complexities involved
in applied research at a corporate research facility, while the staff at
L-3/Cincinnati Electronics will be exposed to the basic science and
technological research at an academic institution.

Technical Abstract: This project is to investigate the basic physics of a newly
grown class of semiconductor nanowire heterostructures and their emerging
applications as unique infrared detectors spanning the range from 1.5 microns to
10 microns. Such nanostructures have the potential to substantially enhance the
capabilities of infrared focal plane arrays for imaging since the quasi one-
dimensional geometry opens up new ways to tune the wavefunctions and the band
gaps in these materials. This proposal is strongly enhanced by an active
collaboration between L3/Cincinnati Electronics, with experience in effective
design and manufacture of complex infrared imaging systems, the world-class
nanowire growth group at Australian National University, and the research group
at UC which has substantial experience in the imaging and spectroscopy of single
semiconductor nanowires. The research described in this proposal is made
compelling by two new developments: (1) the newly developed capability to grow
III-Sb and InAs nanowires and nanowire heterostructures of very high quality,
and (2) the very recent confirmation in our laboratories that it is possible to
make single nanowire dynamical measurements of photoexcited carrier
recombinations and relaxation with very high sensitivity out into the infrared.
The specific goals of this research are to measure the band structure and
dynamics in Zincblende GaAsSb, InAsSb and InGaAs ternary alloy heterostructures.
This ability to tune the band structure to design new nanostructures will enable
the design of new extremely sensitive detectors in the infrared. These
nanostructures will be combined so as to make sensitive 1D and 2D IR detector
arrays. Students and faculty at the academic institutions will be exposed to the
dynamics and complexities involved in applied research at a corporate research
facility, while the staff at L-3/Cincinnati Electronics will be exposed to the
basic science and technological research at an academic institution.