* 1509794
* Study of Spin-Dependent Charge Transfer through Self-Assembled Monolayers of DNA on Metal Surfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Paul Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules, the genetic code of life, have recently
been shown to possess a surprising filtering capacity for the flow of electric
charge. The charge is carried by electrons that are transmitted through each
molecule. Electrons also possess an intrinsic property known as spin, and can
exist in one of two (usually) equally probable states: spin up or spin down.
Surprisingly, DNA molecules can filter transmitted electrons based on their
spin, holding exciting implications for their use in emerging technological
applications that require the generation and manipulation of spin-polarized
electrical currents within the nascent field of spintronics. However, the
mechanism responsible for the filtering effect remains elusive and
controversial. In order to assess the practicality of DNA molecules as
components in next generation spintronic devices, the parameters that have been
theoretically predicted to influence electron spin-filtering capacity by DNA
molecules assembled on metal surfaces must be tested and determined. The
proposed research will leverage two decades worth of studies on manipulating
molecular assemblies and recent advances to develop and to understand spin-
polarized sources of electrons. This research will combine the fields of
nanoscience, nanotechnology, spintronics, bioelectronics, and biomagnetics.
Specific advances in terms of experimental tests and their results will be made
widely available both through UCLA, national, and global collaborations. Deeper
understanding of these effects will lead to important discoveries across
disciplines; findings will be broadly disseminated via presentations,
publications, and strong collaborative networks. Outreach activities will target
young, underrepresented scientists and the public at large by engaging local
high school teachers and students, as well as the global entertainment industry
based in Southern California. Recent observations of spin-selective phenomena
involving chiral molecules prevalent in biological systems demonstrate the
unique and exciting potential to utilize diamagnetic molecules for organic
spintronics. In particular, unprecedented spin-selective electron transmission
has been observed through self-assembled monolayers of deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) adsorbed on metal surfaces. While experimental evidence has established
that assembled, oriented, chiral DNA molecules have the capacity to filter
electron spins at room temperature, the mechanism responsible for this
phenomenon remains controversial. One community suggests that the phenomenon may
be intrinsic to the molecule itself as many theoretical models attribute the
observed effects to unconventional Rashba-type molecular spin-orbit coupling. In
contrast, leading theory groups argue that the substrates and interfaces play
major roles in spin-orbit coupling. Careful experimental tests will deconvolute
the relative contributions and will establish a means to optimize spin selection
and filtering. Robust figures of merit will be established to characterize spin-
dependent charge transport via electrochemical methods. Molecular properties and
substrate materials will be tuned systematically to test the theoretically
predicted contributions to this phenomenon. Specifically, the modification of
molecular chemical and electronic structures including the inclusion of heavy
metal species and substrate identity will directly probe spin orbit coupling
within the molecule and interface. This work will simultaneously develop a
foundational understanding of spin-selective electron-molecule interactions and
critically evaluate the practicability of ultimately implementing DNA and/or
other chiral molecular assemblies as sources of polarized electrons in next
generation organic spin electronic devices such as spin filters, spin-transfer
torque magnetoresistive random access memory devices and spin-polarized organic
light emitting diodes.