* 1509268
* Facilitating remote chemical sensing with random Raman lasing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Vladislav Yakovlev, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 01/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Title: FACILITATING REMOTE SENSING VIA RANDOM RAMAN
LASING&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: The
driving motivation for this proposal is the growing necessity for chemically
specific remote sensing (standoff detection) and deep tissue optical imaging.
From remote assessment of powders on the ground to optical biomedical imaging,
there is a need to evaluate the chemical composition of materials a turbid
medium. Vibrational spectroscopy has proven to be successful in identifying
chemicals in complex medium. However, the strength of the signal is often
considered as a major limitation. The proposed research program aims at
overcoming those major disadvantages by utilizing a recently discovered effect
of stimulated Raman emission in disordered medium. It allows increasing the
signal by an astonishing value of 106-109 making it possible simple and seamless
remote chemical sensing of powders km's away from the target. The proposed
program will have a profound effect on environmental science, biomedical science
and medical diagnostic imaging, and homeland security. The novel operating
principle of the proposed device and technology and methods, which will be used
in the device design and construction, will positively affect a number of
research and application areas where light scattering effects are important.
Just a single impending application of biomedical imaging device utilizing
stimulated Raman scattering enhancement in randomly scattering tissues can
potentially affect the lives of more than a billion people by providing a simple
access to the chemical composition of deep-laying tissues. From the educational
standpoint, proposed program will provide unmatched opportunities for training
and professional development of the students directly involved in the research,
significantly advancing their future career prospects. In particular, the
program will expose the students to the "full cycle" of multidisciplinary
research, from computational simulations to sample preparation and
characterization, from initial formulation of analytical description of the
observed phenomena to the follow-up iterative instrument optimization, from a
fundamental idea to a real-life practical application. From the outreach
perspective, the program presents several thrusts aimed at school-aged students
and their teachers. Texas A&amp;M University is located in the middle of the
fastest growing, predominantly Hispanic-populated region in the US, and several
activities will be specifically targeting the diverse student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The proposed program
builds up on the recent advances in computational science, engineering, optical
sciences and chemistry to introduce a transformative approach for remote sensing
and biomedical imaging through scattering medium. The proposed program is built
on those preliminary results and has a major research objective of fundamental
understanding the mechanisms and limitations of efficient nonlinear optical
interactions in random media. To accomplish this goal, we will:
&lt;br/&gt;(1)Fundamentally understand the mechanism, conditions and limitations
of stimulated Raman scattering in random media. We will use both the developed
computational and experimental tools to investigate the effects of absorption
and scattering parameters of the media, the effects of inhomogeneities and
inclusions, as well as a broad range of excitation parameters, such as
wavelength, pulse duration and beam shape, on the threshold and efficiency of
stimulated Raman scattering in random media.&lt;br/&gt;(2)Explore the
possibility of controlling random Raman lasing using temporally and spatially
shaped laser pulses. In many practical situations, random media does not vary
appreciably over time. It creates an opportunity to optimize the wavefront of
the incident radiation to enhance the nonlinear interaction inside the
medium.&lt;br/&gt;(3)Utilize the developed concept of random Raman lasing for
remote sensing and deep tissue biological imaging. We will use the results of
Aims 1-2 to design a practical system for remote chemical sensing and deep
tissue biological imaging.