* 1509285
* Probing substrate/inhibitor binding to metalloenzymes using EPR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Tierney, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 552,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professors Michael Crowder and David Tierney of Miami
University to study substrate and inhibitor binding to metalloenzymes using the
tools of EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance) spectroscopy. Once thought to be
rigid molecules, it is now understood that enzymes--arguably Nature's most
important biological molecules--are dynamic and that enzyme motions are
essential for catalysis. This proposal describes novel methods to probe enzyme
motions as the enzymes catalyze chemical reactions; these motions occur on
timescales less than one one-thousandth of a second. The techniques developed in
this project can, in principle, be applied to all enzymes, and the information
gleaned can possibly be used to alter existing enzymes to catalyze different
reactions. This project will allow for the training of a large number of
undergraduate and graduate students in molecular biology, enzymology, and
spectroscopy and be integrated into an outreach program that provides hands-on
STEM activities for elementary school students.

This research project will assess new ways to generalize the use of EPR-based
techniques to determine inter-spin distances in otherwise inaccessible
systems/states. The techniques are designed to access a wide range of processes
that span microseconds to milliseconds at room temperature, from inter-subunit
motions to the motion of unstructured loops relative to the substrate and active
site metal ions. Ultimately, the method is to be used to determine how concerted
motions track with important catalytic events. Specifically, the project
involves experiments that determine the reliability of rapid-freeze quench
(RFQ)-EPR-derived distance changes that accompany substrate binding and turnover
in a series of paramagnetic analogs of the metallo-beta-lactamase NDM-1, freeze-
quenched at reaction times ranging from around 100 microseconds to greater than
500 milliseconds. Parallel studies at both X- and Q-band will be conducted to
ensure internal consistency and to guarantee access to the interactions.
Experiments will also be conducted to examine the scope of spin-bearing species
combinations that yield detectable, and interpretable, dipolar couplings from
cw-EPR and DEER, and several unique combinations that are best suited for ESEEM
interrogation. This goal will be accomplished by examining available
permutations within a set of singly- and doubly spin-labeled proteins,
selectively loaded with diamagnetic Zn(II)/Cd(II) or paramagnetic Co(II) in
either side of the dinuclear active site, and spin-labeled substrate/inhibitor
analogs, including several triply-labeled species.