* 1509812
* Stochastic Control for Decentralized Systems: A Common Information Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Ashutosh Nayyar, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 304,535.00

Engineering systems involve a wide array of decision-making problems. Planning
the production schedule for a power generator, controlling the motion of an
aircraft, or selectively activating sensors to make environmental observations,
all require multiple decisions to be made over time, very often in face of
uncertainties about the system and the future. The success of many technological
systems can be attributed to the successful solution of their underlying
decision-making problems. Many of these decision-making problems were addressed
under the common assumption of centrality of information and centrality of
decision-making. Modern technological and economic developments, however, have
led to increasingly decentralized systems. For example, the advent of smart
sensors has led to sensing and monitoring systems that can make decisions in a
distributed manner, the prevalence of networks has coupled individual social and
economic decisions, the push for de-regulation has resulted in competitive
decision-making in power systems. In all these systems, the centralized command
structure is being replaced, to a varying degree, by a decentralized one. The
future success of these systems will depend on our ability to understand,
analyze and solve the decentralized decision-making problems these systems
create. The objective of the proposed research is to develop a systematic
framework for sequential decision-making problems that arise in decentralized
systems operating in dynamic and uncertain environments. The proposed research
will impact decentralized and networked systems in diverse application domains
including infrastructure systems like power, transportation and communication
networks, sensing and surveillance systems like teams of unmanned aerial
vehicles or robots as well as networked control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a systematic theory
of stochastic control for decentralized and networked systems. Such systems
involve a network of agents making decisions based on different information
about the environment and/or about each other. In many applications, different
decision makers share a common system-wide objective and should behave as
cooperating members of the same team rather than competing players in a game. In
such cooperative systems with a common objective, the global optimization of
this objective with respect to agent decision strategies rather than game-
theoretic equilibrium identification is a more appropriate solution approach.
The goal of this proposal is to develop a dynamic programming like global
optimization approach for sequential, decentralized decision-making problems. In
particular, the proposed research will investigate decentralized control of
autonomous vehicles/agents, control of decentralized finite state systems and
control of information flow in sensor networks and networked control systems.
The project will also explore the connections between decentralized cooperative
systems and stochastic games among players with asymmetric information. The
educational impact of the proposed research will include providing graduate
students with a multi- disciplinary training in stochastic control, game theory,
optimization and networks, development of a new graduate level course focusing
on decentralized decision-making in networked systems and supporting women PhD
students in our research program.