* 1509805
* Collaborative Research: Axion Resonant InterAction DetectioN Experiment (ARIADNE)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Andrew Geraci, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2018
* USD 81,124.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. One of the most exciting quests in particle
physics is the search for new particles beyond the Standard Model of particle
physics. Extensions of the Standard Model predict not only new particles with
large masses but also some with very small masses. Such a candidate is the
axion, which has been introduced to explain the smallness of Charge-Parity (CP)
violation in Quantum Chromodynamics and which turns out to also be a prime
candidate for a constituent of the dark matter in the universe. This award will
provide funds for R&D towards developing a new experiment to search for axion-
like interactions between nuclei at sub-millimeter ranges. While participating
in this research, a team of postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate
researchers will be broadly trained in the various techniques of experimental
atomic physics such as low-temperature physics, magnetic shielding, vacuum
systems and modeling.

The experiment involves a rotating non-magnetic mass to source the axion field,
and a dense ensemble of laser-polarized He-3 nuclei to detect the axion field by
NMR. The signal from an axion field can be resonantly enhanced by properly
modulating the axion potential at the nuclear spin precession frequency. The
method has the potential to improve previous experimental and astrophysical
bounds on axions by several orders of magnitude and probe deep into the
theoretically interesting regime for the Peccei-Quinn (PQ) axion. The experiment
is also sensitive to more exotic axion-like particles. It is estimated that this
method can ultimately exceed present laboratory constraints on spin-dependent
short-range forces by up to eight orders of magnitude and can improve on the
combined laboratory/astrophysical limits by a factor of 10^4 in the prime axion
range of f_a between 10^9 and 10^12, probing deep into the theoretically
interesting regime for the PQ axion. In contrast to cosmic axion searches, the
setup is sensitive to the axion even if it does not make up most of the dark
matter.