* 1509713
* UNS:Direct measurement of DUB activity in intact single cells using a droplet microfluidic array
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Adam Melvin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 313,643.00

1509713 &lt;br/&gt;Melvin, Adam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest
challenges facing myeloma patients is the resistance to the drugs currently used
to treat the disease. This interdisciplinary project involves the development of
a microfluidic device and man-made peptide-based biosensors to specifically
identify distinct sub-populations of cancer cells found in a tumor, including
those that are resistant to particular chemotherapy drugs. Ultimately, the goal
of this proposal is to develop a new diagnostic tool that can lead to a
personalized treatment protocol for high risk myeloma patients, dramatically
increasing the prognosis of individuals battling
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecularly-targeted therapeutics and personalized
medicine have dramatically increased the prognosis of patients suffering from
cancer. In the case of multiple myeloma, there has been great success using
drugs that specifically target enzymes associated with the ubiquitin proteasome
system (UPS). Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are one such class of enzyme due
to their ability to promote drug resistance in multiple myeloma patients. In
this proposal, an interdisciplinary approach will be applied to develop a new
method to directly measure DUB activity in intact single cells across a
heterogeneous population such as tumor biopsy. A long-lived, cell permeable,
DUB-specific fluorescent reporter will be developed to directly measure DUB
activity. One hallmark of this peptide-based reporter is the inclusion of a
â-hairpin ?protectide?, serving to both confer stability onto the DUB-specific
substrate, and to act as a potent cell penetrating peptide (CPP). This novel
reporting scheme will be incorporated into a microfluidic droplet array that
will be developed to facilitate high-throughput screening (HTS) of a population
of myeloma cells. The microfluidic droplet array designed in this proposal will
allow for on-chip encapsulation followed by real-time quantification of DUB
activity in intact single cells. The biochemical assay will serve as a first
step in developing a new technique allowing to 1) determine if patients would
benefit from a DUB-targeted therapy, 2) identify an ideal dose of drug to
maximize efficacy while minimizing side effects, and 3) analyze a heterogeneous
sample to identify distinct subpopulations of drug-resistant cells, which cannot
be performed using bulk measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-
funded by the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).