* 1509845
* Optical Phased Laser Arrays and Their Functionality
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Kent Choquette, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Title: Coupling Multiple Semiconductor Lasers in a Single Chip for Applications
of Fast Optical Data Transmission or High Power Operation

Semiconductor lasers have an increasingly significant impact on many aspects of
our daily lives, as well as the economy and security of our nation. The internet
relies upon tiny lasers to transmit information originating from our smart
phones and computers through optical fiber to destinations around the world,
while the low cost manufacture automobiles, planes, and consumer goods require
lasers for precision cutting and welding. To continue the expansion and improve
the performance of the internet, or to further reduce manufacturing costs,
improved performance of the properties of semiconductor lasers are necessary.
Conventional approaches for further improvements are not obvious, whereby for
both high speed data transmission as well as high power laser light output the
laser manufacturing industry are near the limits of performance, in technology
areas that are accustomed to an order of magnitude increase every few years or
less. Therefore new ideas and paradigms are needed to break through these
performance barriers. The research of this project seeks to develop new
semiconductor laser chips that will address faster optical transmission of data
as well as increased laser output power. The ability to distribute greater
amounts of digital data over optical fiber with orders of magnitude less
electricity and at faster rates, would be a key enabler for data centers, which
has been identified in a recent National Academy of Engineering report as a
critical U.S. challenge. High power lasers will also lead to more reliable
manufacturing processes and lower cost production, or more compact laser sources
for display applications. Finally, the development of high brightness lasers
could also enable a new generation of directed energy weapons for enhanced U.S.
security. This research program incorporates design, simulation, fabrication,
and characterization of semiconductor lasers to challenge and educate a diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students in electrical engineering in both
classroom and laboratory experiences.

The approach of this research is to develop multiple lasers within a single
semiconductor chip to act together in a coherently coupled manner. Specifically,
the light wavelength and phase of each of the lasers in the array will be
controlled in such a manner that all of the laser beams are combined together
coherently. The coherent combination of the lasers does not simply result in the
addition of the beams, but in fact the overall output light intensity increases
as the square of the number of lasers in the array. Moreover, the control of the
phase of each of the lasers in an array with all of the beams coherently
combined can produce a significant increase of the modulation rate (the rate of
turning the laser light brighter and dimmer) for digital transmission
applications. The key aspect to control the light wavelength and phase of each
laser element of the array is to independently electrically contact each laser
diode. The intellectual merit of this research originates from the control and
manipulation of multiple quantum mechanical optical oscillators. The fabrication
approaches that are used in this research project are the same as those
presently employed to manufacture individual semiconductor lasers, and thus can
be transferred to the laser manufacturing industry in the United States.
Furthermore and perhaps most importantly, the students involved in this research
will be prepared for future scientific and engineering careers in the U. S.
photonics industry.