* 1509879
* UNS:  The Oxidative Potential of Manganese Oxides in Passive Water Treatment Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Matthew Ginder-Vogel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 328,059.00

1509879 Ginder-Vogel

Naturally occurring and synthetic manganese oxides are among the strongest,
naturally occurring oxidants and can destroy hazardous organic compounds.
Organic compounds are widespread among aqueous pollutants and include many
endocrine disrupting compounds, biologically active hormones, and antibiotics.
These chemicals are generally not removed nor significantly degraded by
traditional primary and secondary wastewater treatment technologies, resulting
in their discharge to and presence in drinking water sources, including surface
and groundwater. Thus the focus of this project is to explore the use of
manganese oxides as inexpensive passive oxidants to remove a variety of organic
contaminants from water.

The objectives of the proposed research are to: (1) assess the reactivity of
target organic compounds with manganese oxides, and, (2) investigate the impact
of environmental conditions on manganese oxide reactivity. The PIs will (1)
assess the reactivity and transformation mechanisms of target organic compounds
(e.g., model phenols and phenolic contaminants) with delta-MnO2 (a pure Mn(IV)
oxide) and previously uncharacterized manganese solids collected from a drinking
water treatment system, while quantifying changes in solid-phase manganese oxide
chemistry, (2) quantify the role of dissolved O2 in limiting manganese oxide
surface passivation during contaminant oxidation, and, (3) quantify the impact
of competing reactions on target contaminant transformation. The proposed work
will yield important insights into the fundamental and practical considerations
that govern the ability of manganese oxides to degrade organic contaminants in
environmental settings. Due to their high reactivity, manganese oxides could be
applied to remove recalcitrant organic contaminants in a variety of water
treatment applications. For example, manganese oxide-based filter media could be
used in green infrastructure, such as bioretention ponds, permeable pavements,
green roofs and vegetated swales, to oxidize a wide range of contaminants in
urban stormwater. Similarly, a layer of manganese oxides could be installed
below the geosynthetic or clay-based liners typically used to contain landfill
or manure lagoon leachate. This project will provide research, teaching and
mentoring opportunities for a graduate student and a research opportunity for an
undergraduate summer intern each summer.