* 1509687
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: 30%-Efficient III-V/Silicon Tandem Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Minjoo Lee, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2017
* USD 260,000.00

PI: Minjoo Larry Lee / Zachary C. Holman&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1509687/
1509864&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun represents the most abundant potential
source of sustainable energy on earth. Currently, solar cells based on
crystalline silicon materials dominate the photovoltaics market for production
of electricity from the sun because they offer the highest solar energy
conversion efficiency at the lowest manufacturing cost. However, to accelerate
the penetration of solar energy in the renewable electricity market, the solar
energy conversion efficiency of silicon-based solar cells must ultimately
increase beyond its practical limit of 24%. The goal of this project is develop
a silicon-based solar cell which contains Group III and V elements from the
Periodic Table, arranged in layers which have the potential to increase the
solar energy conversion efficiency to 30%. The fundamental science underlying
the performance of this the III-V/silicon tandem cell will be used to develop
the best strategy for eventual manufacture. As part of the educational
activities of this project, the principal investigators will be actively
involved in an outreach program that seeks to broaden the participation of
under-represented groups in engineering by using solar research as a platform
for involvement in both technical and career-development sessions at Veterans
meetings and the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photovoltaic devices that contain multiple p-n
junctions are currently the only route to achieve solar energy conversion
efficiencies that exceed the Shockley-Queisser single p-n junction limit that
caps the theoretical performance of crystalline silicon solar cells currently in
commercial use. The overall goal of this proposed research is to develop a
fundamental understanding of two-terminal tandem solar cell performance through
controlled growth of Group III-V elements on silicon. The fabrication strategy
is guided by fundamental studies and is designed to optimize the material and
device architecture to achieve 30% solar energy conversion efficiency, which is
beyond the 24% practical limit of single-junction crystalline silicon solar
cells. Towards this end, the model Group III-V material selected for study is
GaAsP, since it has a direct and tunable bandgap, and can be grown on a
transparent, compositionally graded buffer on a GaP/Si template. The bottom cell
of the tandem device will be based on an amorphous silicon/crystalline silicon
heterojunction solar cell, where the front amorphous silicon layers will be
replaced with the GaP template layer upon which the top cell is grown. The
research plan has three objectives. The first objective is to understand and
control the formation of threading dislocations in the GaAsP absorber, and to
develop optimized window and back-surface field layers for the top cell that
will both increase transmission into the GaAsP absorber and reduce surface
recombination. The second objective is to understand and improve the passivation
of GaP on silicon and the transport of electrons across the conduction band
offset. The third objective is to maximize the conversion of infrared light into
current in the bottom cell by designing single-side light-trapping textures and
dielectric/metal rear reflectors, and then tune the thicknesses, doping
densities, and bandgaps of the III-V supporting layers to both form a
recombination junction between the sub-cells and match their currents. The
research outcomes will advance fundamental scientific understanding of multi-
junction solar cell performance while developing fabrication strategies that
will enable for scalable industrial manufacture of devices potentially capable
of delivering 30% solar energy conversion efficiency. The principal
investigators will also use the research outcomes to enhance instructional
materials in photovoltaics course offerings at Yale University and Arizona State
University.