* 1509041
* SUSCHEM: Aquous organic redox chemistry for renewal energy storage
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Roy Gordon, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Michael J. Aziz Proposal Number: 1509041

As more wind and solar energy sources are harnessed to generate electricity, the
intermittent nature of these supplies requires the deployment of electrical
energy storage capacity to stabilize the grid. Existing technologies for storing
vast amounts of electricity are either too expensive or ultimately limited by
other factors, such as geographic location, or the lack of critical materials
needed for large-scale manufacture of energy storage systems. Redox flow
batteries are a promising new technology for storing large amounts of
electricity as electrochemical energy, but suffer from many technical
challenges, including use of expensive or rare materials, flammability of
organic solvents used as electrolytes, and low electrochemical energy storage
capacity. The goal of this project is to develop a new electrolyte for redox
flow batteries based on organic compounds called quinones that are dissolved in
water as the solvent. This electrolyte is potentially inexpensive, noncorrosive,
nontoxic, and nonflammable. The proposed research will design quinone molecules
to improve electrochemical energy storage capacity, and develop fundamental
understanding of their underlying electrochemical processes. As part of the
educational activities of this project, interactive presentations and
demonstrations on energy conservation and renewable energy topics will be
developed for the public programs offered through the Boston Museum of Science.

This project will explore new electrolytes for redox flow batteries based on
aqueous quinones. Some quinones and comparable molecules are nontoxic and have
the potential to improve electrochemical energy storage capacity, avoid acid
corrosion, and reduce the potential for flammability based elimination of
organic solvents. In neutral and basic solution, certain quinones undergo
reversible two-electron processes, but these processes are poorly understood.
Since two-electron reduction stores twice the energy of single-electron
reduction, it is hypothesized that the use of aqueous quinones as electrolytes
could improve electrochemical storage capacity for redox flow battery
applications. The goal of the research is to develop a fundamental understanding
of two-electron reduction process by quinones and comparable molecules in
alkaline medium through substituent modification of quinones guided by molecular
design of their proton transfer processes. The roles of intermolecular and
intramolecular hydrogen bonding, as well as interactions with electrolyte
cations and anions, in enabling two-electron reduction processes will be
elucidated. Further studies will clarify the role of molecular geometry,
substituent groups, and electronic structure on the electrochemical behavior of
this process. The research outcomes could suggest new electrolyte systems for
redox flow batteries which are more efficient, cost less, and are safer than
existing systems for electrochemical-based mass storage applications.
Furthermore, an interactive demonstration based on a redox flow battery from the
PI's laboratory will be developed for the Boston Museum of Science.