* 1509020
* GOALI: Study of Next-generation Nanopatterned Magnetic Memory Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Vladimir Nikitin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 408,000.00

According to Moore's Law, miniaturization of electronic components is nearing
its end. Different approaches are being explored to continued improvement of
computing performance. Technology is currently at the beginning of a paradigm
shift from charge-based devices to spintronics where the electron spin is used
to transport and store information. Eventually, all major elements of a computer
chip (logic, memory, data storage) may be based on magnetism, addressing some of
the most pressing current challenges such as power consumption and interconnect
delays. Specifically, spin transfer torque random access memory is being
vigorously pursued to replace conventional semiconductor technology in the near
future. However, a reduction of the current required to switch the state of a
memory element is urgently needed in order to realize the full commercial
potential. The proposed research will address these challenges by studying and
optimizing the material properties of these nanopatterned elements that are
critical for operation as a memory element. The close collaboration between
Samsung and UC-Santa Cruz provides an excellent opportunity for students at all
levels to be trained in an industrial environment. The project also ensures
rapid translation of the research results into prototypes and, ultimately,
commercialization of memory products using nanomagnetic arrays. Other outreach
activities include internships for undergraduates, and guest lectures from
Samsung researchers at UC Santa Cruz.

This collaborative project between UC Santa Cruz and Samsung Semiconductor aims
at studying and optimizing the critical material parameters that determine the
performance of next-generation magnetic memory devices. The expertise in device
design and fabrication at Samsung and ultrafast magneto-optical characterization
at UC Santa Cruz will be combined in order to understand, control, and minimize
damping in nanomagnetic elements that will make up high-density commercial
products. By the end of the project, a complete understanding of how material
choice, process conditions, and sample geometry affect damping will have been
gained. Both single nanomagnets and nanomagnet arrays will be studied with the
goal of being able to control Gilbert damping in a single nanomagnet under
applied bias and to understand the influence of various mechanical and magnetic
inter-element interactions in an array on the behavior of a single element.