* 1509361
* Developing novel chip-scale spectrometers for infrared sensing applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Hui Cao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2019
* USD 301,984.00

Title: Developing novel chip-scale spectrometers for infrared sensing
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectrometers are widely used tools in
chemical and biological sensing, material analysis, and light source
characterization. Mid-infrared (mid-IR) spectrometers are of particular
importance to sensing and imaging applications, since many biochemical molecules
have spectral "fingerprints" in the mid-IR frequency. However, the large size,
weight, and cost of existing mid-IR spectrometers has limited their adoption
despite the broad range of potential applications. In this work, the
investigators will leverage advances in integrated photonics to develop chip-
scale mid-IR spectrometers which are low-cost, compact, and lightweight. The
chip-scale mid-IR spectrometers will utilize a new design paradigm based on
"complex photonic structures" to achieve the same performance as the existing
tabletop mid-IR spectrometers. The chip-scale mid-IR spectrometers will have
wide-spread applications from trace-gas sensing for pollution control and
environmental monitoring to combustion analysis and medical diagnostics. The
investigators will integrate the research with education including training
graduate and undergraduate students, curriculum development and outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a high-resolution chip-
scale spectrometer could enable portable, low-cost spectroscopy for field
sensing as well as enhancing lab-on-a-chip functionality. Among the different
types of on-chip spectrometers that have been developed, none of them is
applicable to the mid-infrared (IR) frequency because of the long wavelength and
large detector noise. Current IR spectrometers rely on the multiplex advantage
(the so-called Fellgett's advantage) to achieve an acceptable signal-to-noise
ratio. These spectrometers operate by scanning a mirror over a long distance,
which cannot be easily adopted on-chip. The primary goal of this proposal is to
develop novel on-chip spectrometers capable of utilizing the Fellgett's
advantage to achieve the level of sensitivity required for mid-IR sensing
applications, while maintaining small footprint, high-resolution, broad-
bandwidth, and low-loss. The investigators will leverage the unique
characteristic of complex photonic structures, which provide broadband, non-
resonant enhancement of optical pathlengths in a limited footprint to develop
chip-scale spectrometers. They propose three spectrometer designs based on (i) a
disordered structure, (ii) a chaotic cavity, (iii) a spiral waveguide, which
provide different spectral resolution, footprint and sensitivity, and are
therefore optimized for different applications. Each spectrometer consists of a
complex photonic structure with a single input waveguide and a single output
waveguide. The transmitted light intensity is recorded as the refractive index
of the complex structure is modulated (e.g., via the thermo-optic or electro-
optic effect). The input spectrum is then recovered with the calibration data
describing the system response to different wavelengths and refractive indices.
This approach can achieve the Fellgett?s advantage in a chip-scale spectrometer
without moving components while maintaining a small footprint. The complex
systems such as disordered structures and chaotic cavities can have extremely
sensitive response to changes in the probe wavelength and refractive index
modulation, thus enhancing the spectral resolution and operation bandwidth.
Finally, the insights gained through the proposed work into novel photonic
structures with broadband pathlength enhancement could enable additional
applications in on-chip sensing and imaging.