* 1509342
* Control of Dynamic Patterns in Neuronal Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jr-Shin Li, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 07/31/2019
* USD 476,658.00

The past decade has seen significant growth in the development and use of
neurostimulation technology to manipulate neural activity in the brain. The
applications of such technology range from scientific objectives, e.g., studying
how different parts of the brain interact with each other, to clinical
objectives, e.g., using stimulation to alleviate the symptoms of neurological
disorders such as Parkinson's disease. Despite many technological advances
associated with such stimulation, its use is still largely limited to
perturbative paradigms, in which stereotyped inputs (waveforms) are used to
activate or deactivate a neuronal network in its entirety. In other words, the
stimulation is used to create a uniform circuit response, turning an entire
population of brain cells (neurons) on or off, without regard for specificity
(i.e., which cells in the population respond) or timing (i.e., when they turn on
or off). In engineering, control is understood as not simply uniform
stimulation, but as the precise creation or prevention of certain system
maneuvers at each moment in time. This project will investigate fundamental
questions regarding the use of neurostimulation to control neuronal networks in
this temporally precise sense. That is, rather than simply stimulating the
brain, the goal of this research is to develop new engineering theory and
methods to allow practitioners to steer the activity in neural circuits so as to
create complex patterns of activity, or neural spiking. Thus, this highly
transdisciplinary project will elucidate enabling theory for the use of
neurostimulation and will lead to new and fundamental contributions to systems
theory and control engineering. The project will also support new initiatives to
promote interdisciplinary education for students from traditionally underserved
populations through the creation of summer workshops for students from local
high schools in the city of St. Louis, MO.

By bridging ensemble systems theory with computational neuroscience, general and
versatile frameworks for neuronal control will be formulated. Specifically,
oscillator and conductance-based neural models will be used to mathematically
model both oscillatory and non-oscillatory regimes in brain networks. Using
these models, the proposed work will determine fundamental limits on the
controllability of neuronal spiking or synchronization by the application of
external inputs. The notion of ensemble reachability is also proposed and will
be examined via entropic gain analysis and dynamic optimization. These
characterizations of fundamental control properties in both oscillatory and non-
oscillatory neural dynamic regimes will then facilitate the development of
control design paradigms to synthesize optimal controls for the creation of
complex patterns in neuronal populations, such as firing or entrainment
patterns. Methods of ensemble control and formal averaging will be employed to
derive optimal sequence and pattern controls, and stochastic versions of these
problems will also be treated using stochastic control techniques to ensure
tolerance to noise and uncertainty, which are pervasive in neural circuits.
Thus, the results of the proposed research will include a unified systems-
theoretic framework for analyzing the control of physiologically relevant brain
networks; and further, will include a set of formal neural control design
methods that may be readily translated to a range of neurostimulation
implementations.