* 1509486
* Collaborative research: Understanding and Engineering the Timing Precision of Superconducting Nanowire Single Photon Detectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Karl Berggren, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2019
* USD 380,636.00

Title: Understanding and Engineering the Timing Precision of Superconducting
Nanowire Single Photon Detectors

Superconducting electronics and radiation sensors are exceptional for their
speed of operation and precision of timing. As a result, they find application
in critical niches such as space communications, metrology, sensing, and
computation. The performance of these devices thus sets the limit of what can be
achieved in these domains. One type of superconducting detector in particular
has demonstrated high speed and timing precision: the superconducting nanowire
single photon detector. This type of detector is able to detect the arrival of
the smallest amounts of light possible, a single photon. As a result of its
excellent speed and precision characteristics, it has found application in a
wide variety of areas. For example, quantum key distribution, the secure
communications method of the future, crucially relies on timing precision of
photon detection in order to guarantee security. In a related field, emerging
quantum computing thrusts such as those taking place on photonic integrated
circuits rely on the precise detection of single photons. Unfortunately,
although the speed limitations of the superconducting nanowire single
photodetector are well understood, we do not yet understand what limits timing
precision (typically referred to as "jitter"), and thus cannot yet engineer
improvement. Many theories have been developed that can explain how these
superconducting nanowires function. However, none of these theories can justify
the jitter seen in these detectors. In this work, we will investigate the
fundamental limits of jitter in superconducting nanowire single-photon
detectors, and thus enable improvements in a wide array of application areas.
For example, communication data rates depend directly on the jitter because the
standard low- power digital communication protocol, pulse-position-modulation,
uses timing precision to enhance the data rate. By investigating and
characterizing possible sources of timing jitter in these detectors, this work
will directly increase the impact of the relevant applications in industry,
space, and defense. Although superconducting nanowires have been studied since
the 1970s and have been used as radiation sensors for over 13 years, their
picosecond-time-scale dynamics are still not fully understood. Early attempts to
explain the timing dynamics in superconducting nanowire single photon detectors
focused on possible microscopic origins. In the field of radiation sensors based
on superconducting nanowires, some theories related these picosecond-time-scale
effects to environmental causes and others to processes intrinsic to the physics
of the superconducting nanowires. For example, the hotspot model of the
detection mechanism was suggested to explain the time delay between the photon
arrival and voltage response as a function of number of incident photons at two
different bias currents, but fitting to a theoretical model of gap suppression
time was poor and no mention of jitter was made. Later, phase slip centers were
purported as the mechanism for the initial hotspot creation but again, no
substantive connection to jitter came about from those analyses. In this
project, we will probe commonly accepted theories in the field as well as
unexplored sources of jitter using both numerical and experimental approaches.
We have identified several key components of the nanowire operation that we
consider likely sources of jitter: (1) nanowire self-resonance; (2) trapping of
vortices; and (3) stochastic elements in the microscopic physics of the hotspot.
We intend to characterize the jitter contributions of each of these possible
sources, and design modified devices that can reduce these contributions to
jitter.