* 1509084
* Detection and Tracking of Multiple Dynamic Targets with Cooperating Networked Agents
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Christos Cassandras, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 407,980.00

In the multi-agent framework, a team of autonomous agents cooperates in carrying
out complex tasks in an environment that is potentially dynamic, hazardous, and
even adversarial. In general, the team must seek out and then monitor targets
that may also be moving while balancing the monitoring task with continued
exploration. This setting, broadly termed persistent monitoring, typically
arises in mobile robotic applications and sensor networks, but it is
surprisingly rich and encompasses a number of other, less obvious, domains. In
this project we will develop mathematical techniques for the optimal, or at
least near-optimal, behavior of a team of autonomous agents performing
persistent monitoring and deploy the theory in the context of tracking multiple
biological macromolecules moving inside living cells. In additional to
foundational mathematical research with a broad scope, the project aims to
construct a new tracking fluorescence microscope that will leverage the
mathematical framework to provide significantly better speed, accuracy, and
throughput than existing instruments for following the dynamics of single
molecules. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in a variety
of disciplines, including optimization, control theory, robotics, and
microscopy. In addition, the project involves outreach to low-income, first-
generation-to-college students in the Boston metro area through the development
of one-day modules in single molecule imaging that will be used as part of
Nanocamp, a six-week residential summer program for rising high school
sophomores and juniors in the target demographic.

The control and coordination of agents in dynamic, hazardous, and possibly
adversarial environments is highly challenging since it involves multiple
objectives and a considerable amount of information exchange with often severe
communication limitations. Since the use of ad hoc control policies frequently
leads to poorly performing systems, the approach proposed in this project is the
use of optimization methods to create well-designed, rational policies that can
guarantee satisfactory, if not optimal, behavior. Because such optimization
problems rapidly get computationally intractable and their solution is rarely
amenable to on-line scalable, distributed implementations, one of the specific
aims is to develop near-optimal, efficient, and uncertainty-robust schemes that
use a parametric family of control policies that can be optimized on-line. While
the primary project goal is a mathematically rigorous and broadly applicable
framework, it will be developed with the primary motivating application in mind,
namely tracking of multiple single biological macromolecules. In this setting,
the agents are individual confocal volumes, each independently addressed and
controlled using a programmable array microscope, and the targets are
fluorescently-labeled biological macromolecules. While a decentralized
implementation is in general desirable, the single molecule tracking application
supports a centralized solution since all implementation is done on a single
controller and thus the project will focus on the centralized approach. The
mathematical algorithms developed will be implemented on field programmable gate
array (FPGA) devices and tested through experiment by tracking freely diffusing
quantum dots.