* 1509760
* Collaborative Research: A Contact Lens-Based Glucose Nanosensor Using Affinity Polymer-Functionalized Graphene
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* James Hone, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1. Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: A Contact Lens-Based Glucose
Nanosensor Using Affinity Polymer-Functionalized Graphene 2. Project Goals: The
project goals are to create a mechanically flexible, contact lens-based,
affinity nanosensor to continuously monitor glucose concentrations in tears

3. Abstract:

3a. Nontechnical Abstract: Approximately 25.8 million people in the U.S. have
diabetes, which is the seventh leading cause of death. Continuous glucose
monitoring (CGM) involves repetitive measurements of physiological glucose
concentration to allow close monitoring and timely correction of problematic
blood sugar patterns of diabetes patients. CGM can significantly reduce the risk
of diabetes-related complications, but existing CGM devices are not yet adequate
because of limited stability, insufficient accuracy, slow responses, and
invasiveness. This project aims to create a mechanically flexible, contact lens-
based nanosensor to overcome these limitations. The nanosensor will exploit the
nanomaterial graphene and measure glucose concentrations in tears via physical
interactions of a synthetic polymer with glucose, thereby enabling stable and
accurate CGM in a noninvasive, nonobstructive and convenient manner. With these
capabilities, the nanosensor will potentially lead to improved care of patients
with diabetes and other related disorders, and can be extended to the monitoring
or detection of additional tear-borne analytes in healthcare. The nanosensor can
also broadly impact other applications. For instance, in military applications,
the device can potentially be used to enable health monitoring as well as drug
and nutritional supplement delivery, thereby improving the protection of
soldiers and enhancing their performance in the battlefield. In addition, the
principal investigators will extend their current educational efforts in
training graduate students and educating undergraduate students, including those
from underrepresented groups, in an interdisciplinary research environment. The
research team will also actively participate in strong educational outreach
activities in the New York City and Columbia, SC, areas.

3b. Technical Abstract: The affinity nanosensor will use polymer-functionalized
graphene to enable continuous monitoring of glucose in tears in the eye. The
device will be constructed by an interdisciplinary approach, which, as a primary
intellectual merit of the proposed research, combines graphene nanotechnology,
synthetic polymer chemistry, and flexible micro-electro-mechanical systems.
Graphene, a single, tightly packed layer of carbon atoms bonded together in a
hexagonal honeycomb lattice, is emerging as a highly promising functional
nanomaterial in chemical and biological sensors. Such sensors at present most
commonly operate in solid- or gas-phase environments, and their use in liquid
media is relatively limited. In particular, graphene has not yet been explored
to enable affinity glucose sensing in physiological fluids. This research
exploits the high surface-charge sensitivity, mechanical flexibility and optical
transparency of graphene for glucose measurement in tears. The graphene will be
functionalized with a synthetic, boronic acid-derivatized polymer and bonded on
a mechanically flexible, contact lens-shaped substrate. By differential
measurement of changes in the electric conductance of graphene due to specific
affinity binding between the boronic acid moieties and glucose molecules, the
device will allow specific, sensitive and rapid measurement of glucose
concentration. In this design, the device will possess optimal miniaturization
to attain a rapid time response, high sensitivity to effect improved glucose
measurement accuracy, and mechanical flexibility to reduce adverse tissue-device
interactions. With future integration of wireless telemetry, the nanosensor can
enable stable and accurate continuous glucose monitoring in a noninvasive,
nonobstructive and convenient manner.