* 1509782
* RAPID: Realization of a Medical Cyber-Physical System to Enhance Safety of Ebola Workers
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Sonia Chernova, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Motivated by the fact that the 2014 Ebola outbreak is the largest in history and
there is a pressing need to understand how to improve delivery of care with the
right technological interventions at the right place, this Rapid Response
Research is aimed at realizing a human-in-the-loop medical cyber-physical system
(CPS) for monitoring patients, insuring compliance with relevant safety
protocols, and collecting data for advancing multidisciplinary research on
infectious disease control. The ultimate goal is to enhance safety of Ebola
workers by minimizing their contact with potentially contaminated surfaces and
materials through integration of methods and technologies to realize smart and
connected treatment clinics. This project could impact the response to
infectious disease outbreaks by augmenting existing treatment clinics with cost-
effective, modular, reconfigurable and&amp;#8232; open-design CPS technologies.
The project will train a new cadre of engineering students, researchers and
innovators to be &amp;#8232;sensitive to societal needs and national priorities
by involving K-Gray, undergraduate and graduate students in all aspects of the
project, especially at the co-ideation and co-design stages. The project will
bring together a multidisciplinary team of engineers, scientists, technologists,
medical experts, and humanitarian aid workers to develop holistic solutions to
infectious disease control. The broader impacts also include operational cost
savings in treatment clinics by reducing the need and use of the personal
protective equipment and preserve resources such as water by reducing
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to prevent, detect and respond to
current Ebola outbreak and future similar infectious disease outbreaks, this
research plan has the following interconnected aims: (1) contribute new
knowledge, methods, and tools to better understand the operational procedures in
an infectious disease treatment clinic, (2) design, implement and validate a
treatment ward augmented with a medical CPS for patient monitoring, (3) apply
intuitive control interfaces and data visualization tools for practical human-
robot interaction, (4) realize traded, coordinated and collaborative shared
control techniques for safe and effective mobile robot navigation inside a
treatment facility, (5) assess acceptability and effectiveness of the technology
among health care workers and patients. The team will develop a self-contained,
modular and reconfigurable system composed of a connected sensor network for
patient monitoring and a mobile robot platform for telemedicine that will
primarily focus on the interoperability and integration of existing standardized
&amp;#8232;hardware and software systems to realize a testbed for verification
and validation of a medical CPS. Medical, emergency response and humanitarian
aid experts will be engaged to critically assess user-experiences and
acceptability among medical staff to develop pathways for fielding the system in
a treatment clinic. This RAPID project will lead the way in designing the next
generation of human-in-the-loop medical CPS for empowering health care workers
worldwide in treating patients during infectious disease outbreaks.