* 1509107
* Resonant acousto-optic devices in silicon for ultra-low power optical modulation and non-reciprocity
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Amir Safavi-Naeini, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2018
* USD 384,989.00

Resonant acousto-optic devices in silicon for ultra-low power optical modulation
and non-reciprocity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of this
program is to combine two major strands of research in chip-scale nanotechnology
to address long-standing practical problems in silicon optical circuits. By
merging the advances in circuit technologies developed for controlling the flow
of light on a chip, with the invention of nanodevices capable of generating and
detecting high frequency mechanical vibrations, this program aims to develop a
remarkable class of new optical devices. The backbone of the Internet is
entirely based on systems that use light and fiber optics to efficiently send
large amounts of data quickly over vast distances. In the last decade, the rise
of cloud computing, data centers, and ubiquitous high bandwidth wireless has led
to an effort to increase our ability to perform more integrated and complex
routing and modulation of optical data. This has led to several successful
demonstrations of complex photonic circuits on Silicon and in other
semiconductor materials. Despite the significant successes of these systems in
increasing throughput and efficiency of computing networks, the growth of demand
for data in the wider economy and the corresponding growth in information
technology energy consumption has completely out-paced parallel technological
advances. Therefore, successful new approaches to address these challenges are
expected to have a significant economic as well as environmental impact.
Currently, most high-speed optical switches and modulators, as well as all major
industrial research efforts, are based on using electrons or electric fields to
locally change the optical properties in material, leading to electrical control
of optical fields. In contrast, this research program explores a novel approach
using high frequency mechanical vibrations, or sound, in lieu of electrons to
control the propagation of light. Remarkably, recent calculations and
experimental results suggest the possibility of making optical high-speed
modulators that operate nearly a thousand times more efficiently than state-of-
the-art laboratory demonstrations, and more than one hundred thousand times more
efficiently than commonly deployed technologies. This program will develop
devices that experimentally demonstrate the potential of using sound to process
light. Finally, in its later stage, this program will spearhead the development
of a fundamental device that has been lacking from the optical circuit
designer?s toolbox: the optical circulator. By dynamically modifying the
properties of an optical structure with sound, it is possible to operate in a
mode where light can propagate in only one direction and is inhibited from
flowing backwards. This significantly simplifies the design of robust multi-
element systems and can lead to new types of optical circuitry that are far less
difficult to scale up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core concepts of this proposal
are centered around the following recent technological developments: 1)
simultaneous localization of light and motion leads to extremely efficient
modulation of light in a micron-scale package, 2) microwave capacitive
transduction of high frequency mechanical waves via nanopatterened transducers
allows transduction frequencies into the GHz and above, 3) optical filters
modulated at high frequencies can have highly non-trivial and tailorable
responses based on the amplitude and phase of the drives and can be utilized for
filter-shaping and non-reciprocal photon propagation engineering. This program
will demonstrate ultra-low power (attojoule/bit) acousto-optic modulators and
switches with application in data center and wireless back-end optical networks.
The core technology to be developed is a way to efficiently electromechanically
modulate photonic crystal cavities at frequencies up to 10 GHz. Finally, in its
later phase, this program will develop novel devices utilizing mechanically
modulated cavities to break time-reversal symmetry in photonic circuits enabling
a new type of chip-scale photonic circulator as well as other interesting non-
reciprocal elements.