* 1509117
* UNS:Surface and Electrochemical Processes in Co-Electrolysis of Carbon Dioxide and Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Eric Stuve, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2021
* USD 389,534.00

The project targets co-electrolysis of carbon dioxide and water in high-
temperature solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) to make synthesis gas, which
can be further reacted to produce fuels and chemicals. Although attractive from
a sustainability standpoint, there are many technological hurdles to overcome
before co-electrolysis can become commercially feasible. The study will
investigate the surface reactions at the electrode to determine their
mechanisms, kinetics, and sensitivity to different materials. The resulting
scientific insight should lead to the design of improved co-electrolyzers. The
PI will couple the work with educational opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as learning experiences and research exposure for
high-school and community college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-
electrolysis of carbon dioxide and water to produce synthesis gas is a daunting
technological challenge, but one with huge benefits to energy and overall
sustainability if it can be achieved. One key to achieving success is to build
fundamental understanding of the surface reaction processes involved, and use
the resulting insight to design better catalysts. The project will focus on
mixed conducting ceria and perovskite SOEC cathodes with the goal of
constructing kinetic models of surface reactions. Specifically, the project will
combine analysis of gas phase reaction products and electrochemical measurements
to elucidate catalytic mechanisms and reaction pathways, including rate limiting
steps. The resulting insight will be used to understand dependence of
electrolysis reactions on properties of the cathode, with potential for
extending the general approach to predict new cathode materials and designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental understanding that will come
from the proposed work will potentially impact a broad range of electrocatalytic
applications with related benefits to energy and sustainability. On the
education side, the PI (Stuve) teaches two energy related classes each year that
are innovative in nature and highly suscribed. The project also supports a novel
outreach program - the Energy eXperience Project (EXP) - which gives high school
and community college students an opportunity to experience hands on energy-
related work at the University of Washington through an annual symposium.