* 1509006
* Collaborative Research: Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio: Theory and Hardware
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Huu Nghi Tran, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2019
* USD 208,396.00

As the number of wireless devices will increase nearly 2-fold to almost 50
billion, and wireless/mobile data traffic is expected to increase 1000-fold
within the next decade, the wireless spectrum has become a scarce commodity.
This proposal aims at the development of novel theory and hardware that will
significantly improve the ability to reuse the crowded spectrum by leveraging
the capabilities of full-duplex mobile users in sensing the spectrum while they
are transmitting. The concept of a fully passive full-duplex radio front-end in
this proposed research is a fundamental shift from the conventional full-duplex
radio designs that shall provide significant power and complexity advantages.
The use of the proposed design in cognitive networks to intelligently detect
unused radio spectrum is expected to lead to more efficient use of the spectrum
and significant capacity enhancement that is not easily achievable using
existing technologies. In the long term, the proposed concept has the
transformative potential to improve wireless systems in a variety of aspects,
ranging from high-capacity distributed multiple-input multiple-output solutions,
efficient network protocols to support intelligent interference coordination,
and management to reduce latency in multi-hop wireless networks. Besides these
societal and technical contributions, this project will also advance discovery
and understanding via integrating with both graduate and undergraduate
education, and enhance infrastructure for research and education via an
interdisciplinary, inter-institutional collaboration. The education and
collaboration plans will additionally broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups, including those from a predominantly undergraduate
institution and female students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a collaboration
between two experts in different areas (i.e., antenna design and communication
theory), the overall objective of the proposed interdisciplinary research
project is to develop new architectures and algorithms for full-duplex cognitive
radio wireless communications to significantly improve reuse of the crowded
spectrum. The specific aims of the project include the following: 1) to design
and develop fully passive full-duplex hardware architectures suited for
cognitive mobile devices, which significantly cancel the self-interference
without the need for adaptive analog cancellation at the 5 Ghz band or below; 2)
to investigate the applications of the proposed full-duplex hardware
architectures in enhancing white spectrum usage and increasing capacity of
cognitive radio links under the context of opportunistic spectrum access; and 3)
to investigate the applications of the proposed full-duplex hardware
architectures in multiuser cognitive networks for further sensing performance
improvement and capacity enhancement. For Aim 1, the merit of the approach is in
the use of novel antenna configurations that provide a considerable amount of
isolation from self-interference. The design is based on obtaining two identical
out-of-phase components of self-interference signals. The design is fully
passive and can be used in wideband applications. For Aims 2 and 3, the approach
to the information-theoretical characterization of the full-duplex cognitive
radio link and network is founded on capacity calculation techniques using novel
results in real and complex analysis, probability theory, and optimization
theory. The full-duplex capability will be exploited in both simultaneously
transmitting/sensing mode and simultaneously transmitting/receiving mode to
fundamentally enhance the efficiency of using the vacant spectrum and to
significantly improve the capacity of cognitive radio systems.