* 1509880
* EPCN:   Quantifying the Resilience of Power Systems to Natural Disasters
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Payman Arabshahi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 419,966.00

Power systems are not likely to remain unscathed by natural disasters such as
hurricanes, earthquakes, ice storms or floods. Power outages lasting days or
even weeks might ensue and will affect not only the well-being and the economy
of the affected communities but could also threaten their very fabric. Recent
events, such as Super-storm Sandy and hurricane Katrina, have highlighted the
need to improve the resilience of the electricity grid. Some utility companies,
such as Consolidated Edison, have embarked on massive investment programs aimed
at hardening parts of their network. The design changes that these companies are
implementing are based on observations of which components failed during past
disasters. While such measures will undoubtedly be useful, they tend to focus on
the resilience of individual components but do not necessarily represent the
most effective way to enhance the resilience of the system. Large infrastructure
investments may therefore not be targeted at the most effective solutions. To
overcome this problem, electric utilities and government agencies in all areas
that could be affected by a natural disaster need a rigorous method for
assessing the relative value of various investments. This proposal describes how
the overall resilience of a power system could be quantified. It also outlines a
technique to assess the relative value of measures aimed at hardening various
components or facilitating the repair and restoration of the system. Quantifying
the resilience of a power system turns out to require the solution of a very
complex optimization problem. New optimization algorithms will be needed to
solve this problem and hence to answer the pressing practical issue that this
project addresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce advances in
two directions:&lt;br/&gt;1. The development of quantifiable models of the power
system repair and restoration process following a natural disaster. These models
will support the optimization of investments aimed at improving the resilience
of the power system.&lt;br/&gt;2. The quantification of the resilience of a
power system to natural disasters involves the solution of a new type of
multistage optimization problem where the cost function depends on the
cumulative time required to reach each node in a graph. As illustrated in the
proposal, this can lead to counterintuitive optimal recovery schedules. For
example repairing first the branches connecting to nodes with the largest number
of consumers may not constitute the optimal strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
availability of a technique to quantify the resilience of a power system to
natural disasters will help electric utilities decide how best to direct the
vast sums of money required to improve this resilience. It will also be useful
to governments and regulatory agencies when they consider how much money should
be spent on power system resilience as opposed to other priorities. Emergency
management agencies could also use these models and tools to study the
interdependencies between the electricity grid and other critical
infrastructures, with the aim of better coordinating the post-disaster recovery
process. The ultimate beneficiaries of this project will be the people and
communities affected by a natural disaster because its results should help
reduce the human suffering and the economic hardships that they are bound to
suffer. Since this research topic is apt to capture the imagination of young
people, the investigators will organize related undergraduate research projects
for students from underrepresented minorities at one of the participating
institutions. They will also discuss resilience issues at a symposium on energy-
related technologies for high school and community college students.