* 1509589
* Uncooled Silicon Germanium Oxide Microbolometers with Metasurface for Multispectral Infrared Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Mahmoud Almasri, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2019
* USD 359,507.00

Abstract Title: &lt;br/&gt;Uncooled Silicon Germanium Oxide Microbolometers with
Metasurface for Multispectral Infrared
Imaging&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Many studies have shown that
color imagery leads to faster and more accurate scene understanding, reaction
time and object identification than intensity-based false color or grayscale
imagery. Capturing the spectral distribution (color) in the infrared provides
more information, improving contrast and object-identification, which provides
better situational awareness than conventional night vision imagery. However,
the current cooled multicolor infrared technology requires an expensive
cryogenic cooling system for operation, while uncooled multicolor technology is
complex and expensive. To address this issue, the research project will
integrate metasurfaces onto uncooled infrared (IR) microbolometers in a novel
architecture. The metasurface selective absorption will be combined with the
Fabry-Pérot resonant cavity in a pixel with multiple stacked microbolometers, to
provide high IR absorption in different spectral windows while maintaining a
fill factor over 90%. This will allow attributes of incident radiation beyond
its intensity, including its spectral distribution, to be resolved. The
metasurfaces will allow the electrical and thermal performance of the
microbolometer to be partially decoupled from its radiative properties. The
resulting technology will lead to low cost, portable uncooled multiband IR
detectors with a broad range of applications such as automotive safety,
healthcare, surveillance, and landmine detection. The project will provide
comprehensive educational training to graduate, undergraduate and high school
students, and curriculum development. The outreach effort will be focused on
guest lectures at Lincoln University, a regional HBCU, and recruiting students
from underrepresented groups in STEM education. In addition, the project will
also further scientific education by advancing integrated, multidiplinary,
multicampus postgraduate training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of
this project is to establish the design and microfabrication frameworks for
uncooled IR microbolometers by integrating a thermally isolated dual-level pixel
architecture, a metasurface with engineered radiative properties, and an
amorphous Si-Ge-O based sensing layer. This will create an uncooled multiband
infrared (IR) microbolometer where the images from different bands are fused
into a single multicolor image with high resolution. The multiband operation is
accomplished by synthesizing metasurfaces to determine the
absorption/transmission/reflection properties of the two microbolometers. The
research project focuses on measuring the spectral content in the long wave IR
range. The amplitude of the incident radiation is divided into two bands
corresponding to the two microbolometers. This will allow the temperature of a
radiating surface to be determined without knowing its temperature beforehand.
The combination of Fabry-Pérot cavity and surface resonances provides multiple
degrees of freedom for designing the spectral response of the pixel so the fill
factor does not need to be sacrificed. The use of the metasurfaces as an
absorber allows further exploration of the thermal characteristics of
microbolometer design for improved performance. Rigorous coupled electromagnetic
and thermal models will be built to predict the performance of the devices.
These devices will be fabricated and characterized to identify sources of noise
and optimize for noise reduction. The research objective is to generate
knowledge about the electromagnetic/thermal and noise effects of integrating the
metasurface and microboleter, elucidate the interaction between the Fabry-Pérot
and metasurface resonance, and establish fabrication principles for the two-band
microbolometer. This will provide better detection technology that will enable a
future generation of smaller, lighter, low cost multicolor thermal imaging
systems that consume less power and operates at ambient temperature.