* 1509874
* Polarization-mediated modulation of electronic properties of hybrid ferroelectric-based heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Alexei Gruverman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 409,996.00

Polarization-controlled modulation of electronic properties of hybrid
ferroelectric-based heterostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Description: Nonvolatile ferroelectric memories, based on electrically
switchable polarization, have been in mass production for over 20 years with a
market size estimated to be in the hundreds of millions of dollars per year.
However, a number of challenges, such as scaling issues, high operating
voltages, relatively slow speed and structural degradation, limit further
development of this technology and call for fundamental advances in materials
science and device engineering. In this project, the principal investigators
study hybrid heterostructures comprising ferroelectric perovskites and two-
dimensional (2D) electronic materials, namely transition metal dichalcogenides.
2D electronic materials - the most notable among them being graphene - have
recently attracted an unprecedented interest due to their unique physical and
chemical properties. A combination of 2D and ferroelectric materials results in
heterostructures with promising electronic and memory properties. Reversal of
ferroelectric polarization direction allows modulation of the electrical
conductivity of a 2D material, which provides a basis for the development of
memory devices with superior characteristics, such as low power consumption and
better scalability. This project will identify promising materials combinations
for implementation in operational electronic memories and logic devices. The
enhances science and engineering education at both undergraduate and graduate
level. Within this research, a new nanotechnology laboratory course for
undergraduate and graduate students is developed along with the outreach
activities targeting K-12 students and their parents, teachers, minorities and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The main
scientific objective of the proposed research is implementation of the
electronic devices comprising 2D materials and ferroelectric (FE) thin films
that will exhibit polarization-controlled non-volatile modulation of the
electronic transport. This project primarily focuses on 2D crystals of
transition metal dichalcogenides, such as MoS2 and WS2. Polarization reversal is
employed to modulate (1) the in-plane transport in a conducting channel of a
field-effect transistor device, and (2) the perpendicular-to-plane tunneling
conductance across the FE barrier. A critical component of this research is
investigation of the effect of engineered molecular layers at the 2D-FE
interfaces on the functional properties of these devices. The 2D materials,
which are impermeable for gases and liquids, are used to trap and stabilize any
molecular layer on a ferroelectric surface serving as effective cover layers for
encapsulation of molecular species at the 2D-FE interface and providing a simple
and straightforward method for interface engineering. This research will advance
the fundamental understanding of the electronic properties of hybrid
ferroelectric-based devices, build a lasting basis for the exploitation of
controllable electronic barriers and channels, impact a broad range of physical
phenomena from solid-state phase transitions to surface electrochemical
reactions and contribute to technological development of nanoscale electronics.