* 1509804
* Real-time Ab Initio Modeling of Electric Machines
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Taylor Johnson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2021
* USD 285,000.00

Nearly all electricity is produced through electric generators, and 65% of
industrial electricity is consumed by electric motors. By 2030, the annual
energy consumption of electric motors is expected to exceed 13 quadrillion watt-
hours. The ability to undertake optimal design and accurate analysis of electric
machines is important to the success of any sustainable energy policy. Weight-
critical applications, such as electrified transportation fleets, require
radical structural designs with a high power density, high efficiency, and wide
operating ranges. To facilitate such aggressive industry-wide transformation,
physics-based machine models and high-performance computer simulation tools are
indispensable. The fundamental compromise between modeling fidelity and
simulation speed for design and analysis of electric machines is investigated in
this project. The project is expected to enable a quantum leap in desktop-scale
analysis that might not otherwise be achievable until several decades of
computational advances lead to the computational capacity needed for real-time
analysis of electric machines. First-principle models will be constructed
systematically to mimic the characteristics of hardware prototypes, and free the
designer from needing expert knowledge and approximations. This is a superior
alternative to the existing approaches, namely behavioral approaches that use
many simplifying assumptions that compromise model performance, and physical
models, which are prohibitively slow. Hybrid order-reduction algorithms and
massively parallel hardware-centric tools will accelerate the simulation by up
to a million times faster, providing a suitable environment for performance
analysis, design optimization, and fault prediction and diagnostics of electric
machines. Planned knowledge dissemination of the research results will
contribute to multi-disciplinary curricula that help prepare the next generation
of power engineers, and to materials that help update the existing workforce to
be able to address challenges of the emerging energy conversion devices and
systems. The team will engage in STEM-related outreach activities to high school
students as well as under-represented groups at UT Arlington, which is a
Hispanic-serving institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate an analytical paradigm for electric machines using first-principle
physics, and achieve real-time analysis of the resulting ab initio models. The
vision is to shift the modeling paradigm away from outdated rule-of-thumb
approaches and move toward physics-based yet intuitive models that account for
emerging construction materials, computational capabilities, and power
electronics-enabled control. The research objectives are to i) construct
universal and physical models of electric machines without making heuristic or
empirical assumptions common in existing behavioral models, ii) investigate
model order reduction algorithms tailored to the resulting ab initio models,
iii) map the reduced-order models to massively-parallel hardware-centric
simulation platforms to speed up the model execution by as much as six orders of
magnitude, and iv) experimentally validate all research findings using
prototypes of various machine types commonly used in electric vehicles, electric
aircraft, and wind energy conversion systems. This project highlights the
fundamental cross-cutting challenges across the domains of power electronics,
control systems theory, and scientific computing relevant to electromechanical
energy conversion systems. Investigation of such models and tools will enable
significantly reduced design cycle time for more efficient electric machines,
realistic representation of machine-drive systems for smarter control of energy
flow, and co-simulation of temporally-diverse dynamic systems involving both the
field equations and grid dynamics for electric machine-to-power grid integration
(e.g., in wind farms).