* 1509347
* UNS: Fluid-driven Fracture of Elastic Materials, Flowback Dynamics and the Effect of Proppants
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1509347 (Stone)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to
explore fluid dynamics phenomena that are related to hydraulic fracturing - an
area of national importance for domestic energy production. The work proposed is
based on fundamental theoretical analysis and elegant experiments conducted in
simplified and very well-controlled systems of gelatin to model an elastic
geological formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the pressure is relieved after
hydraulic cracking of an elastic material, the fluid can flow back. This is a
process that occurs in hydraulic fracturing and has implications for the
production of hydrocarbons as well as for the environment, since hydraulic
fracking fluids need to be monitored in the subsurface. In contrast to fluid-
driven cracking of elastic materials, for which there is a substantial
theoretical literature but only limited experiments, there is a much smaller
literature on flowback when the pressure controlling injection is released. This
proposal is about laboratory experiments and mathematical modeling to (i)
understand and characterize the coupled fluid flow and elastic stresses of
fluid-driven cracking followed by flowback as the elastic stresses relax, and
(ii) will do so including a particle-laden fluid (the proppant). The experiments
will make use of gelatin materials that are elastic but brittle and have been
described previously in the solid-earth geophysics literature for the study of
fluid-driven cracks. Hence, there will be a link between fluid injection and
flowback to the elastic response of the bulk material, with results interpreted
using appropriately scaled quantities and dimensional analysis. These
experimental and modeling efforts will be among the first to describe the
dynamics of flowback and the role of the proppant. Graduate students will be
involved in research and a series of outreach lectures, the Harvard and
Princeton holiday lectures on engineering and science for children and families,
will be offered based on the research findings of the project.