* 1509362
* Mitigation of Thermal Resistance in High Power Photodiodes as a Means to Increase Device Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joe Campbell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Title: Nanoscale interfacial heat transfer engineering to increase high power
photodiode device performance

Non-technical: Analog optical links are being deployed in a growing number of
applications. Examples include cable television, beam-forming networks for
phased array antennas, "antenna remoting" for radar, and local oscillator
distribution for radio telescopes such as the Atacama large millimeter/sub-
millimeter array in Chile, one of the largest radio telescopes in the world.
These analog links can be viewed as replacements for conventional electrical
cables or waveguides, which are often impractical due to their high loss and
limited bandwidth. High-power, high linearity photodiodes are essential
components for these optical links since they can enable high link gain, low
noise figure, and high spurious free dynamic range. However, the efficiency and
output power of strongly limited by thermal failure. Thermal failure is commonly
addressed by packaging the devices on high thermal conductivity
submounts/substrates. While this approach often leads to gains in device output,
there are additional sources of thermal resistance in the photodiode layers and
interfaces must be mitigated to further increase the efficiency of devices. This
introduces the overarching theme of this proposal: quantifying the thermal
resistance at each layer and interface of a high-power photodiode, and using
that information to make informed design choices, applicable to a large class of
high power devices, that will lead to improved device performance. The far
reaching societal implications from improving high power device performance from
a "thermal first" material design and processing prospective will lead to novel
material solutions and processes for all electronic devices to mitigate thermal
transport from the nanoscale level during architecture design, which will lead
to reduction of wasted energy via more efficient electronics via better usage of
portable power and reduction in plug loads. Furthermore, this proposed work will
be integrated into various coordinated outreach activities, which are focused on
increasing science learning and hands-on activities in K-12 classrooms through
the NanoDays program, high school teacher and student summer research in
University Labs and conference organization and attendance, with particular
focus on under-represented groups and low-income schools around Virginia.

Technical: The overarching technical theme of this proposal is to quantify the
thermal resistance at each layer and interface of a modified uni-traveling
carrier photodiode, and use that information to make informed material design
choices, applicable to a large class of high power devices. This work will
measure and quantify the process/thermal property relationships using a
hypothesis-driven study of material choice and processing during device
fabrication to identify feasible routes for thermal mitigation via layer-by-
layer thermal analysis. The research is driven by the following hypothesis: the
sources of thermal resistance in high-power devices can be determined and
reduced to dramatically increase device performance through careful choice of
materials, design of interfaces, and processing conditions. Therefore, in
testing thermal properties of device-grade thin films and film/substrate
interfaces, this project will also advance the understanding of electron and
phonon transport in bonded films and metal/non-metal interfaces, with particular
focus on device-level structures and the role of defects, microstructure and
processing conditions. From the proposed nanoscale thermal transport
measurements conducted with time-domain thermoreflectance, a new device will be
designed and tested that will redefine the state of the art power output for
high frequency photodiodes. The power gain realized in this specific photodiode
will guide the choices for an entire class of high power devices and set the
standard for material and processing choices. The approach will create novel,
feasible material solutions to improve device performance based on a better
understanding of nanoscale electron and phonon thermal transport in the bonding
layers, bonded interface and sub-mount contact layers, which will directly
translate to record output powers in modified uni-traveling carrier photodiodes.