* 1509504
* Planar photonic crystals for ultra-broadband ultrasound detection and generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Miao Yu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 399,703.00

Ultrasound plays an important role in many applications, including health care
(e.g., clinical diagnostics, medical therapy, and surgery) and industrial
monitoring (e.g., non-destructive detection and material characterization). In
all these applications, transducers are critically needed for detection and
generation of ultrasound. However, the current ultrasonic transducers are
limited in detectability, spatial resolution, and bandwidth, which seriously
hinder the performance of existing ultrasonic techniques. This award will
support fundamental research on novel artificially designed low-dimensional
periodic photonic structures (i.e., planar photonic crystals) for ultrasound
detection and generation. This work is expected to open up new avenues for the
development of novel ultrasound transducers, which can potentially overcome the
fundamental limitations encountered with conventional ultrasonic technologies.
Various disciplines including physics, material science, and medicine are
expected to benefit from different facets of the proposed research. This award
is expected to help create a new generation of students equipped with knowledge
of emerging technologies in nanophotonics and advanced materials. In addition,
this award will also help broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
in research and enrich the learning experience of students with innovative
projects in an interdisciplinary curriculum integrated with the research
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through combined analytical, numerical, and
experimental studies, the overall goal of this work is to achieve a fundamental
understanding of the photonic-acoustic responses and slow light effect in planar
photonic crystals (PPCs), and to use this understanding to develop novel PPC
based transducers with significantly enhanced performance and capabilities for
ultrasound detection and generation. This research is expected to enrich the
knowledge in the growing field of nanophotonics and lead to new methodologies
for ultrasound detection and generation with PPCs. The unique properties of
PPCs, including high quality factor (Q-factor) resonance, multimode photo-
mechanical response, and immunity to thermal interference, will be investigated.
These properties give PPCs a clear advantage over existing ultrasonic sensors
for ultrasound detection. The award will lead to the development of a new class
of PPC based ultrasonic sensors with capabilities of ultra-broadband detection,
high sensitivity, and high spatial-resolution. Furthermore, the slow light
effect in PPCs for enhancing light-matter interactions will be investigated;
this will enable the development of novel PPC based ultrasound generators with
significantly enhanced energy transfer efficiency. In addition, this award is
expected to lead to the development of a novel optical fiber based nano-
imprinting technique, for enabling scalable, inexpensive, and high-precision
batch fabrication of on-fiber PPC devices and on-chip PPC arrays.