* 1509560
* Integrated THz Spectroscopy exploiting On-chip Scattering and Device Nonlinearity
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kaushik Sengupta, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 320,000.00

Terahertz (THz) spectroscopy has a wide range of potential applications in
imaging, non-destructive quality control, biomedical, chemical and air pollution
sensing, cell biology, crystal engineering, identification of explosives and
counterfeit drugs. However, lack of adequate and cost-effective instrumentation
development in this spectral region has contributed to it being called the 'THz'
gap, and has adversely affected the development of its application space.
However, with new developments in nanotechnology, material science and optics,
there has been a resurgence of active research interest in this frequency range
and the research community are approaching the technology development from a
broad range of scientific disciplines. The success of this project can enable
robust, low-cost integrated, THz spectroscopic systems for the aforementioned
applications. Such low-cost solutions for the THz frequency region will enable
researchers and scientists engaged in this field to rapidly innovate on new
technologies that can find extensive use in our daily lives. The PI also expects
that this research will engage and train both graduate and undergraduate
students in multi-disciplinary fields, which are vitally important for solving
challenging research problems for the future. The PI will also engage high-
school seniors from local schools and broadly disseminate the knowledge through
his proposed two courses and through publications, seminars and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THz-based spectroscopy is purported to have a
wide range of applications in biomedical and chemical analysis. Current
technology to perform THz spectroscopy in the time domain mostly relies on
expensive optics including femtosecond lasers, photoconductive substrates,
nonlinear optical elements and mechanical components making the system
expensive, bulky and not amenable to integration. On the other hand, solid-state
technology performs frequency domain spectroscopy using the classical down-
conversion architecture. It requires a large bank of frequency synthesizers and
multipliers covering the entire THz range making it unsuitable for integration.
This proposal presents an electromagnetics-circuits-nonlinear estimation
crosscut approach to enable chip-scale THz spectroscopy at room temperature
through extraction of spectral information from electromagnetic scattering. The
key idea is that an electromagnetic interface between the on-chip receiver and
the incoming THz wave itself creates an opportunity to perform spectral analysis
of the incident signal, without requiring the traditional receiver following it.
This proposal seeks to establish the analytical framework for spectral
estimation by measuring on-chip electromagnetic scattering. It proposes
techniques to estimate such scattering by measuring on-chip the magnitude of the
induced surface current distribution on the planar antenna structure due to the
incidence of the THz wave. In addition, this proposal also seeks to exploit
nonlinearity of the detectors to extract time-domain signature or phase
information of the spectrum of the incident signal. This can potentially enable
battery-powered, chip-scale THz spectroscopes for a wide range of sensing and
imaging applications.