* 1509280
* Closed Curves Probing Surfaces and Three-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Moira Chas, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2019
* USD 172,797.00

Remarkable patterns have been discovered in the structure of closed curves lying
on surfaces. The goal of this project is explain as many as possible of these
patterns theoretically and to discover further structures. This research
combines methods from geometry and topology with probability and statistics. The
tools include computer experimentation using algorithms developed by the PI,
finding patterns, and then proving rigorous results about the patterns that are
discovered. The PI will engage graduate and undergraduate students in research
related to the project and she will organize the Stony Brook Women in
Mathematics Group. The PI also plans to create a series of applets that can be
used by other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the project is
to understand the asymptotic statistical structure of five numbers that can be
associated to the free homotopy class of closed curves on an orientable surface
with negative Euler characteristic. Those numerical values are the self-
intersection number, the word-length (that is the smallest number of letters of
a word representing the curve in a chosen set of generators of the fundamental
group of the surface), the geometric length of the unique geodesic, and the mean
and the variance of the distribution of mutual intersection numbers with other
curves. Another part of the project concerns development of a combinatorial
description of the string topology of manifolds in dimension three, and
exploring a relationship of string topology with the geometrization of three
manifolds.