* 1509787
* GOALI: Multi-Objective Layout Optimization for Multi-Chip Power Electronic Modules
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Homer Mantooth, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 379,802.00

Advances in semiconductor materials such as silicon carbide (SiC) and gallium
nitride (GaN) have led to substantial advances in power devices and are now
positioned to dominate the next generation of power electronics replacing
silicon devices. This project focuses on design automation software for the
automatic layout of power electronic modules. The market share of GaN devices is
expected to reach a staggering $15.6 billion by 2022 mainly due to the growing
demands in the power and energy sector, the communication infrastructure sector,
and the power electronics market. SiC power devices are also expected to grow at
equally impressive rates. These new power devices are expected to reduce overall
energy conversion losses resulting in an annual savings in the tens of billions
of dollars in the US alone. A high-efficiency and green energy infrastructure is
vital for reducing overall expenditures and reducing carbon footprint in the
environment. These new technologies demand more package level integration to
achieve low inductance, balanced impedances, and appropriate thermal management
to realize the high performance and long life they promise. The expected outcome
from this research effort is a software tool incorporating advanced algorithms
that will improve design productivity for engineers while simultaneously
enhancing performance and reliability of multi-chip power modules in an
analogous way that modern design tools ensure the same for integrated circuitry
(IC). Design tools in the IC industry have played an indispensable role in the
tremendous advances in consumer electronics worldwide. The power electronics
that this tool will impact can be found in all types of applications such as
data centers, electric vehicles, trains, airplanes, the electric power grid, and
motor drives of all types such as heating and air conditioning units.

A team of academic researchers and experienced industrial developers of
electronic design automation (EDA) tools will focus on the models and algorithms
of PowerSynth, a power module layout synthesis tool. Preliminary findings
indicate a need for guaranteeing that power module designs, in particular those
that switch at frequencies in the hundreds of kHz, conform to EMI/EMC standards.
Further, industrial feedback with respect to those early findings indicate that
manufacturability is a first order concern in cost reduction and successful
market introduction of wide bandgap power electronics. Electronic packaging must
be carefully considered for both performance and reliability. The goals of this
research are to create an optimization-driven method for producing the
geometrical layouts of multi-chip power modules (MCPMs) that account for the
simultaneous electrical, thermal and mechanical issues that can adversely impact
performance and reliability of the electronics. Advances in electrical
parasitics modeling, thermal modeling, mechanical stress/strain modeling, and
optimization algorithms are all expected as part of the project roadmap. These
advances will culminate in a software tool that can synthesize geometrical
layouts that minimize and balance electrical parasitics, manage thermal
distribution in-package, and mitigate mechanical stresses that sacrifice module
integrity. Finally, reliability analyses will form the basis for quantifiable
manufacturability metrics.