* 1509551
* Polaritonics using two-dimensional atomic crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Vinod Menon, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 299,281.00

Title: Ultrafast switching architectures based on half-light half-matter
quasiparticles (microcavity polaritons) in two-dimensional crystalline
semiconductors

The field of photonics has had tremendous impact on our lives through
applications in telecommunication, display technology, medicine, sensing,
entertainment, alternative energy systems and in semi-futuristic technologies
such as quantum informatics. The next generation photonic systems and subsystems
used in these applications will need to operate at ultrafast rates (Tbps) and
should be capable of performing all-optical data routing and processing even at
few photon levels. In this context, effort has mostly been directed towards
realizing purely photonic switching architectures to replace their electronic
counterparts resulting in larger power requirement and bigger footprint. This
issue is addressed here by exploiting hybrid systems that take the best of
electronics and photonics. Specifically, the switching architectures will rely
on half-light half-matter quasiparticles called microcavity polaritons realized
in two-dimensional crystalline semiconductors. They are expected to be an ideal
platform to realize low energy, ultrafast, wide bandwidth, switches and gates
for signal processing at classical and quantum levels, and image processing. The
study will also contribute to fundamental understanding of light-matter
interaction at the nanoscale. This work will provide unique inter-disciplinary
scientific education in an emerging field encompassing optics, materials science
and condensed matter physics to graduate, undergraduate and high school students
from diverse socio-economic backgrounds and under-represented communities.
Technical: Exploiting the benefit of both photons and matter, this research
program will investigate light-matter quasiparticles (microcavity polaritons) as
a platform for ultrafast low energy switching and signal processing.
Specifically, microcavity polaritons formed by the strong coupling between the
two-dimensional excitons of transition metal dichalcogenides and cavity photons
will be utilized. By combining the novel physical properties of the two-
dimensional materials such as valley and spin degrees of freedom, microcavity
polariton switches that perform both intensity and polarization switching at
room temperature will be developed. In addition, these switches will be
integrated to demonstrate logic gate operations. Fourier space spectroscopy and
pump-probe techniques will be used to characterize the nonlinear polariton
emission and the switching dynamics. The development of room temperature
polaritonic switching and logic elements represents a significant departure and
advancement from traditional photon based or electron based signal processing
systems.