* 1509909
* Precision Organic Electrochemical Transistors for Single-Cell Electrophysiology
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Robert McLeod, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 397,985.00

Time-resolved in-situ metrology of organic electrochemical transistors to
support the development of a dynamic device model

Abstract Nontechnical: Organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) are an
emerging class of biocompatible organic semiconductor device that operate at
very low voltages and with very high amplification. This combination of
properties makes them attractive for external and implanted bioelectronics such
as measuring electrical activity of muscles or neurons. However, progress is
currently limited by incomplete understanding of the internal functioning of the
transistors and also rudimentary fabrication methods that restrict integration
and repeatability. The internal dynamics of the transistors will be studied with
a number of microscopy techniques applied to operating transistors to inform the
assembly of a theoretical device model. This model will guide the creation of
new biomedical devices based on these transistors including the measurement of
cellular action potentials.

Technical: OECTs modulate the conductivity of a polymer semiconductor by
injecting ions that replace dopant polyions, reversibly transforming the polymer
channel into an insulator. This study will elucidate the spatio-temporal
dynamics of lithographically-fabricated OECTs, based on the conducting polymer
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). The
proposed techniques include real-time, electrochromic microscopy to elucidate
the in situ doping dynamics during switching, scanning Kelvin probe microscopy
to measure the spatial distribution of polymer doping on even finer scales, and
AFM to reveal polymer morphology and swelling that are critical to understanding
the physiological interface. These studies will elucidate the interplay of ion
transport and doping, current flow, and mechanical properties in the active
channel of working devices, leading to a better understanding of the structure-
function relationship and validation of the first complete transient model of
OECT function. This understanding will guide the study of improved fabrication
methods including UV photolithography and surfactants that have been shown to
improve performance and repeatability of other organic electronic devices.
Repeatable photolithographic fabrication will enable device integration and
precision measurements beyond current capability. Performance of these optimized
sensors will be demonstrated by integration with nerve-like and skeletal myocyte
cells, which will be bio-printed onto the gates of OECT arrays and a multi-
electrode array for comparison. This will be performed with the assistance of a
local bio-tech firm and two CU cell biology collaborators. A low-noise,
multiplexed electrical interface to the OECT array will be designed and built as
part of the undergraduate and outreach program.