* 1509390
* SusCHEM: Mixtures of Ionic Liquids with Compressible Fluids for Biopolymer Separations and Processing of Lignocellulosic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Erdogan Kiran, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,855.00

1509390&lt;br/&gt;Kiran&lt;br/&gt;VA Polytechnic Inst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research program will explore a novel approach for separation of the
biopolymers of lignocellulosic materials or woody biomass. The successful
outcomes are expected to lead to purified cellulose and hemicellulose fractions
that are free of extractives and lignin; or to purified lignin fractions that
are free of carbohydrates. The possibility of generating uniform cellulose
resources that are free of extractives and lignin is of high technological
significance. Such a resource would greatly improve the efficiency and the
sustainable production of biofuels such as bioethanol; or may be used as
advanced fiber source for paper manufacture, or for production of cellulosic
aerogels or scaffolds. The possibility of generating a uniform lignin resource
is also of high significance. If it were available, such a resource could be
used for possible conversion to nonpetroleum-based, hydrocarbon-like
transportation fuels, or for conversion to advanced materials such a carbon
fibers or porous adsorbents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As solvent media, the project
will explore mixtures of selected ionic liquids with a supercritical or
compressible fluid such as carbon dioxide plus an organic solvent. The approach
is non-traditional in that the focus will be on using the ionic liquids not as
the major, but as a minor component of the mixtures. The objective is to
incorporate the functionality or solvating power of the ionic liquids to
mixtures of an organic solvent with a more compressible supercritical fluid at a
level that would be just sufficient for separation and processing of
biopolymers. The methodology is to combine the pressure-tunability of
compressible fluids with the solvating power of ionic liquids while at the same
time lowering the viscosity of the medium for easier processability. The goal is
to develop solvent-antisolvent combinations that can be tuned for selective
dissolution and precipitation of target polymers with manipulations of pressure
and /or temperature, while at the same time facilitating the recovery and the
recycle of the ionic liquids employed. Towards these objectives, the project
will generate fundamental data on the high-pressure miscibility, volumetric
properties, solubility parameters and viscosity of mixtures of selected ionic
liquids with compressible fluids and their mixtures with the biopolymers of
interest as a function of the fluid composition, pressure and temperature. The
proposed combination of ionic liquids with compressible or supercritical fluid
mixtures at high pressures are expected to provide new process flexibilities in
terms of pressure, temperature, or compositional tuning of (a) the thermodynamic
conditions for miscibility and phase separation, or (b) the transport properties
such as viscosity, or (c) the kinetics with respect to either chemical
reactivity and transformations, or (d) the thermophysical transitions and
morphological modifications.