* 1509202
* UNS: Novel metabolic engineering strategies for complex oligosaccharide synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Ruizhen Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,133.00

1509202 &lt;br/&gt;Chen, Ruizhen &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oligosaccharides are
molecular recognition elements that play key roles in many vital biological
processes such as cell growth and development,and host-pathogen interaction.
Among many potential applications, oligosaccharides are particularly promising
in diagnostics, vaccine, cancer therapy, prebiotics, and new antimicrobials.
Unfortunately, these applications are hindered by the limited scalability and
cost-effectiveness of current synthesis technologies. This project develops
novel microbial biocatalysts for scalable and cost-effective synthesis of
oligosaccharides. The success of this research will not only impact basic
research efforts such as the understanding of glycan structure-function
relationship, but also will impact broadly on their medical applications,
including but not limited to diagnostic cancer diagnostics, vaccine development,
prebiotics, and new antivirals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to develop novel metabolic engineering strategies for complex oligosaccharide
synthesis. Oligosaccharide biosynthesis is particularly difficult due to (i) a
high cellular energy demand; (ii) the necessity to engage multiple sugar
molecules; (iii) the complexity of the biochemical reaction network. These
challenges accentuate as the target oligosaccharide becomes bigger and more
complex. To overcome these challenges, a cellobiose-based metabolism that
exploits energy-efficient phosphorolysis will be established to meet the high
demand of cellular energy for synthesis. Using cellobiose based metabolism
allows glucose, the best energy source, to be used without triggering its
repression on the uptake of other sugars, thus enabling engineered biocatalysts
to access multiple sugars as they are needed. The complexity of the biochemical
network necessary for oligosaccharide synthesis is further addressed by breaking
a complex reaction network into several small modules that are designed to be
sequentially executed. Each module is activated at a time and for a duration
dictated by a target oligosaccharide. This approach allows microbial
biocatalysts to devote cellular resources (ATP, glycosyltransferase enzymes, and
precursor pools) to only one glycosidic bond formation at a time so that it
performs each glycosylation step efficiently. The methods used will include the
expression of specific enzymes involved in oligosaccharide synthesis and the
application of optimized feeding and bioprocessing strategies during synthesis
of the desired compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology
and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the
Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biology.