* 1509232
* RAPID: Improved Detection of Ebola through Nanomanufacturing of Bio-Inspired Diagnostics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Nicole Steinmetz, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 99,999.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will pioneer a novel diagnostic tool
that will enable the detection of the deadly Ebola virus with high accuracy
through reduction of false negative results. The test-bed developed through
bioengineering design and nanomanufacturing will be implemented in high-tech and
low-tech detection assays. The latter will enable detection on-site and in-
field, testing human specimens, livestock and agricultural samples without the
need for specialized equipment. The ongoing Ebola epidemic could potentially be
the largest in history, not only affecting multiple countries in West Africa,
but also U.S. and other healthcare personnel working on-site in disease
management and containment. While therapeutics and vaccines are undergoing
development and testing, protection or treatment of this life-threatening virus
is not yet available. Therefore, detection of Ebola virus is the first step, and
currently the only option, to prevent the spread of the disease. Results from
this research will benefit the economy and society on a global scale. An
important further benefit is the training and education of scholars in an
interdisciplinary environment fostering team sciences, bridging bioengineering,
nanomanufacturing, virology, and molecular biology. K-12 and public engagement
will be promoted through the established 'The Nanoman' outreach program. Reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction is a molecular biological technique used
to detect Ebola virus in diverse specimens. While this method has the potential
to be highly sensitive, the assays lack internal controls to negate false
negative results due to processing errors. Contemporary controls are synthetic
RNA transcripts. These 'naked' RNA transcripts are unstable and prone to
degradation, therefore these molecules cannot be reliably used to spike samples
under investigation; the lack of verification of negative results presents a
considerable health and environmental risk. This research sets out to overcome
this technological hurdle through bioengineering design and nanomanufacturing of
an intrinsic positive control, in which the synthetic RNA transcripts are
packaged into a plant virus capsid. Such a probe mimics more closely the
conditions encountered by the RNA template of the Ebola virus within clinical or
environmental samples. The diagnostic probe can be added to each specimen prior
to processing and will reveal whether various sample-processing steps have
resulted in degradation of the Ebola virus target and resulted in a false
negative read-out. In response to the urgency of the Ebola epidemic, the
diagnostic probe will be implemented in high-tech and low-tech assays to enable
accurate detection in hospitals and in-field and on-site.