* 1509681
* A Novel Electric Power Line Modeling Approach: Coupling of Dynamic Line Ratings with Temperature-Dependent Line Model Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Valentina Cecchi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 257,232.00

With the ever-increasing demand for electric power, in conjunction with the
significant push for and subsequent increase in renewable and distributed
generation connected to the existing network, transmission and distribution
lines are now operating beyond their nominal ratings. This makes the electric
power grid increasingly vulnerable to service interruptions and blackouts. Given
practical limitations posed on infrastructure upgrading (mainly economical and
regulatory), the optimized use of the existing assets is of paramount
importance. It is then essential to accurately determine network operating
conditions, allowing for optimized planning and operation of the system. By
increasing the level of detail in the electric power line models, and removing
select historical modeling assumptions, this project aims at developing models
that take into account available information including ambient conditions, to
result in more accurate determination of the network operating conditions. The
proposed work will enrich the power and energy systems field by introducing
innovative ways to represent electric power lines, which will impact not only
utilities and dispatchers, but also consumers. One of the critical expected
outcomes of this project is the more accurate determination of line power
handling capabilities, which results in optimized use of existing transmission
and distribution assets, allowing for more reliable, efficient and cost-
effective delivery of electricity. This project plans to investigate and
formulate the coupling of temperature-dependent transmission line models that
are able to account for longitudinal non-uniformities in line parameters, with
dynamic line rating techniques, leading to a novel methodology to estimate
transmission network parameter and model structure of an electric power system.
This would result in increased accuracy in estimates of network loading
capabilities and system voltage stability indices. The integrated approach
comprises: (i) a new network modeling technique involving temperature-dependent
line model structures, (ii) a practical system application tool that utilizes
the adaptive line models and dynamic line ratings to better estimate transfer
capability limits (both off-line and on-line), and (iii) a performance
evaluation and assessment plan. These research activities will provide a
framework to study electric power systems by incorporating environmental
conditions as new degrees of freedom in the line models. The focus will be on
adaptive determination of transmission network models and of system transfer
capability limits. Specifically, the main research goals are to: (i)
analytically investigate ambient condition-dependent power line models,
including longitudinal non-uniformity in line parameters due to gradients in
external conditions, (ii) develop effective system applications tools, with
special attention to the estimation of line power handling capabilities, and
(iii) under the guidance of industry collaborators, validate and evaluate the
performance of resulting system models and application tools in a laboratory
setting as well as against field measurement data.