* 1509609
* Spectrally and Temporally Engineered Processing using PhotoElectroChemistry (STEP-PEC)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Lynford Goddard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 385,743.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: Semiconductor devices are ubiquitous. They
represent a multi-trillion dollar industry. Ordinary objects such as electrical
outlets, thermostats, and blood pressure/heart rate monitors, are being embedded
with increasingly complex control electronics, sensors, and network connectivity
to enable greater functionality, value, and service. Although foundry services
exist for large volume manufacturing of microelectronics for ?smart? objects,
there are no cheap (&lt;$100/run) rapid turnaround (&lt;1hr) options for garage
inventors to prototype new ideas. The biggest hurdles are that conventional
microfabrication requires a cleanroom and expensive (&gt;$1M) equipment. This
NSF project seeks to democratize semiconductor manufacturing by investigating a
new fabrication paradigm in which pulses of light of specific colors catalyze
electrochemical reactions that dope, etch, and metallize designated circuit
patterns onto a semiconductor wafer with high resolution. The project offers
rich opportunities for high school and community college teachers to participate
in research and develop teaching modules for hands-on labs through Research
Experiences for Teachers projects. Research and teaching will be integrated
through the PI?s ?Principles of Experimental Research? course. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in semiconductor micro- and nano-
fabrication, photonics, optical system design, fluid mechanics, and bio-sensors
through the proposed research activities. Recruitment, retention, and
participation of students from underrepresented groups will be addressed through
Research Experiences for Undergraduates internships and engineering summer camps
for 9th-12th grade girls. Results from both research and teaching will be widely
disseminated in journals and conferences to enhance the current understanding of
photoelectrochemical processing and of engineering education/outreach
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Photochemical etching uses light to generate
minority carriers that catalyze semiconductor wet etching. Recently, the PI?s
team implemented photochemical etching using a projector. The local etch rate
was controlled using color images drawn in PowerPointTM. Here, the team seeks to
drastically improve the etch resolution and anisotropy and expand the method to
enable new types of light controlled processes, e.g. patterned doping and
metallization, so that new classes of unconventional photonic devices and
multifunctional integrated circuits can be fabricated in a single system. In the
proposed system, a super-continuum laser, tunable filter, and spatial light
modulator will generate high intensity spectrally engineered dynamic image
pulses and a synchronized electrical pulse generator will temporally gate the
chemical reactions. If successful, this project is potentially transformative
because it could create a new semiconductor fabrication paradigm for several
reasons. First, multiple processing steps, e.g. doping, etching, and
metallization can be performed sequentially in the same system. Second, these
processes can be easily aligned to features made through conventional cleanroom
processing since the illumination pattern can be adjusted in software. Moreover,
this dynamic illumination capability enables new designs to be rapidly
prototyped. Next, the processing rate for different bandgap materials can be
individually adjusted. Finally, the limitations imposed by conventional planar
fabrication technology can be removed and complex 3D devices can be fabricated
with precisely controlled dimensions. The overall research goals of this project
are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Understand how spectral and temporal gating affects the
resolution, anisotropy, photo-induced selectivity (e.g. light on vs. off), and
material selectivity (e.g. GaAs vs. AlGaAs) of the etch;&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop
photo-induced electroplating and doping techniques; and&lt;br/&gt;3. Fabricate
unconventional devices with complex topography.