* 1509244
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Biodiesel-derived butanol: Lipid vesicle mediated extraction enables continuous fermentation processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Carmen Scholz, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2020
* USD 207,478.00

PI: Geoffrey D. Bothun / Carmen Scholz&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1508844 /
1509244&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Butanol is a promising advanced biofuel because it
has a high energy content approaching that of gasoline, and can serve as a drop-
in replacement fuel. However, butanol is more difficult to produce by
fermentation relative to ethanol. This is because the butanol product is toxic
to the fermentation process, resulting in low concentrations of butanol that are
too costly to recover economically. This project will develop a novel
fermentation process that uses a nontoxic solvent to remove butanol while it is
being produced, which reduces toxicity and increases overall butanol yield.
Furthermore, the microorganism chosen for study, Clostridium pasteurianum, makes
butanol from fermentation of crude glycerol, the by-product of biodiesel
manufacture. Through this investigation, undergraduate and graduate students
will be trained in renewable fuel technologies, and will receive specialized
training in communication skills and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
production of butanol by fermentation typically results in low butanol yields
due a variety of factors, including low butanol tolerance of microorganisms,
difficulty in redirecting the metabolic pathway towards butanol biosynthesis,
and limitations of conventional extractive fermentation techniques. Recently,
ongoing research has shown that the bacterium Clostridium pasteurianum can
achieve high butanol yields using crude glycerol as the sole substrate. Crude
glycerol is the byproduct of biodiesel production from fatty acid feedstocks.
The overall goal of this research is to enhance butanol production by C.
pasteurianum through understanding of the relationships between butanol
tolerance and its extractive removal by biocompatible lipid vesicles during
continuous fermentation on crude glycerol as the substrate. Continuous cultures
will be used to determine changes in membrane lipid composition and maintenance
energy in response to butanol and substrate addition. This approach will used to
connect tolerance, toxicity, and substrate utilization to butanol production.
Continuous culture combined with lipid vesicle-based extractive fermentation has
the potential to enhance the butanol yield through two processes. First,
vesicle-mediated extraction of the crude glycerol will be studied to remove
residual fatty acids in the biodiesel-derived glycerol, which are known to
inhibit glycerol fermentation to butanol. Second, in situ extractive
fermentation with the biocompatible lipid vesicles will be studied for its
potential to stimulate the metabolic pathway associated with butanol
biosynthesis through the mass-action effect. The project also provides
opportunities to educate students, teachers, and communities about the
sustainable production of biofuels, and to develop the communication skills of
students in this context through Metcalf Institute at the University of Rhode
Island. Interdisciplinary modules will be created where students from the
University of Rhode Island and the University of Alabama in Huntsville will work
together on bioseparation processes relevant to biorefinery operations.