* 1509493
* RAPID: The Role of Aerosolization from Wastewater Systems in the Fate and Transport of and Exposure to Ebola Virus
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Amy Pruden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 130,610.00

1509493&lt;br/&gt;Marr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water treatment and wastewater
treatment are the greatest engineering achievements of the 20th century in terms
of public health. Wastewater systems have helped drastically reduce the
incidence of enteric (gastrointestinal) disease, which remains a leading cause
of childhood mortality in developing nations. The recent outbreak of Ebola virus
disease has raised new concerns about the potential for exposure to the virus in
wastewater, not only through direct contact but also through inhalation of
aerosolized droplets. Prior work has shown that toilets, sewer systems, and
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) can generate bioaerosols. It is often
assumed that medical care in the developed world is superior to that in less
developed areas, but there are certain technological aspects that may in fact
lead to less desirable consequences. Research is needed in order to determine
the extent to which Ebola virus could in fact be aerosolized by wastewater
systems, from the point of use at a toilet to the sewer environment and
ultimately in WWTPs. There are several critical knowledge gaps regarding the
potential for aerosolization of Ebola virus from wastewater systems. Prior
studies have not examined the aerosolization of filamentous viruses from
wastewater systems, and even fundamental information, such as the size
distribution and total number of aerosols generated from wastewater systems, is
not available. Partitioning of microorganisms from human waste to liquid,
aerosols, and surfaces in wastewater systems has not been considered.
Additionally, it is not known whether Ebola virus is able to survive after being
aerosolized from wastewater. Given the high mortality rate of Ebola virus
disease and the many unanswered questions surrounding aerosolization from
wastewater, this research is critical for ensuring the safety of workers who may
come into contact with wastewater. Results from this project will support
practical solutions, such as installing toilet lids or informing recommendations
for safe work practices and use of personal protective
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to assess
the potential for inhalation exposure to Ebola virus that is aerosolized during
the regular operation and maintenance of wastewater systems. We will seed Ebola
virus surrogates into three wastewater systems (flush toilets, a laboratory-
scale sewer model, and a laboratory-scale aeration basin), quantify the amount
aerosolized, and measure the size distribution of the carrier aerosols. Using
this information, the PIs will predict the fate of the virus and the dose
inhaled by nearby workers. The specific objectives are to (1) quantify the
emission rate and size distribution of Ebola virus surrogates and total aerosols
produced by wastewater systems; (2) determine the partitioning of Ebola virus
surrogates between water, stool, and surfaces; (3) predict the fate of the
aerosolized viruses and potential inhaled dose. This project will produce novel
data about the number of aerosolized viruses and the size of the carrier
aerosols produced by wastewater systems, including toilets, sewers, and aeration
basins. Because aerosol size largely dictates fate in the atmosphere, this
knowledge is critical for predicting the risk posed by aerosolization of Ebola
virus from wastewater systems. While bioaerosol formation in sewers and WWTPs
has been surveyed in the field, we will examine generation of bioaerosols for
the first time under controlled laboratory conditions. This project will also
produce novel information about the partitioning of an enveloped virus between
water, solids, and surfaces in wastewater systems. Finally, this project will
provide the first quantitative estimate of the potential for inhalation exposure
to Ebola virus that is aerosolized during the regular operation and maintenance
of wastewater systems.