* 1509895
* ReMIROR: Reference Modulation for Improved Response of Microgrid Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Ali Mehrizi-Sani, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 01/31/2020
* USD 326,379.00

One of the U.S. grand energy challenges is to enable integration of at least 80%
renewable energy resources in the power grid at a competitive cost by 2050.
While it is technically feasible to run the U.S. economy on renewable
technologies available today, what is missing is a flexible power system that
can accommodate the unique characteristics of renewable resources, such as their
susceptibility to overcurrents and overvoltages due to power electronic
interfaces. This project will address this challenge and accelerate the adoption
of renewables by enabling them to deliver the required system performance via
fast and accurate controls. The significance of this work is to eliminate the
need for over-design by reducing transients and subsequently increasing asset
utilization. Moreover, this work positively impacts industry because by reducing
sensitivity to the individual design of controllers, controllers from different
vendors can be employed. It should also contribute to enabling higher rates of
integration of renewables, and is expected to have positive societal and
environmental impact. The developed controllers can be adapted for different
power system configurations, ranging from small isolated systems such as more-
electric aircraft, naval ships, utility microgrids, and military camps, to DC-
segmented systems. The educational goal of this project is to build human
capacity for implementation/operation of the smart electricity grid through (i)
workshops for underrepresented minority groups in high schools, (ii) curriculum
enhancement through introducing innovative components in undergraduate and
graduate courses, and (iii) developing new undergraduate and graduate courses.
This goal addresses national concerns for producing skilled STEM professionals.

The project team will develop schemes to autonomously improve set-point tracking
capability of resources in a time-varying, limited-reserve system under various
operating conditions. A prominent example of such systems is a microgrid.
Microgrids have emerged as an enabling concept for the emerging smart power
system. As dynamical systems, it is imperative for microgrids to have fast and
accurate controllers. The performance of a controller deteriorates when the
operating point of the host system varies significantly from that assumed in the
original design. Redesigning controllers requires computational resources and a
complete and up-to-date model of the system, neither of which are necessarily
readily available in a microgrid. Moreover, the operator usually does not have
access to the internal parameters of the controller. This project aims to
augment the controllers that are already implemented with a strategy that
monitors the response and modulates the reference set-point to attain the
desired response. Specifically, this project will (i) build the mathematical
foundation and stability studies based on discrete-event systems theory, (ii)
design algorithms for generalized operation, e.g., under system imbalance and
noisy measurements, and for providing advanced functions, e.g., rejection of
disturbances due to faults and topological changes, and (iii) perform real-time
simulation and experimental validation. The salient features of the proposed
strategy will be (i) robustness to changes in the system, (ii) not requiring
knowledge of the system model, and (iii) scalability and reliance only on local
signals. This project will be transformative because it has the potential to
accommodate different control designs from implemented by various vendors.