* 1509126
* CCSS: Emulating Mixed-Signal VLSI Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Mark Horowitz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal 1509126&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mark Horowitz&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: &lt;br/&gt;Emulating Mixed-Signal VLSI
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals:&lt;br/&gt;To validate combined
analog and digital VLSI chips, we create functional models of the analog
components which run on digital logic
emulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical &lt;br/&gt;Technology
scaling created an environment of ubiquitous computing: we now have singing
cards, and computer controlled cars, and soon all these devices will be
connected to the net. The Internet of Things is one of the most promising areas
in computing research today. Yet there is a fundamental problem that must be
addressed if we are going to fully realize the promise of a fully connected
world: how to validate the complex mixed-signal integrated circuits that are the
foundation of this revolution. Since these chips tightly couple analog and
digital blocks, we need to validate the entire analog/digital system together.
Attacking the mixed-signal validation issue is a key challenge that must be
addressed to enable this new future, and it is the topic of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has started to
address this issue, by creating models of the analog blocks that can be run in a
digital validation environment. This research extends this prior work in two
way. First it will address some of the limitations of the current analog
modeling work to both make it more general (handle more types of situations that
occur in real circuits), and codify the procedure for creating these models.
This first extension will make it much easier to use the current modeling
technique. Unfortunately chip systems are so complex today that software based
simulation is often too slow for system validation. As a result most companies
rely on hardware emulation platforms for validation. Thus our second goal is to
further extend our analog function modeling by creating a system that can map
these functional models onto a platform currently used for hardware emulation.
These emulation platforms either consist of field programmable logic arrays
(FPGAs) or custom built emulation chips.&lt;br/&gt;We will explore two
approaches to analog functional mapping directly mapping all analog blocks to
FPGA logic, and building an analog model interpreter and choose the most cost
effective approach. Since the direct mapped approach can maintain a fixed ratio
between the rates of the clocks used for the analog and digital blocks, it might
make sense to build simple oversampled analog models. Here the challenge is in
mapping the required computation to the FPGA. Most analog functions can be
mapped to digital blocks, implemented with lookup tables (LUTs) and filter/DSP
blocks. In the interpreter approach, we will explore building an analog model
evaluation engine that will emulate a model when its inputs change. If the
analog signals change more slowly than the main FPGA clock, we might have many
cycles for each model evaluation, making this a more efficient approach. In
addition, it is possible that we can build many fewer model evaluation engines
than analog functional models.