* 1509799
* Collaborative Research: A self-contained microfluidic optical cavity biosensing platform for multiplex label-free molecular diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Seunghyun Kim, LeTourneau University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 01/31/2017
* USD 220,913.00

1- Proposal Title: Proposal #1509746&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: A self-
contained microfluidic optical cavity biosensing platform for multiplex label-
free molecular diagnostics&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2- Brief description of project
Goals: &lt;br/&gt;We aim to demonstrate a self-contained microfluidic optical
cavity sensor which enables simple, cost-effective, label-free and highly
sensitive biomarker screenings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3-
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3a. Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Millions of people
suffer from major chronic diseases such as cancers, diabetes, cardiovascular and
pulmonary disease, and infectious disease. To improve survival rates of patients
and give the right treatment at the right time, early diagnosis of these
diseases is required. The most common way to diagnose these diseases is to use a
biochemical test that measures the presence or concentration of a macromolecule
in a solution through the use of an antibody. The current gold standard
biochemical test for detecting these biomarkers is called an enzyme linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Such tests have significant limitations with
respect to the required sample volume, total testing time, expensive
fluorescence detection and an inability to test for many biomarkers
simultaneously. A simpler and more cost effective approach is still needed to
achieve a more efficient biochemical testing platform. In this research project,
we will demonstrate a novel optical cavity biosensor, a sensor that detects the
concentration of biomarkers with simple two partially reflecting mirror
structure, integrated with a simple microfluidic device. This integrated device
enables automated, low-cost, and highly sensitive sensing which is required for
various molecular diagnostic fields. Such rapid, simple and cost effective
label-free biosensors have the potential to transform the field of early disease
screening and to make significant impact on various clinical and healthcare
applications. In addition, a new bio-sample handling technique will be
implemented to make overall testing procedures simple.&lt;br/&gt;The education
and outreach activity of this project is well-aligned with the research approach
and outcomes. By educating undergraduate and graduate students through summer
research experiences, new courses, and seminars, we will be able to deliver the
state-of-art techniques related with micro/nanotechnologies. More specifically,
by adapting the use of microfluidic system and optic sensors into new courses,
we will enhance hands-on learning of microfabrication and
semiconductor/microfluidic processes. For K-12 students, we will use this
advanced biosensing tool for STEM education. Real demonstration of this work
will be broadened through the development and distribution of educational
activities on the optical physics and micro-flow phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3b. Technical:&lt;br/&gt;A standard ELISA process includes
a laborious and time-consuming sample preparation and labeling processes that
involve complicated multi-step chemical reactions, expensive fluorescence and
laser equipment to detect a labeled molecule. A simpler and cost effective
approach is still needed to achieve a more efficient immunoassay platform. By
developing optical cavity biosensor arrays, we will achieve the ultimate goal in
biosensors which is a combination of label-free, low cost, high sensitivity, and
high selectivity. In addition, adapting a differential detection method with
multiple diode systems enables a multiplexing immunoassay, enhances the sensor`s
sensitivity and increases the linear dynamic range. By integrating the optical
cavity sensor with the self-contained microfluidic platform, we will design SMDx
(self-contained multiplexable label-free diagnostics) to achieve a label-free,
multiplexable microfluidic molecular diagnostic system. In this platform,
various bioassay protocols can be implemented using pumpless technology.
Furthermore, the SMDx platform can be readily extended to a portable system by
incorporating a modular biosensing system for reliable medical
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has multiple aims:&lt;br/&gt; (1)
Develop an affordable point-of-care biosensor using optical cavity structure
enabling multiplexing bioassay with high sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Understand
sensitivity enhancement by increasing the responsivity of the transducer through
the differential detection method. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Demonstrate a seamless
microfluidic device containing passive flow control with channel surface
properties and wicking force.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Implement a self-contained multiplex
label-free diagnostics (SMDx) platform for cardiac panel screenings.