* 1509077
* UNS: Energy Sustainability of Green Commercial Buildings: An Empirical Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2015,03/31/2018
* Benjamin Ruddell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 299,985.00

1509077&lt;br/&gt;Qiu, Yueming&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial buildings are
responsible for 36% of electricity consumption in the United States.
Interactions among engineering, organizational, and behavioral factors and
incentives determine building energy use and related environmental
sustainability, and potentially cause divergence between true energy performance
and theoretically possible performance. There has been increasing investment in
energy efficient commercial building designs and technologies. Among the studies
that conduct statistical post-occupancy evaluations (POE), there has been debate
about whether "green" commercial buildings (i.e. LEED buildings) actually save
energy or not, and this casts doubt on their energy sustainability. Evaluating
the true energy performance of green commercial buildings requires empirical
analysis of long data histories and larger sample sizes. To understand a
complete picture of energy sustainability, social factors such as organizational
management and occupant behaviors, as well as environmental and economic impacts
of energy use, must be studied. Additionally, evaluating the effects of these
factors on the timing of building energy use (i.e. peak hours versus non-peak
hours) is essential to understand environmental (i.e. carbon) costs of
electricity consumption. This project will conduct such holistic energy
sustainability analysis using a comprehensive building energy dataset in a city
(Phoenix) that is typical of energy use patterns in many of the world's rapidly
growing hot and dry urban areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project
will: 1) provide reliable statistical evidence of the true energy performance of
green commercial buildings based on large datasets; 2) quantify the impact of
green commercial buildings on power grid load profiles and electricity
generation fuel mix; 3) apply surveys to quantify engineering, organizational,
and behavioral factors that determine observed building energy performance; and
4) evaluate the systemic environmental and economic impacts of green commercial
buildings in the Phoenix metropolitan area. The project will advance engineering
research into energy sustainability of green commercial buildings through a
novel "big data" empirical approach. First, this project will analyze much
larger and reliable datasets of commercial buildings than previously studied,
including historical electricity consumption and other key building level
attributes. The dataset contains more than 700 Energy Star and LEED commercial
buildings, and more than 17,000 total commercial electric customers. Second,
compared to existing POE studies, this project adopts more rigorous and advanced
statistical analysis including matching, panel regression, and nonparametric
modelling. Importantly, this project uses much more credible control groups.
Third, this project will provide the first empirically reliable evidence of how
green building technologies impact environmental footprints by time of day and
season, which are critical for determining environmental costs associated with
electricity consumption. Finally, this project will empirically explore the
interrelated factors in the coupled human-environmental systems including
engineering (e.g. technical reliability and compatibility), organizational (e.g.
principal-agent problem), and behavioral (e.g. bounded rationality) factors that
influence the observed energy performance of commercial buildings and the impact
on environmental sustainability. The insights produced may be directly
implemented by practitioners including state energy policy makers, city
environment planners, energy service companies, building engineers, building
owners, and utility companies.