* 1509763
* Collaborative Research: A Bioinspired Reconfigurable  Optofluidic Device with Tunable Field-of-View and Adaptive Focusing Power
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Cunjiang Yu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

Imaging with a wide field-of-view (FOV) is important for many applications
including consumer photography, surveillance, astronomy, and medical imaging.
The arthropod compound eye is a beautiful design by nature for achieving imaging
with a wide FOV, where an array of small lenses are situated on a hemispherical
dome to view a scene at discrete perspectives. This allows arthropods to search
for food and avoid predators. However, the large FOV of a compound eye is often
accompanied by low image resolution. The human eye is another optical design by
nature that can focus on an object in a scene and thus acquire images with high
resolution and sharpness. However, the FOV of the human eye is limited. Due to
the different working principles of the two vision systems in nature, optical
devices are often built based on one design and cannot capture the optical
performance offered by the other. This project aims at developing a new design
for achieving both a wide FOV and good focusing power. This work presents a
unique combination of optical characteristics of the two natural vision systems.
This bio-inspired optical design could potentially surpass the current state-of-
the-art and enable many applications that require a small device for achieving
high quality imaging with a wide FOV. Example applications include remote
surveillance and laparoscopic surgery. The project will lead to the training and
education of graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students through courses and
existing outreach programs. It may also lead to commercially viable products
through partnerships with clinical users and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This objective of this research is to investigate and
implement a reconfigurable optofluidic device with a tunable FOV and adaptive
focusing power. This reconfigurable optical design will significantly improve
the image resolution of currently available compound lenses. The method of
reducing spherical aberrations of the elastomer-liquid lenses by changing lens
configurations provides a practical way to increase the effective aperture of
adaptive liquid lenses. This is especially important for liquid lenses that are
deformed to a great extent in order to achieve a short focal length and high
optical power. The use of a curvilinear image plane that imitates the curved
retinal surface of the human eye is expected to significantly reduce the
aberration caused by field curvature. In addition, ultra-thin photodetector
arrays with mechanical stretchability and deformability will be designed to
achieve a curvilinear image plane. Such design and manufacturing strategies can
be used in a broad range of optical and biomedical applications. Collectively,
by allowing dynamic focusing and tunable FOV, while at the same time reducing
optical aberrations, the reconfigurable optofluidic design will provide
important scientific knowledge for the next-generation liquid-lens-based
adaptive optics. The research outcome of this study will be disseminated to the
optics, photonics, and biomedical engineering communities through conference
presentations, journal publications, and social media.