* 1509740
* OP: Hybrid Silicon-Vanadium Dioxide Resonators for Tbps Optical Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Sharon Weiss, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Abstract Title&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid Silicon-Vanadium Dioxide Modulators for Record
High Speed Optical Communication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;It is increasingly difficult to raise
computational processing speed simply by adding more transistors because feature
sizes are approaching atomic dimensions, power and heat dissipation are
problematic in small volumes, and bottlenecks in on-chip communication slow down
data transfer. Among the most promising routes to significantly faster
processing speeds is using light pulses to carry digital data. High-speed, low-
power optical modulators that can encode signals in light are essential if
computers are to achieve THz-scale processing using light on silicon chips.
However, due to their intrinsic physical properties, all-silicon optical
modulators cannot achieve signal modulation at such a high speed. In this
project, hybrid silicon-vanadium dioxide optical modulators on a silicon chip
are investigated for THz-speed modulation of light. Fundamental insights on the
ultrafast behavior and intrinsic materials properties of the switching mechanism
- the insulator-to-metal transition in vanadium dioxide - will also be developed
in the project. Participating students will do cutting-edge research at the
intersection of nanotechnology, physics, engineering, and materials science.
Faculty and graduate students will share their enthusiasm for science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics with middle and high school students in
Metro Nashville and surrounding rural Tennessee counties by participating in
successful outreach programs already established at
Vanderbilt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;High-speed, low-power
optical modulators are essential to the future of silicon photonics as the
solution to ultrafast communication. The goal of this project is to reach
switching speeds of at least 500 GHz with an expenditure of 100 fJ/switch in
hybrid silicon:vanadium dioxide photonics devices by exploiting the ultrafast
insulator-to-metal transition of vanadium dioxide. The hybrid devices will also
be used to probe the strong electron correlations that underlie the optically
induced insulator-to-metal dynamics in vanadium dioxide. The specific objectives
of the research are to: (1) fabricate hybrid silicon:vanadium dioxide photonic
components and compare the switching speed of the optically and electro-
optically induced phase transition in vanadium dioxide; (2) benchmark device
performance against state-of-the-art simulations to learn how the phase change
in vanadium dioxide controls the mode structure of optical pulses in the
devices; and (3) measure the time-dependent dielectric function of vanadium
dioxide in the telecommunications band by interferometric monitoring of the
phase and amplitudes of optical pulses in Mach-Zehnder geometries.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit at the heart of the project lies in its
ambition to understand and exploit the ultrafast dynamics of the phase
transition of vanadium dioxide near 1500 nm. The technological challenge is to
demonstrate 500 GHz switching speeds in hybrid silicon:vanadium dioxide
structures with micron-scale footprints using ultrafast lasers in the telecom
band to initiate the phase transition of vanadium dioxide. This will require
careful optical engineering to ensure low injection loss between the laser pump
and the hybrid phase-changing structure. &lt;br/&gt;Demonstrating that the
optically induced, ultrafast phase transition in VO2 can be harnessed in a
practical, silicon-device-compatible architecture and processing regime would be
a transformational step toward on-chip THz-scale processing. The project is
inherently interdisciplinary, training students in optical science and
engineering, silicon photonics, materials science, and advanced computational
techniques. Project participants will engage in well-established science and
technology outreach programs targeting middle and high school students in both
Nashville city public schools and rural counties in middle Tennessee.