* 1509176
* Collaborative Research: Axion Resonant InterAction DetectioN Experiment (ARIADNE)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Joshua Long, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2018
* USD 102,248.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. One of the most exciting quests in particle
physics is the search for new particles beyond the Standard Model of particle
physics. Extensions of the Standard Model predict not only new particles with
large masses but also some with very small masses. Such a candidate is the
axion, which has been introduced to explain the smallness of Charge-Parity (CP)
violation in Quantum Chromodynamics and which turns out to also be a prime
candidate for a constituent of the dark matter in the universe. This award will
provide funds for R&amp;D towards developing a new experiment to search for
axion-like interactions between nuclei at sub-millimeter ranges. While
participating in this research, a team of postdocs, graduate students and
undergraduate researchers will be broadly trained in the various techniques of
experimental atomic physics such as low-temperature physics, magnetic shielding,
vacuum systems and modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiment involves a
rotating non-magnetic mass to source the axion field, and a dense ensemble of
laser-polarized He-3 nuclei to detect the axion field by NMR. The signal from an
axion field can be resonantly enhanced by properly modulating the axion
potential at the nuclear spin precession frequency. The method has the potential
to improve previous experimental and astrophysical bounds on axions by several
orders of magnitude and probe deep into the theoretically interesting regime for
the Peccei-Quinn (PQ) axion. The experiment is also sensitive to more exotic
axion-like particles. It is estimated that this method can ultimately exceed
present laboratory constraints on spin-dependent short-range forces by up to
eight orders of magnitude and can improve on the combined
laboratory/astrophysical limits by a factor of 10^4 in the prime axion range of
f_a between 10^9 and 10^12, probing deep into the theoretically interesting
regime for the PQ axion. In contrast to cosmic axion searches, the setup is
sensitive to the axion even if it does not make up most of the dark matter.