* 1509432
* UNS: Insights into Chemical Looping Combustion Through a Combined Theory and Experimental Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Vicki Grassian, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,878.00

1509432 (Mason)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical looping combustion (CLC) is an
emerging gaseous fuel combustion method in which carbon dioxide (CO2) can be
separated from other components in the flue gas, enabling a low-cost and
efficient separation and capture of CO2. The potential success of this project
will help avoid negative impact on the earth's atmosphere and climate. The
proposed activities will also promote training and learning activities by
involving undergraduate and graduate students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gap is known to exist among
molecular-level details about the surface science of oxygen carriers of CLC.
While candidate batch studies have helped identify carriers, details of
structure-reactivity relationships and the intermediate heterogeneous steps
involved in the fuel oxidation are yet unknown. The proposed study aims to
enhance the understanding of the fundamental reaction mechanisms involved in
important heterogeneous processes of CLC and related catalytic applications. The
thermodynamic stability of oxygen carriers will be assessed through experimental
and theoretical methods and trends between carrier structure, composition,
durability, and reactivity will be identified. The knowledge thus gained may
drive the future rational design of materials for CLC and related applications.
The methane fuel and its C-H bond activation related to many other reaction
activities will be studied. Chemical synthesis and the replacement of
petrochemical feed stocks by alkanes will also be investigated, expanding the
potential impact of this project.