* 1509121
* Engineering interfacial gates for enhanced functionality in organic optoelectronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Russell Holmes, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors are a novel class of electronic materials
currently receiving attention for next generation information display, highly
efficient solid-state lighting, and low-cost solar energy conversion
applications. These materials are of interest for their high performance and
also for their compatibility with high throughput, roll-to-roll processing
techniques that could ultimately enable low-cost device and system fabrication.
In all of these applications, a critical component to enhanced device design and
overall high performance is the ability to engineer the confinement and motion
of molecular excited states created under electrical (as in a light-emitting
device, LED) or optical excitation (as in a solar cell). Unlike the more
familiar case of charge carriers (electrons or holes), it has to date proved
difficult to affect the motion of charge-neutral molecular excited states
through the application of an external voltage. The proposed work will develop
novel, specially designed interfaces capable of acting as gates, permitting the
funneling of molecular excited states to specific locations in a device. In an
LED, this could permit an enhanced efficiency of luminescence, while in a solar
cell this could permit a more efficient conversion of molecular excited states
into useable electric current using simple device architectures. Overall, the
proposed work will lead to the design of advanced optoelectronic devices for
light-emission and photoconversion, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of many
organic optoelectronic devices including photovoltaic cells (OPVs) and light-
emitting devices (OLEDs) is heavily impacted by the excitonic character of these
materials. Excitation of an organic semiconductor leads to the formation of
tightly bound excitons that resist dissociation by both thermal and electric
means. In OPVs, the exciton must be dissociated into its component charge
carriers in order to generate a photocurrent. Dissociation is typically realized
at an electron donor-acceptor interface, necessitating efficient exciton
diffusion from the point of photogeneration to the point of dissociation. A
similar challenge in exciton management exists in OLEDs, where it is critical to
confine excitons to the device emissive-layer, and avoid spatial overlap between
the exciton and polaron densities to reduce non-radiative quenching processes.
In state-of-the-art devices, problems related to exciton management are often
dealt with by affecting large-scale changes in device architecture, which while
effective, avoid addressing the actual processes responsible for transport. For
instance, in OPVs, exciton harvesting is maximized through the use of blended
donor-acceptor structures known as a bulk heterojunctions. In OLEDs, confinement
is often realized through the use of wide-energy gap blocking layers. This
proposal forges an alternate and more direct approach to the challenge of
exciton management. Work is centered on the use of architectures that directly
impact the rates of excitonic energy transfer responsible for diffusion.
Preliminary results suggest that it is possible to construct one-way excitonic
gates, which overcome the limitations of normal diffusion and permit direct
exciton transport. The novelty in this approach is in the use of device design
concepts that directly address deficiencies in exciton migration. The ability to
direct exciton transport has broad implications for the design of OPVs and OLEDs
in terms of addressing the fundamental excitonic challenges inherent in device
operation.