* 1509106
* UNS: Development of a Micropost Approach for the Contractile Maturation of iPS-Derived Cardiomyocytes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Nathan Sniadecki, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2019
* USD 454,800.00

PI: Sniadecki, Nathan J. Proposal Number: 1509106

The goal of this project is to develop a novel strategy that improves the
functionality of cardiomyocytes derived from human induced pluripotent stem
cells (hiPSC-CMs) in culture. Human induced pluripotent stem cells are not
harvested from embryos, which means they can serve as a noncontroversial and
plentiful source of cardiomyocytes. These cells have the potential to be used to
reverse the damage to cardiac tissue caused by heart attacks, assess new
pharmacological treatments for heart disease, and serve as a model system for
studying heart development. To unlock the potential of hiPSC-CMs, this project
will evaluate the effects of mechanical cues like substrate stiffness, cell
shape, cyclic strain, and cell-cell contact in combination with biochemical
treatments that promote cardiac maturation. The expected outcome of this project
is an effective approach for in vitro culture of hiPSC-CMs that can be widely
adopted.

The lack the contractile power and maturation markers for hiPSC-CMs is a major
challenge to overcome in order for these cells to be used effectively as a
source of new cardiomyocytes. To address this challenge, the efforts in this
project are centered on using arrays of flexible microposts for evaluating the
contractile forces of hiPSC-CMs and quantitative fluorescence microscopy
techniques to assess their myofibril structure, hypertrophy, isoform expression,
and calcium handling. Tasks 1 and 2 of this project focus on studying the
mechanical cues that improve the contractility and maturation of hiPSC-CMs,
including cell alignment, cell-cell contact, extracellular stiffness, and
applied strain. Task 3 examines the effectiveness of these mechanical cues
alongside biochemical treatments that are related to cardiac development. The
broader impacts of this work lie in the potential advancement of new cardiac
therapies, drug screening, and developmental studies. In addition, the project
has educational and outreach components that will impact the training and career
development of future engineers who will work at the interface between
engineering, cardiology, and developmental biology.