* 1509767
* Stretchable Planar Antenna Modulated by Integrated Circuit (SPAMIC) for the Near Field Communication (NFC) of Epidermal Electrophysiological Sensors (EEPS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Nan Sun, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2018
* USD 380,433.00

ECCS- Prop. No. 1509767&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1- Proposal
Title: Stretchable Planar Antenna Modulated by Integrated Circuit (SPAMIC) for
the Near Field Communication (NFC) of Epidermal Electrophysiological Sensors
(EEPS)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2- Brief description of project
Goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate and implement stretchable planar
antenna modulated by integrated circuit for the near field communication of
epidermal electrophysiological sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3-
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Epidermal
electrophysiological sensor (EEPS) is a class of skin mounted, non-invasive,
ultra-thin electrophysiological (EP) sensors with softness matching human
epidermis. They are considered the most intimate and comfortable wearable
sensors for long term EP monitoring including electrocardiogram (ECG),
electromyogram (EMG), and electroencephalogram (EEG). EEPS has a great potential
to transform both mobile health (mHealth) and human-machine interface (HMI) if
the low power and wireless operation of EEPS can be realized. Out of many
wireless technologies, near field communication (NFC) is chosen because it can
wirelessly transmit both power and data, which makes it possible to bypass both
batteries and bulky wireless modules on the EEPS. Therefore the proposed
wireless EEPS will house only three components: stretchable gold EP electrodes,
aluminum stretchable planar antenna (SPA), and one single millimeter-sized
integrated circuit (IC) chip. Stretchable EP electrodes and SPA have been
successfully manufactured, hence the research objective can be achieved through
the following three research tasks: i) the rational design, characterization,
and optimization of skin-mounted SPA, ii) the design of the ultra-low-power,
zero-external-component IC for EEPS data acquisition (DAQ) and NFC, and iii) the
integration of the three components and the validation of the wireless EEPS. The
proposed SPAMIC technology will enable the first low cost, battery-free,
wireless EEPS with minimum rigid component. The impact on mobile health and HMI
can be disruptive because it will make possible more affordable, dependable,
long term, and unobstructive EP monitoring in comparison with existing expensive
and confining systems. The education and outreach objective of this proposal is
to tightly integrate the research efforts and results with graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 education and to globally disseminate both research and
the education outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;b) Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Although the unprecedented thinness and compliance of EEPS
offer ultimate conformability to human skin and long term wearability,
microprocessors, wireless communication modules, and batteries cannot be
manufactured as thin and soft as the EEPS very easily. Cables that connect the
EEPS to the DAQ are not only obstructive, but also a major source of motion
artifacts and interference. We propose to develop stretchable planar antenna
modulated by integrated circuit (SPAMIC)-enabled battery free, wireless EEPS
with three unprecedented merits: artifact-minimized EP measurement, long term
wearability, and low cost. Despite the many merits of NFC, there are two major
challenges to implement NFC for EEPS: i) Although the SPA can be made as thin as
stretchable as EEPS, its operation can be significantly affected by bio-
integration and mechanical deformation. Therefore the first intellectual merit
of the proposed work is the fundamental understanding of the
electrical/mechanical/bio coupling of skin-mounted SPA and the holistic design
paradigm of SPA enabled by this fundamental understanding. ii) The power
harvested from NFC is very limited especially at long distance and in the
presence of large frequency detuning due to bio-coupling. Thus, the second
intellectual merit is the design of ultra-low-power IC and applying on-chip
frequency compensation to mitigate the dynamic variation of bio-integrated SPA.
The transformative aspect of this work arises from the broad applicability of
SPAMIC to other wearable and even implantable devices when they try to go
wireless.