* 1509114
* Strengthening power system dynamic operation with the advent of increased renewable generation: Location and control of fast energy storage systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kevin Tomsovic, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 355,372.00

This research project seeks to increase power system robustness through the use
of fast energy storage systems so the grid is better prepared to withstand
failures and abnormal operation, which may lead to blackouts. The theoretical
work of this project will also contribute to establishing a basis for dynamics
studies for the future power system infrastructure. Several power system
problems can be studied using the proposed mathematical development, such as
controller designs for renewable generation, smart grid dynamic operation,
electricity markets, and others. Besides advancing research knowledge on power
system dynamics, this project will bring further development in control theory
that is applicable to many other systems and industrial processes from the
fields of electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, chemical engineering,
and management. The PIs plan to leverage research results for curriculum
development in new courses on power system dynamics and control. The researchers
will also have support from the Office of Diversity, College of Engineering, and
the Office of Information Technology at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

This project will investigate a criterion to identify the best locations of fast
energy storage systems (FESS) to improve power system dynamic performance and
design appropriate controls for FESS. The future power grid is likely to be
characterized by a high penetration of renewable energy interfaced to the grid
through power electronics, and this may result in poor dynamic performance due
to the reduction of inertia and a high variability on the generation side. To
measure dynamic performance improvement, features such as frequency nadir, rate
of change of frequency, and low frequency oscillation damping, among others, are
considered. This work would be among the first to propose a solution for the
FESS location problem while considering the full mathematical complexities of
power system dynamics (large dimensionality, dynamics in different time scales,
linear and nonlinear elements, and others). Although the modeling of this
problem is highly complex, one of the proposal hypotheses is the existence of a
criterion for FESS location based on specific physical characteristics of a
power system, such as distribution of inertia, distribution of response speed of
synchronous generators, and grid topology. Data analytics will be used to
identify correlations between the optimal location and power system
characteristics and, based on the numerical results, the theoretical development
of the criterion will be derived. This characterization would allow planners to
carefully strengthen the grid dynamics with the advent of increased renewable
generation. In addition, this research seeks to establish three control
strategies for FESS: (a) a continuous control scheme; (b) a discrete control
scheme that determines the specific time when FESS need to change their discrete
states (three states are considered: idle, discharge, and charge); and (c) a
hybrid control scheme that combines the discrete state transitions and the
continuous stored energy control within a particular discrete state. The hybrid
control scheme is expected to provide the best dynamic improvement and, at the
same time, is expected to extend the lifespan of FESS. The potential of phasor
measurement units (PMUs) is considered to facilitate coordinating control loops
among FESS, conventional generation, and renewable generation.