* 1509543
* Microwave Spectroscopy for Magnetic Nanowires - Exploring Fundamentals and Designing Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Bethanie Stadler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 408,005.00

Bio-labels are used as labels and for sorting of cells and bio-species in the
medical community. Commercial labels, like fluorophores, are limited to offering
7 unique addresses. This research proposes to develop a method of creating at
least 30 unique labels that can be used to label up to 30 cells or bio species.
Most labeling techniques also require observation of individual cells, which can
be time consuming for large samples or inaccurate if fast image processing is
used. Our approach combines magnetic nanowire technology with radio frequency
technology to characterize and detect unique nanowire strand systems. We use
radio frequency signals to measure the ferromagnetic resonance properties of the
magnetic material. By detecting the zero DC magnetic bias ferromagnetic
resonance, we can read out 30 nanowires simultaneously based on the material
properties of the nanowires set. This solution will revolutionize diagnostics
and multi-cell medical research. &lt;br/&gt;Similar to the leap from barcodes to
QR codes, these nanowires and nanowire arrays will provide a quantum leap to
nano-medicine because large samples (e.g. tissues or whole vials) will be
multiplexed so that ratios of labels can be detected simultaneously.
Additionally, the research will support workforce development of undergraduate
and graduate education and will enrich the team's outreach efforts to the K-12
STEM community by providing experience and exposure to exploring fundamental
physics, designing materials science, and building diagnostic tools to design
and synthesize solutions to enhance the successful diagnosis of deadly
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will produce a variety of magnetic
nanowire systems that can be used as bio-labels. Radio frequency (RF) signals in
combination with traditional magnetic methods will be used to characterize the
fabricated batches. Once understood, the radio frequency data will be used to
aide in the detecting them as similar and mixed nanowire systems. The nanowire
arrays of materials will be based on specific metal systems "single or mixed
(Co, Fe, Ni, CoFe, NiFe)" that demonstrate unique ferromagnetic resonance
response that will correspond to distinct label addresses. The RF signal will be
observed as a sharp null in the signal frequency response corresponding to a
specific ferromagnetic material. These studies are essential to determine the
specific signature of the RF signal and material system, whereby leading to a
unique methods for characterizing magnetic nanowires outside of the
manufacturing environment. The proposed research will involve design and
synthesis of the nanowires (e.g. 10-200 nm in diameter and 0-100 microns long)
as well as characterization of material properties using custom high speed chip
diagnostic systems to evaluate single and mixed material systems based on static
and dynamic magnetic behavior. Feedback from the nanowire diagnostics will be
used to re-design solutions that will allow determination of FMR frequency
shifts. One major aim being to create "in-situ or self" DC bias that result from
an "effective field" formed by careful design of multilayered
ferromagnetic/nonmagnetic nanowire configurations for null frequencies in the
9-40 GHz regime.