* 1509866
* Super-Hydrophobic Surface Enabled Microfluidic Energy Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hui Zhao, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 276,674.00

Currently, rechargeable batteries are widely used to power electronic devices.
The use of batteries is increasing significantly to meet the demand of the
rapidly growing number and density of portable electronic devices. Such rapid
growth results in major challenges in recycling and replacement of batteries,
and environmental concerns related both to manufacturing and disposal of
batteries. Therefore, the development of an eco-friendly alternative energy
harvesting method to effectively extend the lifetime of batteries or even
replace them becomes increasingly urgent. To meet this urgent need, the research
project is investigating a new high-power high-efficiency microfluidic energy
scavenging technology to convert mechanical energy into electricity. The
proposed method can operate virtually in any situation having a pressure
difference. The proposed eco-friendly method is envisioned to recover
electricity from human locomotion. Human power is ubiquitous and abundant,
environmentally friendly and independent of climate and environment. Such
applications are of high interest to military for the usage on the battlefield
or emergency and law enforcement personnel as well as civilians to power a broad
range of portable electronic devices. This technology has the potential of
translating into critical social and environmental benefits, such as decreased
pollution due to the reduction in the amount and capacity of batteries. In
partnership with local high schools, the PI has developed an already successful
summer camp. Results from the project will be used in educational modules for a
camp used to attract high school students to engineering at the University of
Nevada in Las Vegas, which has a large Latino population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the application of super-hydrophobic
surfaces for energy conversion. Using a combined theoretical and experimental
approach, the central goals of the project are to: (1) fundamentally understand
electrokinetics over super-hydrophobic surfaces, and (2) explore these phenomena
in order to design new microfluidic energy-conversion devices with high
efficiency and high power density, using super-hydrophobic surfaces. This
proposed technology capitalizes on the finding that conversion efficiency and
power density over a super-hydrophobic surface can be greatly enhanced compared
to a traditional smooth surface. However, very little work has been reported on
energy conversion over super-hydrophobic surfaces. In this project, a program
integrating theory, computation and experiment is employed with the aim of
bridging this fundamental knowledge gap. The PI will employ a mathematical model
accounting for surface conduction and concentration polarization. These factors
have been neglected in previous modeling efforts but are essential for practical
applications. In addition, the PI will measure the power density over super-
hydrophobic surfaces to directly test theories. In turn, the validated model
will guide the experimental design as well as engineer the performance of energy
conversion. The proposed coordinated theoretical and experimental approach will
allow the PI to explore the rich behavior of a variety of physical phenomena
(non-uniform surface conduction, concentration polarization, and associated
diffusio-osmotic flows) over super-hydrophobic surfaces. Understanding of these
important phenomena will surely advance the fundamental knowledge in
electrokinetics and lay a solid foundation for the rational design of super-
hydrophobic-surface-enabled systems. Equipped with a much improved
understanding, the PI also proposes to use the microfluidic large-scale
integration method to integrate thousands of channels into a microfluidic chip
to demonstrate the feasibility of the conversion method in powering small
electronic devices.