* 1509071
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Crossing the boundary: motion of solid objects across air-liquid interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Fotis Sotiropoulos, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 01/31/2016
* USD 199,997.00

1512192(Kanso) &amp; 1509071(Sotiropoulos)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed research is to investigate, experimentally and numerically, the motion
of irregularly shaped objects as they cross fluid-air interfaces and the
phenomena that occur at the interface and the bulk of the fluid because of the
presence of the object. Understanding the underlying phenomena could lead to
controlling the process by controlling the object shape or controlling the type
of fluid. Results from this research can have implications for the design of
small robotic vehicles that move across fluid-air interfaces or the design of
off-shore wind turbines or oil platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This problem of
object entry is generally complex, even for regularly shaped objects, such as
spheres and discs, but is particularly interesting for objects with sharp
leading geometries, such as cone- or pyramid-shaped objects, where the interplay
between the body geometry and the complex vortical flows that develop at and
near the fluid-air interface could help to dissipate the impact energy away from
the body crossing the fluids' boundary. This proposal will analyze the fluid-
structure interactions of objects moving in and across multi-phase
incompressible fluids, and will particularly explore how the interplay between
the object's geometry and material properties and the complex flow structures
(waves and vortices) that develop at and near the fluid interfaces can be
exploited to hinder or facilitate the motion of the solid object. During this
project, carefully designed experiments as well as through mathematical and
computational models will be used to investigate the following two problems: (i)
Forward problem: for a given multi-phase fluid medium and shape/material
properties of the object, what is the forward dynamics of the body and the
surrounding fluids? (ii) Inverse problem: two types of problems: a. For a
desired response such as aiding the motion of the solid object in a given fluid
environment, what geometric/materials design principles should the object
fulfill? b. For a desired response such as hindering the motion of the solid
object, what properties should the fluid medium have? Activities are also
proposed that involve undergraduate curriculum development at USC and at the
University of Minnesota, as well as outreach efforts to K-12 students in the
greater LA area through the USC VAST program and the Cabrillo Aquarium in San
Pedro.