* 1509212
* Carry Small Enjoy Large: a Mobile Cloud Computing Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Dapeng Wu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 308,000.00

Mobile devices are being transformed into a ubiquitous computing platform,
resulting in profound impact on the way we live, work and play. New mobile
applications with advanced features are being created every day and finding
their way into our lives. However, this trend toward omnipotent mobile Internet
is hampered by the fact that mobile devices, compared to their desktop
counterparts, are inherently resource-poor, due to limited computing power and
battery lifetime. As a result, there exists a tussle between computation-
intensive applications and resource-poor mobile devices. Recently, a mobile
cloud computing paradigm is emerging and is capable of answering the needs of
computation-intensive mobile applications, and reflects the principal
investigator's vision of carry small enjoy large: carry a small mobile device
while enjoying a large amount of resources offered by cloud computing
infrastructure. Under this paradigm, a small mobile device can deliver a rich
experience of computing, telephony, multimedia, entertainment, gaming, and
Internet.

To realize the vision of carry small enjoy large, this project is intended to
develop new theories and techniques with the promise of significantly advancing
the current technologies of mobile cloud computing. To accomplish this, the
following research tasks will be conducted: 1) developing a computing-task
scheduling approach based on Markov decision process and effective capacity,
which is capable of achieving optimal energy consumption while guaranteeing
user-specified task-completion delay performance over fading channels; 2)
designing a data-prefetch scheduler for mobile video streaming, which minimizes
the cost incurred by unconsumed video data while satisfying the viewer's quality
of experience; 3) designing a resource-optimized video codec that guarantees low
delay and high quality of experience for gaming video; and 4) developing a real-
time wireless testbed.

The proposed approaches will fill some important gaps in fundamental
understanding of mobile cloud computing and networking over time-varying fading
channels, and will provide the theoretical underpinning for system design and
algorithm implementation. The proposed approach to computing-task scheduling
will not only provide an enabling technology that realizes our vision of carry
small enjoy large, but also push the frontier of green computing technologies.
The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students, and attract
students from underrepresented groups. The mobile cloud computing applications
will offer an ideal platform to engage undergraduate and K-12 students with
enhanced education and research experience.

The transformative aspect of the project is that the proposed research on mobile
cloud computing will result in new methodologies for the design of mobile video
streaming systems and cloud gaming systems with unprecedented capabilities of
achieving optimal resource usage and high quality of experience.