* 1509546
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Optics of Photonic Topological Insulators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mikael Rechtsman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2019
* USD 285,000.00

Collaborative Research: Endowing nonlinear optical devices with unprecedented
robustness: overcoming fabrication disorder by "topological protection" against
parasitic scattering

Non-technical section of abstract:

Technology based on controlling and manipulating light affects our lives in
countless ways: from the optical fibers that enable ultrafast internet speeds,
laser manufacturing of automobiles, to solar cells that provide clean energy -
optical devices are ubiquitous. Very often, the performance of a given device is
limited by fabrication imperfections: random defects that cause unwanted
scattering of light, which impedes its flow and adds unwanted noise.
Investigators Rechtsman and Chen will demonstrate a method to completely
suppress such scattering: so-called "photonic topological protection" of light
beams. This concept, borrowed from solid-state physics (in which the goal was to
protect electronic current from scattering) has already been demonstrated to
work, and offers the possibility of endowing a wide class of devices with
unprecedented robustness. In order to test these concepts in the lab, the
investigators will fabricate waveguide arrays (a series of "wires" for light
that together form a desired device) embedded in a type of glass that is
particularly useful for so-called "nonlinear" optical devices. With proper
design of the waveguide array, suppression of scattering will be demonstrated in
multiple different devices. The implications to optical devices are clear:
increased device efficiencies or cheaper fabrication costs (or both). Moreover,
the authors expect their work to "shed light" on the general wave phenomenon of
topological protection against scattering in many contexts, including acoustic
waves, microwaves, optical waves, and even electron waves.

Technical section of abstract:

The field of "topological insulators" has captivated condensed matter physics
for ten years, due to these materials' universal properties, and striking
applications in spintronics and quantum computing. It was recently demonstrated
that their key property -"topological protection" against scattering by
disorder- could be achieved with photons in waveguide arrays with engineered
linear dispersion properties to preserve edge modes.

This proposal will explore the nonlinear optical properties of Photonic
Topological Insulators (PTIs). Through the fabrication of high quality PTI
waveguide arrays in nonlinear optical substrates such as chalcogenide glass,
this research project will explore a nonlinear properties of edge modes and
their potential applications. Since PTIs have a fundamentally different
dispersion, a novel understanding of nonlinear optics in these structures is
bound to yield new scientific knowledge and device applications, which will be
of great interest to a highly cross-disciplinary set of intellectual
communities.

The activities of this project are: (1) theoretical work to analytically and
numerically model nonlinear effects (i.e., modulation instability and solitons)
in photonic topological systems; (2) fabrication (laser-written photonic
crystal-type structures) in chalcogenide glass, which has a high nonlinear
response; (3) characterizing the structures by injecting high-peak-power near-
infrared light and observing spatial diffraction patterns.

The collaboration between PI and co-PI with complementary expertise will enable
the success of the proposed project from theoretical studies to device
fabrication to characterization. If successful, photonic topological protection
can potentially be used to dramatically improve the performance of optical
devices such as multiplexing systems, all-optical switches and beam-shaping
systems - and indeed any optical application limited by fabrication disorder.