* 1509757
* High-Voltage Optically-Activated Wide-Bandgap Rapid Fault Isolation Device
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Sudip Mazumder, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2021
* USD 347,253.00

Rapid Fault Isolation (RFI) in legacy and/or emerging AC and DC power systems
has emerged as an extremely important issue from the reliability, stability,
power quality, and capacity utilization viewpoints. This project seeks to
develop a silicon-carbide based optically-activated gate-turn-off thyristor (SiC
OA-GTO) that is expected to be a game changer in RFI, with clear device and
system level benefits based on radically new innovations. The SiC OA-GTO will
also have clear benefits for several major applications including pulsed-power
systems, transfer switches, high-voltage power electronic converters for medium-
voltage drives, energy storage, step-up-transformerless integration of solar and
wind energy, and flexible AC transmission systems (FACTS), to name a few. This
National Science Foundation (NSF) project will provide graduate- and
undergraduate-level research and education opportunities, including a
significant representation of minority and cross-disciplinary students. Guidance
will be provided to one middle-school student each summer. The results of the
research will be integrated into the course ECE 442 (Power semiconductor devices
and integrated circuits). The PI will leverage his demonstrated mechanisms of
research dissemination (for his ongoing and prior NSF projects) to support this
NSF project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of this project are
as follows: 1) To synthesize a high-gain monolithic SiC based optically-
activated (OA) gate-turn-off thyristor (i.e., SiC OA-GTO) for realization of a
Rapid Fault Isolation Device (RFID) (i.e., SiC OA-RFID). The SiC OA-RFID is
expected to support high breakdown voltage, high rated and surge currents, high
slew rate, low on-state forward drop, high junction temperature, and operation
using low average optical triggering power; 2) To design an optimal photonic
package for the SiC OA-GTO and then using it realize a SiC OA-RFID to address
reduced parasitic inductance given the presence of large di/dt, thermal
robustness, and uniform and efficient triggering and mitigation of current
filamentation by optimal beam localization; and 3) Experimental I-V and
switching characterizations of the fabricated prototype device at package levels
for performance validations. The SiC OA-GTO device for the OA-RFID incorporates
several key features: a) a monolithic SiC device structure that mitigates
parasitic inductances yielding high di/dt; b) rapid turn-on and turn-off due to
novel optical excitation and unity-gain turn off; c) very low optical power
requirement due to thyristor action and conductivity modulation; d) low forward
drop; e) seamless voltage and current scaling; f) high-voltage blocking and
current conduction; g) high thermal conductivity; h) novel optical triggering
that simplifies switching; and i) no dependence on oxide layer. The new optical
single-bias device, unlike leading high voltage Si and SiC based devices yields
immunity against noise, enhanced reliability, and reduced delay due to direct
photogeneration. Additionally, optical triggering eliminates complexity
associated with negative gate referencing. The optical device enhances isolation
between the SiC OA-GTO power stage and the low-voltage control stage. Photonic
modulation of the device enables dynamic control of device dynamics of the SiC
OA-GTO yielding reduced delay and improved on-state and off-state
characteristics.