* 1509824
* State-of-Health Diagnosis and Early Fault Detection for Lithium-Ion Battery Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,02/28/2022
* Jaber Abu Qahouq, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2022
* USD 195,849.00

The main goal of the project is to investigate and develop methods for State-of-
Health (SOH) diagnosis and early fault detection for Lithium-Ion (Li-Ion)
batteries and systems, which are becoming increasingly important and critical
for the performance, safety and efficiency in the growing number of applications
where Li-Ion battery systems are utilized. To mention a few, these applications
include Electric and Hybrid-Electric Vehicles (EVs and HEVs), Consumer Portable
Electronics, More Electric Aircraft (MEA), Aerospace Systems, and the large-
scale integration of renewable energy into the power grid, among others. As a
battery ages, its SOH slowly degrades, resulting in capacity and power
degradation. Compared to the slow aging process, battery faults such as short-
circuiting and overheating are faster processes that might cause catastrophic
failure of the battery system, such as thermal runaway and catching fire.
Moreover, the research and development of batteries with high energy densities
is expected to make catastrophic failures of batteries a larger issue. This
project aims at developing methods for smart energy storage battery systems
which allow for online real-time diagnosis and estimation of the health of the
battery system, and provide early fault detection in order to alleviate
failures. Related control technology, algorithms, and architectures will be
devised and developed in the course of the project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will (1) conduct thorough experimental study and analysis on the online
real-time behavior of battery system parameters including the behavior of the
electrochemical AC impedance of Li-Ion batteries and under different loading
conditions as a function of upcoming faults; (2) develop online real-time
adaptive algorithms and control schemes that utilize the online real-time
parameters of Li-Ion batteries for SOH diagnosis and early fault detection; and
(3) investigate methods that potentially can delay/alleviate faults. This might
partially be facilitated by: (1) practical methods that allow for online real-
time AC impedance estimation through power converter control and other
parameters without the interruption of system operation and performance; and (2)
adaptive utilization of each cell or module based on its health by utilizing
energy sharing control as a function of real-time battery SOH. The project will
make significant contributions to the management of energy storage systems and
their safety, health diagnosis, and early fault detection. Advances in energy
storage management and safety impact many critical applications including many
that are important for our daily lives such as in consumer electronics,
aerospace, medical, military, electric and hybrid vehicles, and power grid
energy storage applications, among others. Safe and reliable battery systems
reduce the risk of catastrophic failure that can cause inconvenience and/or
injury and can be costly. On the other hand, advances in energy storage systems
can enable increased utilization of renewable energy sources and therefore
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, reduction in dependence on foreign oil
imports and resources, and support U.S. economic and environmental security. The
project results will be disseminated through refereed journal and conference
publications, classroom educational components, seminars, lectures and public
demonstrations.