* 1509815
* Power Electronics Architectures for Extreme Efficiency Data Centers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Robert Pilawa-Podgurski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 09/30/2018
* USD 376,326.00

Energy usage of data centers is becoming an increasingly important concern, as
the energy-related operating costs of data centers have become a dominant part
of the total cost of ownership, and their power demands represent some of the
fastest growing loads on the electric grid. Consequently, data centers today are
a significant contributor to global carbon emissions, making the design of data
centers with improved efficiency an important societal need. The goal of this
project is to reduce the power conversion losses in data centers through
innovations in power electronics and system control, with the aim of extreme
efficiency. This research program is expected to have far-reaching consequences
for the economic and environmental impact of data centers. If successful, the
large-scale adoption of the proposed power delivery architecture could save 4.44
billion kWh of energy in US data centers, based on conservative 2010 data and
preliminary experimental results from an early proof-of-concept demonstration.
These energy savings would in turn reduce harmful emissions equivalent to
removing 850,000 cars from U.S. roads. Research will be conducted by
undergraduate and graduate students who will be provided with opportunities to
develop broad research and education skills. The research will complement
existing educational efforts, and will help enhance community outreach programs.
Additionally, educational activities include the development of power and energy
focused educational modules for middle school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore a radically different
power delivery architecture that is designed specifically for multi-machine
environments such as racks of servers, and provides significant improvement both
in terms of volume savings and power efficiency. The proposed power conversion
architecture exploits the large number of servers available in today's data
centers, and achieves extreme power conversion efficiency by electrically
connecting servers in series, similar to solutions developed for solar PV and
battery applications. Stringent voltage regulation and operational requirements
will be met through the combination of a) isolated, high-efficiency, high power
density differential power converters that maintain each server voltage within
specifications, b) hardware circuitry that enables safe and reliable isolation
and hot-swapping of malfunctioning servers, and c) system control that achieves
high efficiency, and which handles start-up and shutdown of individual servers
and racks of servers. The research plan includes major research components in
the areas of power converter topologies; design, fabrication, and testing of
high density switched-capacitor power converters; development of isolation and
hot-swapping circuitry for safe and reliable operation; bidirectional hysteresis
control for improved light-load efficiency; and evaluation and benchmarking
against existing solutions.