* 1509308
* UNS: Imaging inhomogeneous stress networks in colloidal glasses and gels to determine their role in the bulk response of disordered suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Itai Cohen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2019
* USD 351,819.00

CBET - 1509308 &lt;br/&gt;Cohen, Itai &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through various
processes a piece of glass can be designed to safely shatter, be bullet proof,
or flexible and tough. The glass properties can be changed by manipulating the
microscopic forces between the molecules that make up the glass. Learning how to
better control the distribution of these microscopic forces and how they evolve
under various loading conditions is an important technological challenge. This
projects aims to visualize and determine the forces and construct models for the
glass. The understanding gained through these studies will have very broad
impact with the potential to change industrial manufacturing practices. Both
graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the research and
outreach and conference programs will benefit student and postdoctoral
researchers and industries in the up-state New York
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deformation of disordered dense colloidal
suspensions is governed by the nonlinear behavior of inhomogeneous stress
networks that develop within the material in response to applied stresses.
Determining how evolution of these local stress networks governs bulk
rheological behaviors remains an outstanding scientific challenge. A key hurdle
for developing this understanding is the lack of methods for experimentally
measuring the local stresses within suspensions. In this project, a novel method
- Stress Assessment from Local Structural Anisotropy (SALSA)- will enable
groundbreaking capabilities for determining stresses associated with sample
volumes that extend down to the single particle scale. In combination with a
newly developed confocal rheometer device, pioneering experiments including,
indentation, compression, shear, and biaxial shear are being conducted to
quantifying how inhomogeneous stress networks collude to govern the bulk
mechanical behavior of dense disordered colloidal suspensions. The application
of SALSA is also being extended to more complicated interparticle potentials
arising from depletion interactions. This extended capability is being used to
study how crack propagation is altered as the gel that it is traveling through
approaches a percolation threshold. In addition to being excellent model
systems, colloids are an important technology in and of themselves. In
particular, controlling the jamming of colloidal suspensions is important for
processing products ranging from toothpastes to paints. As such, the findings
made through this project will have very broad impact with the potential to
change practices in both the scientific and industrial communities.