* 1509197
* Collaborative Research: Nanostructured Conductive Tin Oxide for High-Efficiency Light Trapping in Thin Films and Photonic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Jing Kong, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR), and by the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS).

Nontechnical Description: This project investigates nanostructured conductive
tin oxide as a self-assembled electrode for high-efficiency light trapping in
photonic devices based on thin films and two-dimensional (2D) materials. These
nanostructures scatter the incident light into the plane of the active absorber
materials, thereby "trapping" the light for strongly enhanced optical absorption
in ultrathin absorbers. This technology enables a drastic reduction in materials
consumption and cost compared to wafer-based optoelectronic devices. It has
broad potential applications from infrared sensing/imaging to energy harvesting,
including direct conversion of heat into electricity. The light trapping in
ultrathin absorbers also enables a new group of flexible, high-efficiency
photonic devices that can be installed on curved surfaces. The project provides
a broad range of cutting-edge research experiences for graduate and
undergraduate students. The team also participates in the "sharing science
workshop and practicum" at the Museum of Science in Boston to make demos on the
light trapping effect that allows visitors to observe an atomically thin
graphene layer with naked eyes. The PI (Liu) integrates the new concepts
generated from this research project into the Summer Engineering Workshop at
Dartmouth College for high-school juniors and seniors. The Co-PI (Kong)
participates in the MIT Edgerton Center to inspire K-12 students using the
nanostructured materials produced in the research.

Technical Description: This project studies high-efficiency, low-loss light
trapping in photonic devices. The goal is to investigate nanostructured
conductive tin oxide SnOx (x<2) as a low-temperature (<250 degrees Celsius)
self-assembled electrode for efficient light trapping in thin-film and
2D-materials based photonic devices, thereby greatly enhancing their quantum
efficiencies. Due to the non-stoichiometry, the excess Sn segregates upon
annealing and induces nanobrick/nanoneedle formation. In order to achieve high
light trapping efficiency, the team studies the fundamentals of the
nanostructure formation, ambipolar electrical conduction, and nanoscale optical
coupling between SnOx and thin film/2D absorbers. Based on the new knowledge
gained through this project, the device structure and fabrication process can be
optimized for different applications. Two examples are (a) SnOx enhanced light
trapping in Ge and GeSn thin films for thermo photovoltaic cells and infrared
sensors, and (b) SnOx/2D material heterostructures for photonic devices. The
research can potentially lead to a new class of low-loss, nanostructured
conductive oxides for high efficiency light trapping in thin active absorbers
with thicknesses ranging from a single atomic layer to a few micrometers.
Compared to conventional surface-textured transparent conductive oxides, this
new technology enhances light trapping efficiency for ultrathin absorbers and
minimizes the surface leakage current simultaneously.