* 1509178
* AF: Medium: Algorithmic Complexity in Computation and Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2022
* Leslie Valiant, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,079,975.00

Computational complexity is the field that studies how much resources are needed
for performing computational tasks. Its primary focus has been to understand how
many steps and how much storage space is required for performing various
important tasks on conventional computers. Biological processes, can also be
viewed as computations to the extent that they consist of step-by-step processes
that follow certain rules, and can then be also studied from the perspective of
the theory of computational complexity. This proposal is concerned with studying
both of these aspects. Its goal is that of proving, by mathematical means, upper
or lower bounds on the resources needed for both general purpose and
evolutionary computations.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;While much is understood about
the complexity of computations on general purpose computers, this understanding
is pivoted around a small number of critical open questions, such as the P=?NP
question, the answer to which would resolve the resource requirements of
numerous important tasks. The first focus of this study will be algebraic
approaches to these questions, in which the limitations on computations imposed
by algebraic axioms is analyzed. Holographic algorithms have over the last
decade yielded novel algorithms for a variety of problems, as well as new lower
bound arguments, and also new techniques for proving computational equivalence
among apparently dissimilar problems. The goal of the research is to understand
the inherent limits of holographic algorithms and to use this understanding to
develop efficient algorithms. Darwinian evolution can be also viewed as a
computational process that uses quantifiable resources, here measured in terms
of numbers of generations, size of populations, and the number of experiences of
individuals. Recently it was shown that the Darwinian mechanism can be viewed as
a form of machine learning, the field of computer science that studies systems
in which most of the information is acquired from experience and not from a
programmer. The goal of the research is to understand what classes of functions,
such as those occurring in protein expression networks, can so evolve using
practicable resources. Graduate students will be involved in these projects.