* 1509619
* Coherent Ultrafast Optical Signal Processing Using Stabilized Optical Frequency Combs
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Peter Delfyett, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

The demand for bandwidth continues to increase, as technologies such as
computers, cell phone, and tablets, become connected through the internet. Key
business activities, such as e-commerce, bank transactions, stock trading, and
the transmission of high bandwidth services, such as streaming video and gaming,
also contribute to the significant demand for bandwidth. New developing
applications become possible given that the access to bandwidth increases. These
new applications are enabled by access to increased bandwidth, resulting in the
consumption of more bandwidth and thus increasing the demand. This results in a
situation of ever increasing demands for bandwidth. As the demand for bandwidth
increases, new approaches in the distribution, transmission and processing of
this bandwidth are required, thus generating the need for the development of new
device technologies. In addition, new system architectures may need to be
considered based on emerging device technologies. The development of new
photonic technologies and approaches to communication, computing and signal
processing are needed to keep ahead of the continually increasing demand for
bandwidth. The significance and importance of developing new technologies and
methods for communications, computing and signal processing is that these new
devices and approaches will be more energy efficient, compact, and cost
effective, resulting in applications and services that are broadband, ubiquitous
and low cost. As these services become more ubiquitous and low cost, access to
these high bandwidth environments will be accessible to a broad population, thus
improving the overall intellectual and economic strength of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop ultra-broadband optical communication
and signal processing technologies relying on the unique properties of injection
locked micro-cavity laser oscillators such as the Vertical Cavity Surface
Emitting Laser. The approaches exploit the ability to simultaneously select
single wavelength components from a multi-wavelength frequency comb laser, and
realize high speed modulation or detection functionality. These devices will
then be used in an ultrafast coherent parallel signal processing architecture,
realizing functionality ranging from format independent optical communications,
optical sampling, optical arbitrary waveform generation and detection. It is
anticipated that multi-wavelength comb lasers combined with vertical cavity
surface emitting laser arrays could provide processing, communication and
computing speeds of 5 terabits per second, equivalent to 1 million TV channels.
The intellectual significance is that the newly developed technologies will
enable researchers to conceive of new approaches to the challenges of
transmitting and processing massive amounts of data, which has been identified
as one of the grand challenges in the 21 century. In addition, young scientists
and engineers will be trained in these cutting edge technological areas, thus
allowing for the rapid incorporation of these approaches into commercial
industry.