* 1509005
* CCSS: Collaborative Research: Smart-Grid Powered Green Communications in Heterogeneous Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Valentine Aalo, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 195,967.00

Both the current wireless communication networks and the electricity grid
infrastructure are on the verge of a major paradigm shift. The traditional
cellular architecture is evolving into heterogeneous networks (HetNets)
consisting of densely deployed macro/micro/pico-cell base stations (BSs). In
such HetNets, coordinated transmissions are advocated to perform energy-
efficient green communications. At the same time, the current power network
infrastructure is also migrating toward a so-termed smart grid that promises
unprecedented levels of monitorability and controllability. It is expected that
all future communication systems will be powered by a smart grid. Integration of
smart-grid technologies into system designs then holds the key to fully
exploiting the potential of green communications in next-generation HetNets.
This highlights the clear need for fundamental understanding and systematic
exploration of smart-grid powered green communications in HetNet
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the present project is centered
on transformative analytical and algorithmic tools for smart-grid powered green
communications. The vision is to establish a comprehensive framework based on
state-of-the-art optimization approaches to jointly design green HetNets along
with critically relevant smart grid operations. By cross-fertilizing ideas
between these two fields, the ultimate goal is to set forth a unified treatment
for modeling, analyzing, and designing resource management schemes for smart-
grid powered HetNets. The engineering outcome of the proposed research is a
suite of protocols for distributed, real-time implementation of basestation
activation, coordinated beamforming in HetNets, as well as renewable energy
harvesting and storage, demand response, and unit commitment operations for
smart grids. Creating energy-efficient, distributed, real-time algorithms will
greatly enhance the performance of emerging wireless cellular networks while
reducing carbon emissions and enhancing the green communication solution to
climate change and global warming. This project also addresses the broader
impacts of improving undergraduate STEM education, increasing participation of
under-represented minorities, and promoting a scientifically literate public.