* 1509081
* Photonic Imaging Receiver for Ultra-wideband Radio-frequency Communications and Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Dennis Prather, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 339,999.00

A new concept in radio frequency (RF) receivers will be developed under this
program. RF receivers are a vital component in a variety of systems that are
yielding transformative benefits for society. Perhaps most prominent is wireless
broadband internet connectivity. Enhancing the capacity of wireless networks
will accelerate the benefits of worldwide connectivity among households,
schools, hospitals, businesses, and governments. The photonic imaging receiver
uses optical detection and processing of RF signals to enable unprecedented
capabilities, from extremely broadband wireless communications to all-weather
obscurant-penetrating imaging. Conventional RF receivers are limited by the
intrinsic nonlinearity of the detection process, by which multiple signals mix
and generate spurious responses. The unique capability of the imaging receiver
system is the use of optics to"see" upconverted RF signals much like the eye or
a camera sees visible light: sources of RF energy within its field of view
produce distinct spots on an image plane or camera sensor, whereupon these spots
can be detected separately, minimizing intermixing. This approach affords
advantages in speed, complexity, linearity, and also adds new capabilities such
as real-time direction finding, tracking, and processing of multiple signal
sources. The imaging receiver system will offer increased capacity in wireless
networks, while also improving performance and reducing infrastructure cost. The
same enabling technology will also provide benefits in transportation and
search/rescue operations, allowing navigation in obscurants like fog, smoke, and
sand. Likewise, security checkpoints will be able to screen persons and vehicles
passively at a distance, enhancing both security and convenience. The research
effort will investigate the limits and optimize the performance potential of
such imaging receiver systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The photonic imaging
receiver is a novel type of phased array receiver that uses the coherent
properties of frequency upconversion in optical modulators to detect radio-
frequency (RF) signals, and simple free-space optics to perform signal
correlations between array elements, which are conventionally performed
computationally after signals are detected and digitized. The optical
upconversion process offers broad bandwidth, from UHF to millimeter-wave. Free-
space optical processing enables signals coming from different sources to be
spatially separated prior to detection, minimizing intermodulation and
dramatically improving spur-free dynamic range (SFDR). It also provides the
array gain of a phased array receiver, but with the advantage of forming all
beams simultaneously. The recovery of data that has been modulated onto detected
RF carriers is enabled by the use of a widely tunable optical local oscillator
that is mixed with the upconverted signal on a photodiode. The foundation of the
technical approach has been proven in the context of passive millimeter-wave
imaging. This research program will explore the fundamental limitations of the
approach in a broad and general sense, but will primarily focus on extending the
utility of the approach toward ultra-wideband wireless communications, enhancing
capacity by enabling spectrum reuse through spatial division multiple access. It
will also investigate a novel concept in wideband systems, namely scale
invariance, which seeks to replace conventional Fourier (time-frequency) domain
formalism, in which the basis functions used for carrying information are
continuous-wave (CW) carriers, with a new formalism based not on time-harmonic
CW carriers but rather scale-invariant functions, which are naturally suited to
applications with extremely broad bandwidth.