* 1509754
* Collaborative Research:  Arrays, Analog RF 2-D Filters, and Nanostructured Multiferroic Antennas for MM-wave OAM-Multiplexed Wireless Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Habarakada Madanayake, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 305,994.00

Wireless radio frequency (RF) communication has relied on encoding information
in the amplitudes and phases of waves that have patterns analogous to the
concentric circular ripples produced by dropping a stone into a pond. Radio
waves that are said to carry non-zero Orbital Angular Momentum (OAM) are more
like the swirling vortices that develop as water drains from a sink. The OAM
property of these vortex waves provides an additional dimension for transmitting
information. This research will investigate antenna array analog filtering
methods that can extract the OAM information from a received signal despite the
presence of electromagnetic interference and noise. Mathematical filter design
techniques, founded on topology and multi-dimensional signal processing, will be
realized using complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) based recursive
filters, which will enable high-frequency, continuous-time data extraction.
Circuit theory will be created for use in designing RF vortex wave array
processors that have multi-GHz bandwidth for challenging realizations in the
microwave and millimeter-wave range. This work provides a new technique for
exploiting an unused design dimension. Apart from providing communications
engineers with a new means of physically realizing OAM-multiplexing, the results
of this effort might offer paradigm-changing solutions for improving imaging and
encryption technologies. Such technologies could impact medical,
telecommunications, and defense industries as well as radio astronomy and
atmospheric science. This knowledge will be distributed through outreach
activitie at conferences and meetings. The project includes a female PI and will
involve participation from underrepresented groups. There will be summer STEM
workshops for high-school girls at both the University of Akron and the
University of Texas at Dallas. Lab open houses will educate the public of the
possible merits of this project for future wireless
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vortex modes are orthogonal to each other despite
occupying the same carrier frequency and bandwidth, allowing independent
encoding of information. OAM-multiplexing allows encoding with overlapped radio
bandwidth. The project explores array-processing schemes for electronically
tuning onto desired vortex modes using array processing and analog RF integrated
circuits (ICs). Filter design techniques founded on curvilinear multi-
dimensional signal processing are proposed for vortex-wave array processing
using recursive filters, leading to high frequency continuous-time RF CMOS
realizations. Circuit theory will be created for use in designing RF vortex wave
array processors that have multi-GHz bandwidth for challenging realizations in
the microwave and millimeter-wave range. Design methodologies and techniques for
analog realizations will result from theoretical analysis, circuit synthesis,
simulation and modeling of the vortex signal processors. To circumvent the
problem of scattering of incoming signals, the project explores novel
subwavelength antennas that minimize radio wave reflections by virtue of their
smallness and the fact that the characteristic impedance of the antenna material
will be engineered so as to achieve impedance matching with free space. This
work will take advantage of the cross-coupled electric, magnetic and acoustic
properties of magnetoelectric multiferroic materials (to be realized using
polymer nanocomposites) to drastically enhance the performance of electrically
small antennas. Conversion between electromagnetic and acoustic energy is
advantageous because a signal of a particular frequency will have a much shorter
acoustic wavelength than that of a radio wave.