* 1509557
* Collaborative Research: Prediction and Model Selection for New Challenging Problems with Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Thuan Nguyen, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 102,185.00

Mixed model prediction, that is, prediction based on a class of statistical
models known as mixed effects models, has a fairly long history. The traditional
fields of applications have included genetics, agriculture, education, and
surveys. Nowadays, new and challenging problems have emerged from such fields as
business and health sciences, in addition to the traditional fields, to which
methods of mixed model prediction are potentially applicable, but not without
further methodology and computational developments. Some of these problems occur
when interest is at subject level, such as personalized medicine, or (small)
sub-population level, such as small communities, rather than at large population
level. In such cases, it is possible to make substantial gains in prediction
accuracy by identifying a class that a new subject belongs to. Other challenging
problems occur when applying existing model search strategies in situations of
incomplete or missing data, in model search or selection when prediction is of
primary interest, and in making statistical inference based on the result of
model search or selection. This collaborative research project aims at solving
these challenging problems in prediction and model selection in situations of
complex data, such as incomplete or missing data, and data that are correlated
due to presence of random effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative
research project the PIs develop a novel statistical method, called classified
mixed model prediction, to identify the subject class. This way, the new subject
is associated with a random effect corresponding to the same class in the
training data, so that the mixed model prediction method can be used to make the
best prediction. Furthermore, the PIs develop a recently proposed method, called
E-MS algorithm, for model selection in the presence of incomplete or missing
data. The PIs also develop an idea called predictive model selection by deriving
a predictive measure of lack-of-fit, and combining this measure with a recently
developed class of strategies of model selection, called the fence methods.
Finally, the PIs develop a unified Jackknife method to accurately assess
uncertainty in mixed model analysis after model selection. Theories will be
established for these new methods, and their performance and potential gains
through extensive Monte-Carlo simulations will be studied. The new methods will
be implemented in the R language/environment for statistical computing and
graphics. All of the developed methodologies will be applied and tested in a
number of applications via a series of close collaborations with experts who
will provide access to the data and also guidance in interpretation and
dissemination of findings. The fields of applications include genetics, health
and medicine, agriculture, education, business and economy. The research project
will also promote teaching, training and learning that involve under-represented
groups, and build research networks between our institutions.