* 1509599
* Graphene Thermoelectric THz Direct and Heterodyne Detectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Sigfrid Yngvesson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 367,700.00

Detection of terahertz or THz radiation, the electromagnetic waves with
frequencies in-between that of microwaves and infrared light, is useful for a
wide range of applications, including investigating the formation and evolution
of stars and galaxies in the universe, analyzing the thickness of coatings on
pills and tablets in the pharmaceutical industry, distinguishing cancer cells
from healthy tissues, spotting manufacturing flaws for non-destructive quality-
control analysis, identifying concealed objects under clothing, and sniffing out
explosives and illegal drugs remotely. A long-standing objective of THz
technology research has been to develop a multi-pixel THz "camera" that can
produce images of the THz radiation from an object, similar to the commonly-used
digital cameras that take pictures with visible light. Because of the limited
sensitivity and speed for typical room temperature devices, THz imaging
presently requires the use of a high power, coherent, THz illumination source.
Meticulously engineered THz detectors can reach high sensitivity and fast speed.
However such devices typically need to be cooled down to cryogenic temperatures.
Here graphene, a single atomic sheet of carbon atoms, will be used to make
compact and high performance THz detectors operating at room temperature.
Specifically graphene will be processed into a thermocouple that can rapidly and
efficiently sense the heating effects due to THz radiation absorption. Fully
optimized devices from the project are expected to reach a performance
equivalent to existing systems that have to be cooled down with liquid helium,
paving way for developing a compact room temperature THz camera that can record
thermal images of the environment without the need for an intense THz light
source. This research project will provide a unique inter-disciplinary
scientific education and training program in two dimensional materials, nano
science, technology and engineering, optics, THz instrumentation and condensed
matter physics to graduate, undergraduate and high school students from diverse
socio-economic backgrounds and under-represented communities.

Recent intense electrical and optical studies of graphene have pushed the
material to the forefront of THz research due to the atomically thin crystal's
high mobility, weak electron-phonon coupling, tunable broadband optical response
and minute specific heat. The proposed research seeks to take advantage of these
unique properties and fabricate high quality graphene-boron nitride atomic
stacks to detect THz radiation through a thermoelectric mechanism: THz radiation
heats up electrons in graphene while keeping the lattice in thermal equilibrium
with the environment; the diffusion of hot electrons creates a temperature
gradient which, in a device with broken mirror symmetry, generates a
thermoelectric voltage signal. This detection mechanism can effectively
circumvent performance roll off at high THz frequencies, commonly encountered in
gallium arsenide Schottky barrier diode and semiconductor plasmon detectors, and
provide very fast response due to graphene?s small electron heat capacity. The
THz detectors will be coupled to the incoming radiation through an integrated
circuit antenna and a silicon lens. The project will develop: 1. graphene
thermoelectric direct detectors with high responsivity, fast speed and low noise
equivalent power; 2. graphene thermoelectric heterodyne detectors reaching high
sensitivity with low local oscillator power requirement and room temperature
operation. The potential for employing the heterodyne detectors in future THz
array imagers will be evaluated. In addition to potential applications, the
results are expected to provide key information to elucidate the underlying
mechanism of the relevant physical processes, including the speed of the
thermoelectric process, generation and relaxation of hot electrons, as well as
the impacts of the charge density and impedance profile on the thermoelectric
voltage.