* 1509105
* App Maker Pro (AMP): Motivating STEM Study through App Development
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2015,03/31/2019
* Ashish Amresh, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,199,910.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by producing
empirical findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about
which models and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely
to increase capacity in the STEM and STEM cognate intensive workforce of the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project AMP (App Maker Pro), a partnership between
Arizona State University and the Chandler, Higley, Mesa, and Phoenix, Arizona
public schools, will gauge the effectiveness of a design village (community)
program on the technology interests and talents of high school students. The
teachers will enhance their technology expertise and knowledge of applications
of technology, as a way to increase the number of STEM majors. In design
villages, teams of high school students and high school STEM teachers will study
existing apps, and then develop (or modify existing) apps, including those
focusing on games, and architectural designs, that address problems in the
various STEM and related fields, as for example, city planning, eco-friendly
construction, education, finance, nutrition/fitness/healthcare, and travel. The
AMP approach, with its design villages of scientists and industry experts,
teachers and students, who collaborate to identify and address challenging
problems in STEM fields through development of apps that will be immediately
useful by the public, not only increase the number of high school students well-
prepared for post-secondary education in STEM fields, but may also prove to be a
tool for recruiting high school graduates into STEM fields. AMP products,
including curricula for effective after-school AMP programs facilitate
replication of this strategy nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The app and
software design program will follow an informal agile development methodology
which moves through rapid-cycle iteration from prototyping to intermediate to
final versions of the requirements, design specifications, implementation and
validation. After increasing their own expertise in design and development,
teams of teachers and high school students will create and conduct after-school
AMP programs for other students and teachers in their schools. Design villages
will be conducted and led by university and industry scientists, assisted by
undergraduate software design and programming majors. Each design village will
consist of 10 teams of 5 villagers (3 students and 2 teachers). Over the course
of the project, three design villages will be conducted, involving 90 high
school students, 60 high school teachers, and from 15 to 45 mentors. Evaluation
will focus on both students and teachers. Major goals will include: 1) Increase
in student interest in and commitment to study STEM subjects in high school; 2)
Increase in the number of students who enroll in and persist in STEM programs in
education settings beyond high school; 3) Increase in teacher interest in and
commitment to use of software development as a vehicle for engaging students in
solving real-world problems; and 4) Increase in teachers' talents to
successfully plan and offer software design and app development courses for
after-school or in-school programs. Results from the evaluation will add to
knowledge about motivation for student course and program selection and career
choice, and professional development approaches that enhance teacher technology
talents and knowledge of STEM careers.