* 1509615
* High-Efficiency Wireless Transmitters Employing RF Pulse-Width Modulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Ranjit Gharpurey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 294,993.00

High-Efficiency Wireless Transmitters Employing RF Pulse-Width
Modulation&lt;br/&gt;Ranjit Gharpurey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growth in
infrastructure for wireless systems such as cellular telephony and wireless
local area networks (WLAN), and the widespread availability of communication
devices, has had a profound impact on multiple aspects of modern life over the
recent decades. Examples of this include commerce, entertainment, healthcare,
navigation, safety and security, social-media, transportation and workspace
productivity, in addition to basic person-to-person communication. In the
foreseeable future, the emergence of applications driven by the "internet-of-
things", wherein a significantly larger number of devices, such as household and
industrial appliances, will require wireless connectivity, will place even
greater demands on the wireless infrastructure. Power efficiency of
communication links, and compatibility with technologies such as advanced
semiconductor processes that enable miniaturization and low-cost deployment,
will be critical to future proliferation of wireless systems. Efficiency is
important in both mobile and stationary devices for minimizing energy wastage.
With potentially billions of wireless communication devices being deployed over
the coming years, the need for efficient operation is in fact, fundamental.
Power efficiency is also critical in mobile devices since it directly impacts
the available operating time of the device. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will investigate design techniques for significantly enhancing the efficiency of
wireless communication transmitters through innovative architectures that
leverage advanced Complementary Metal "Oxide" Semiconductor (CMOS) processes.
The research will also include an investigation of transmitter architectures
that can be easily reconfigured to operate in different end environments, and on
techniques that reduce the spurious interference generated by transmitters, that
can degrade the performance of other devices. &lt;br/&gt;A key part of the
proposed research will be an investigation of Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM)
signaling schemes, as applied to the problem of wireless transmitters.
Techniques that reduce noise in the transmitter spectrum will be explored. To
avoid the noise caused by quantization in the time-domain, analog-PWM techniques
will be investigated. Techniques for efficient generation of PWM directly at the
desired RF band without the need for frequency upconversion will be employed.
This will help reduce the out-of-band spurs that can be a significant limitation
in upconverted baseband PWM due to co-existence considerations. The use of
phase-locked loop (PLL) based PWM generator, which allows for generation of
high-speed analog PWM will be studied. The use of efficient class-D output
stages to drive output loads over broad bandwidths with minimal reconfiguration
will be investigated. Such transmitters can be an enabler for techniques such as
channel-bonding, wherein data rates can be increased multiple-fold by combining
data streams that are transmitted over multiple bands concurrently. A practical
design to validate and verify the proposed circuit techniques will be
implemented in a modern CMOS technology. A practical wireless system, such as
4G-LTE will be employed for this investigation. The work will form the core of
the doctoral research of one graduate student researcher, who will gain
expertise in theoretical, design-related and experimental aspects to the design
of wireless transmitters.