* 1509933
* UNS: Targeted saturated fatty acids synthesis by microbial biohydrogenation and its superior extraction from microalgae biomass through selective fermentation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Bruce Rittmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,443.00

PI Name: Bruce E. Rittmann&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1509933&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microalgae are single-celled photosynthetic
organisms that grow on atmospheric carbon dioxide, sunlight, and dissolved
mineral nutrients. Under the proper conditions, microalgae also produce fatty
acids stored as lipids, which can be readily converted to biofuel such as
biodiesel. This proposed research will explore a new process called selective
fermentation to address two major roadblocks facing the continued commercial
development algal biofuel production processes: safe and efficient extraction of
the lipids, and beneficial use of the non-lipid biomass. Selective fermentation
involves the conversion of carbohydrate and protein fractions of microalgae
biomass to short-chain fatty acids while leaving the lipid fraction intact and
more easily available for extraction by non-toxic solvents. This research has
the potential to improve biofuel yield from algal biomass and reduce waste,
thereby increasing efficiency and promoting sustainability of algal biofuel
production processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of liquid
transportation fuels from microalgae faces many challenges, including the safe
and efficient extraction of lipids, and in the beneficial use of the non-lipid
components in the biomass. This project will study the potential of selective
fermentation to simultaneously address these two challenges. In the proposed
selective fermentation process, the carbohydrate and protein fractions of the
microalgal biomass are fermented to short-chain fatty acids, while the existing
lipid fraction is conserved in a form that is more readily extracted from the
non-fermented biomass. To increase the rate and extent of carbohydrate and
protein fermentation, the selective fermentation process will be carried out in
the anode chamber of a microbial electrolysis cell (MEC), which produces
hydrogen gas at the cathode, consumes the fermentation products, and promotes
bio-hydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids to saturated fatty acids with
higher fuel quality. Mathematical models will be developed to link the key
biochemical, microecological, and electrochemical mechanisms to improve
fundamental understanding of the interactions of these processes in the overall
system, and will enable future techno-economic and life-cycle analysis of the
process. The education aspects of this project will advance the development of a
green workforce by involving students from under-represented groups at a local
community college in year-round research experiences, and by supporting a high
school teacher and student in paired summer internships.