* 1509578
* Microresonator Frequency Combs as Coherent Transceiver Sources for Multi-Tb/s Optical Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Minghao Qi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2018
* USD 362,000.00

Title: Microresonator Optical Frequency Combs as Coherent Transceiver Sources
for Ultrahigh Speed Lightwave Communications

General, nontechnical description:

Fiber optics is the key transmission technology for high-speed internet and as
such has a tremendous impact on society. This proposal seeks to replace large
arrays of lasers commonly used to provide multiple data channels in fiber
systems with a single nanophotonic device known as an optical microresonator.
Under appropriate conditions the microresonator can generate a multiplicity of
precisely evenly spaced optical frequencies termed a frequency comb. Each of the
frequencies can be used to carry independent data channels over the optical
fiber, much as different radio frequencies are used to carry different channels
in radio transmission. By replacing the large array of lasers, the proposed
microresonator-based light source can potentially reduce cost and complexity,
while opening up new opportunities based on the precision of the frequency grid
generated. Advances in this novel light source may also help move a variety of
other applications out of the laboratory, including high precision time transfer
for advanced navigation, environmental sensing, and precision radar. This
research project will support two graduate students and should provide
outstanding opportunities for broad training in areas of cutting-edge
technology. An international collaboration with an advanced optical
communications laboratory in Sweden is proposed in order to characterize the
performance of the developed devices for state-of-the-art lightwave
communications. The proposed collaboration should enhance student training by
providing them with opportunity for international collaboration, both in hosting
visiting researchers at Purdue and in gaining experience in an advanced
communications laboratory abroad.

Technical description

Optical frequency combs, in which a multiplicity of equally spaced optical
frequencies is generated via nonlinear wave mixing in high quality factor
microresonators excited by a single frequency laser, are the subject of intense
research. This proposal seeks to advance the state-of-the-art in microresonator
frequency combs, or simply "micro-combs," in directions relevant to their
application in coherent multiwavelength optical communications supporting
transmission rates of Tb/s (1012 bit/s) and above. In particular, this projects
aims for the first time to realize a frequency matched set of micro-comb chips
that can function as a transceiver pair, one at the transmitter of an optical
communications system, the other at the receiver. In order to test micro-comb
performance in a modern communications testbed and demonstrate high bit rate,
multiwavelength fiber transmission, collaboration with researchers at the
Chalmers University of Technology Fiber-Optic Communication Laboratory is
proposed. The collaboration between Purdue (micro-combs) and Chalmers (fiber
communications) brings together expertise and facilities that are difficult to
find at any single institution, giving potential for significant advances. The
work proposed breaks new ground both in micro-comb development and in
application to advanced communications. In terms of micro-combs, most work
focuses on devices characterized by anomalous group velocity dispersion, for
which a well-known instability can initiate comb formation. However,
interactions between transverse modes of the waveguides utilized often hinders
formation of coherent, low noise combs. Here an alternate approach, which relies
on devices formed from normal dispersion waveguides and exploiting different
comb generation physics, is proposed. Recent work at Purdue has shown that for
such devices, mode interactions can be beneficial in initiating combs and
steering them to coherence. A novel microresonator structure which uses thermo-
optic heaters to control mode interactions and facilitate comb initiation is
proposed. The thermo-optic heaters also enable frequency tuning of the comb; the
current proposal will seek to obtain detailed understanding. By developing
micro-combs that can be tuned and matched in frequency, the project seeks to
demonstrate for the first time micro-combs functioning as a coherent transceiver
pair for communications at aggregate rates exceeding 1 Tb/s.