* 1509094
* Computational design and modeling of topological insulator-based heterostructures for spin-orbitronics and skyrmionics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Branislav Nikolic, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2019
* USD 320,000.00

Spintronics, which explores phenomena intertwining spin and charge carried by an
electron, has exhibited a remarkable ability to re-energize itself in directions
that germinate fertile subfields for basic research aimed at future
applications. The first generation spintronics, which has led to revolutionary
increase in the amount of digital information stored on hard drives, has also
crucially relied on the discovery of new materials and heterostructures. The
next generation spintronics is expected to lead to ultralow power dissipation
memory and logic devices that can be integrated with conventional electronics.
The projects in this proposal will explore emerging resource for such advances
brought about by the special relativistic effects, termed spin-orbit coupling
(SOC), in recently discovered topological insulator (TI) materials. The TIs are
insulating in their bulk, but also host metallic surfaces with strong SOC. The
very recent experiments have demonstrated that when current is injected into
heterostructures where TI is attached to a ferromagnetic (FM) layer,
magnetization dynamics of the FM layer can be ignited with potentially much less
dissipation than in presently available technologies underlying magnetic random
access memory. The interface between TI and FM layers with strong SOC and broken
inversion symmetry could also generate swirling spin texture characterized by
nano-scale size, topological stability against defects and impurities, and gyro-
dynamics analogous to that of a charged particle under magnetic field. Using
high performance computing (HPC) simulations to search for optimal combination
of TI and FM materials for these phenomena can significantly shorten time needed
to produce functional devices. Broader impact of the proposed research will,
include training for graduate students in nonequilibrium quantum statistical
mechanics, advanced scientific computing techniques and fundamental
understanding of TI-based heterostructures under nonequilibrium conditions.
Students will interact with the international collaborators. New modeling
software and computational design for high-density data-storage and nonvolatile
memory with ultra-low energy cost manipulation developed under the program will
be available for researchers in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
combination of nonequilibrium Green function theory (NEGF), noncollinear density
functional theory (DFT), and semiclassical Langevin equation techniques, this
research program will develop fundamental understanding of: SO torque; spin
pumping and spin-to-charge conversion; and Gilbert damping and noise effects on
magnetization dynamics in the presence of strong interfacial SOC brought by TIs.
The proposed research will commence with first principles screening of TI/FM
heterostructures in order to identify those with the largest SOC proximity
effect onto the magnetic atoms around the interface or interfacial
Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya interaction that could give rise to skyrmions at room
temperature (all presently known examples of magnetic skyrmions occur below room
temperature). In the second stage, SO torque for most promising heterostructures
will be computed. The SO torque will be used as an input for the stochastic
Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation to study slow dynamics of (classically
described) magnetization or skyrmion spin texture in the presence of fast moving
(quantum-mechanically described) electrons, including damping and nonequilibrium
noise effects generated by them. This research will form the basis for next
generation of ultralow power dissipation memory and logic spintronic devices
based on topological insulators.