* 1509097
* A novel, reliable and sensitive optical detection platform for ovarian cancer.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Daniela Matei, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 383,153.00

Cancer is a deadly disease and costs us half a million American lives every
year. Among many types of cancers, ovarian cancer is a particularly severe
disease because it usually does not present many symptoms and when it does, it
is usually too late. Ovarian cancer, like many other cancers, can theoretically
be detected by sensing certain molecules in the blood sample of a patient. There
are a number of such 'molecular markers' that could be measured. However, most
current platforms are not sensitive enough to detect most of these markers in
blood. Those that are sensitive are highly complicated, unreliable and
expensive. This particular study aims to develop biomolecular detector that is
very sensitive, low cost and capable to performing multiple tests at the same
time very quickly. The prosed platform will have the capability of analyzing how
a cancer patient responds to therapy using a minimally invasive blood test.
Since these tests are relatively simple and cheap as compared to computed
tomography scans and biopsies, the tests can be performed more frequently and
help clinicians quickly see how the patient is responding to therapy and if
necessary, increase the dosage, modify or stop the therapy. In addition, the
platform paves the way to early diagnosis of ovarian cancer and can be adapted
to many other cancers. The proposed study also includes educational activities
that will teach high school students about diffraction and optical phenomenon
that enables the operation of the proposed platform.

The proposed platform integrates three elements: a) immunomagnetic bead-based
separation that concentrates small number of molecules onto a functionalized
biochip surface by capturing rare molecules from large sample volumes, b)
optical diffractometry to detect signals generated by self-assembled bead
gratings, and c) high-speed spinning disk interferometry that interrogates
multiple chips for fast and highly sensitive multiplexing. The study involves
building the system, optimizing its performance via simulations and
experimentation, and testing with three molecular markers of the ovarian cancer
(vascular endothelial growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, basic-
fibroblast growth factor) that are generally difficult to detect using today's
technology and hence have not been extensively studied in the context of ovarian
cancer. The proposed system will detect these markers from the blood samples of
ovarian cancer patients at sub-picomolar concentrations and most importantly,
detect all of them at the same time. Unlike most current biosensing platforms
that usually have one main strength but a lot of shortcomings, the proposed
biomolecular detector system will have the capability of high throughput, high
sensitivity, robustness, archivability of the detection chips for future
analysis, without the need for fluorescence or microscopy.