* 1509712
* Carrier Dynamics in Quantum Dot Solar Cells and Infrared Detectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Mario Dagenais, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 424,434.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Title: "Understanding the enhancement
mechanisms of optical energy conversion efficiency in solar cells based on
confinement by quantum
dots"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Photovoltaic is a technology
that permits the conversion of abundant radiative energy from the sun to
electrical energy which can ultimately be widely distributed using a smart
electrical grid infrastructure. This can be done with a minimum negative impact
on the environment. In spite of being a well-established clean source of energy,
there is a need for improving the present conversion efficiency of Si solar
cells. New materials and new approaches to achieve this goal have emerged. One
appealing approach is based on using different materials with different bandgap
to enhance the conversion efficiency of present solar cells. Another approach is
based on using confined nanostructures, called quantum dots, to convert solar
energy with high efficiency. This latter approach has the advantage of being
simpler and does not require complex growth processes. This might be a very
inexpensive approach to making solar cells. On the other hand, this approach has
not yet demonstrated its potential. Different experimental studies are proposed
with the goal of understanding the potential and limitations of this approach.
The proposed approach involves an effort toward a better understanding of light
absorption in these structures in order to design very efficient solar cells
based on quantum dots. If successful, this project will have a major impact on
clean and efficient energy conversion in this
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Photovoltaic devices based on
p-n junction are the most mature technology for solar-energy harvesting. This
proposal seeks to develop new highly efficient GaAs quantum dot solar cells
based on the intermediate band concept. These cells have the potential of being
as efficient as 3-junction solar cells but at a much lower level of complexity.
The concept of intermediate band solar cells has been with us for more than 15
years. Unfortunately, these solar cells have so far demonstrated a limited
conversion efficiency of 18 % or less. This is in large part related to the fact
that researchers have not been able to demonstrate an intermediate band solar
cell with a well-defined intermediate band Fermi energy, detached from the
conduction band Fermi energy. Some key measurements on intermediate band solar
cells that have not been attempted before are proposed in order to shed light on
this topic. In particular, two-photon measurements using two optical sources of
different wavelengths are proposed to understand if a 2-photon absorption can be
measured and if the process is based on sequential photons absorption or due to
simultaneous two-photon absorption. This will answer the question if
intermediate band solar cells can be realized with well-defined intermediate
band Fermi energy, detached from the conduction band Fermi energy. If
substantially higher efficiencies cannot be reached using the concept of
intermediate band solar cells, implying that the concept is basically flawed,
this needs to be investigated and a final answer has to be provided with a clear
explanation. Additionally, since the physics of these solar cells is similar to
the physics describing photon absorption in IR-detectors, this new understanding
will also lead to a better understanding of the operation of quantum dot
infrared photodetectors (QDIPs). Two quantum dot solar cells will be studied
with different bandgaps to optimize the predicted conversion efficiency of
intermediate band solar cells.