* 1509625
* RAPID: Automatic and Non-intrusive Screening for Potential Viral Disease Carriers
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Guodong Guo, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 11/30/2016
* USD 87,847.00

Viral disease outbreaks such as Ebola epidemic can be a serious concern for the
general public. Many these viral diseases cause a temperature increase in human
body and can be visually detected from infrared images. This project develops an
intelligent system to automatically detect human body temperature for non-
intrusively screening potential viral disease carriers from a crowd. The system
is built on recent advances in computer vision technologies and thermal infrared
sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses an important and
interesting application of computer vision. The research leads to development of
a prototype system that can be deployed in a public pace to automatically
measure human body temperatures from facial images. The research work includes
discovering how to localize the facial features accurately and precisely from
both visible and infrared images for the purpose of accurate measure of body
temperatures and reducing false alarms in screening of potential viral disease
carriers. The key approach utilizes both visible light and infrared spectra to
achieve a robust solution. It can also process multiple people in a crowd non-
intrusively and speed up the screening process. The research in this project can
address the critical need for screening of viral disease carriers, and advance
the study on machine vision algorithms applicable to an important and practical
problem related to public health.