* 1509924
* RUI:  Light-driven biocatalysts for the selective functionalization of substrate C-H bonds
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Lionel Cheruzel, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 394,365.00

Cheruzel, 1509924

This proposal was co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology program,
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences; the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program, Division of Chemistry, and the Biocatalysis program of the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division.

Biocatalysis has emerged as an important environmentally friendly route for the
production of green and sustainable chemicals. Among candidate biocatalysts,
cytochrome P450s are of great interest due to their synthetic potential in the
selective oxidation of unactivated C-H bonds, using molecular dioxygen and two
reducing equivalents. The proposed work will expand the capability of this class
of enzymes for the production of specific chemicals in a sustainable way and
with selectivity not readily obtainable with conventional chemistry. The work
will be done by undergraduate students at San Jose State University (SJSU), a
predominantly undergraduate minority-serving institution located in the heart of
the Silicon Valley. Specifically, this RUI award supports the optimization of
efficient light-driven hybrid P450 biocatalysts. This class of enzyme is,
however, still underused in biotechnological applications due to the requirement
for an electron providing reductase and an expensive NAD(P)H cofactor.
Undergraduate students in the PI?s laboratory have engineered hybrid P450 BM3
biocatalysts, which contain strategically positioned Ru(II)-diimine
photosensitizers capable of delivering the necessary electrons to their active
sites and sustaining photocatalytic activity. This approach circumvents the need
for the redox partner enzymes and the NAD(P)H cofactor. The proposed work will
utilize a three-pronged approach to improve the performance of the light-driven
biocatalysts by 1) expanding the scope of their photocatalytic activity towards
non-natural substrates, 2) enhancing their reusability, stability, and activity
through immobilization, and 3) combining the approach with photoredox catalysis
to expand C-H bond functionalization using visible light excitation.

The proposed research and educational objectives will keep engaging a diverse
group of undergraduate students and teachers while enhancing their educational
experiences at SJSU and beyond. Authentic research experiments will be
integrated into a capstone biochemistry lab course to enrich student learning
and train them for successful future careers in STEM fields. In addition, a
summer workshop will be held for high school teachers to provide hands-on
training and enable the implementation of light-driven experiments in their
high-school classrooms.