* 1509971
* RUI: Double Photoionization to Probe Electron Correlation in Atomic and Molecular Systems with More than Two Electrons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Frank Yip, California Maritime Academy
* Standard Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 07/31/2018
* USD 75,000.00

Some of the simplest objects making up the world as we experience it on a day-
to-day basis are atoms and molecules. These atoms and molecules consist of
nuclei made up of protons and neutrons surrounded by a sea of electrons.
Interactions among atoms and molecules, especially chemical interactions,
involve the motion of the electrons. Exploring the dynamics of this motion,
leading to interactions, has been a major focus of research since the discovery
of quantum mechanics, whose laws allow us to calculate this motion. When an atom
or molecule consists of a large number of electrons, the calculations can only
be approximate and are extremely difficult, while at the same time being
important for understanding aspects of chemistry. This project will focus on
calculating a subset of these interactions. The research will be carried out at
an undergraduate institution, offering the possibility of a true research
experience for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
examine the consequences of correlated electron dynamics of small atoms and
molecules with more than two electrons in order to better understand the
similarities and differences in different target atoms and molecules that result
from having many electrons. Electron correlation is a fundamental phenomena with
great impacts on the behavior and structure of all matter. Many decades of
research towards developing more accurate ways of accounting for the non-
approximated dynamics of electronic motion in even the simplest atoms and
molecules have been focused on bound states (energy levels of atoms, potential
curves of molecules, etc.) but the consequences of this correlation also greatly
impact the resulting double continua when two electrons are ejected from a
target by photons. These correlated electron interactions are fundamental to the
organization and structure of matter at the atomic level and continue to be of
vital importance to study and better understand. Broader consequences of
pursuing more a complete understanding of electron correlation in simple atoms
and molecules with more than two electrons would impact many other fields of
study, including chemistry, atomic and molecular physics, molecular biology, and
material science, to name a few. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the impacts of these fundamental electronic correlations for non-
trivial atoms and molecules with more than two electrons in order to better
understand the ways that the initial and final states of the electrons that
remain bound to the atom or diatomic molecule can affect the two photoejected
electrons leaving the others behind. Theoretical calculations describing these
events from first principles will be applied to targets with many electrons that
continue to interact with the fully correlated electrons before, during and
after the photoionization event. It is hoped that this project can further
elucidate the broader consequences of how all of the electrons bound to an atom
or molecule can affect those that will be moved into the continuum and how
consequences of symmetry and electronic structure impacts outgoing electrons.
Both time-dependent and time-independent approaches will be explored. The work
is closely coupled to kinematically complete experimental investigations of
these systems.