* 1509949
* Collaborative Research: Highly mismatched GaSb-GaAs thin film multijunction solar cells for high efficiency
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Diana Huffaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 219,986.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Rochester Institute of Technology
and University of California Los Angeles propose to demonstrate a highly
mismatched, Sb-based multi-junction solar cell with low defect density and
optimal bandgaps, with efficiency over 50%. A novel growth technique known as
interfacial misfit array will be used to develop the proposed solar cell
devices. These devices would be capable of revolutionary advances in efficiency
and perhaps the eventual possibility of transferring the high efficiency III-V
technology to a low cost Si substrate. The proposed work will significantly
reduce multi-junction solar cell cost and at the same time increase energy
conversion efficiency. As well, the proposed material growth methods can have
potential impact on areas such as detectors, lasers and memory devices. This
work will also support the development of educational activities at multiple
levels. Both graduate and undergraduate students will receive training in
leading-edge materials engineering and device physics. As well, both principle
investigators will be involved in high school student summer mentoring in their
laboratories, through a series of lectures and demonstrations involving the
relationship between materials and solar energy conversion.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The technical aim of this proposal is to gain
access to near optimal band gaps for a five junction solar cells by integrating
Sb-based materials into the lattice matched InGaP2/GaAs technology using the
GaSb interfacial misfit growth technique. Interfacial misfit growth will allow
for the lattice-mismatched growth of high quality GaSb on GaAs without the need
for a complex and growth intensive step-grade buffer layer. Proposed devices
will be comprised of lattice matched (Al)InGaP2, AlGaAs and GaAs as the top
three cells, a single interfacial misfit transition and lattice matched 1.1 eV
AlGaSb and 0.73 eV GaSb as the bottom two cells. Team members have already
demonstrated the interfacial misfit growth of GaSb, which allows them to achieve
the lattice-mismatched growth of high quality materials on GaAs, without the
need for a complex and growth intensive step-grade buffer layer. In the first
year, AlGaSb on GaSb/GaAs templates and InGaP on GaAs substrates along with
required tunnel junctions will be developed, with the aim of understanding of
optical and electrical properties. In the second and third years, the proposed
three junction and five junction solar cells will be developed. All of the steps
will be supported by detailed materials characterization as well as physics-
based device simulations, to optimize the device design and imporve the
predictiave capabilites for Sb-based optoelectronics devices.