* 1509733
* Collaborative Research: OAM photonics: sensing and imaging enabled by orbital angular momentum of light
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mark Siemens, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2018
* USD 262,000.00

Abstract Title: OAM photonics: Sensing and Imaging Enhanced by Orbital Angular
Momentum of Light&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical abstract: The recent
discovery of "twisted light" is very exciting because of the potential
applications ranging from high-resolution biological imaging to increased
bandwidth for communications. Additionally, twisted light carries orbital
angular momentum, which can be used to spin micromachines or can interact with
rotating objects. However, realization of these capabilities has been slowed by
the complicated and expensive techniques for generating twisted light. This
research will address this challenge by demonstrating simple, reliable, and
inexpensive ways to generate, control, and detect light with orbital angular
momentum. Specifically, the researchers propose to use inexpensive and
commercially-available optical fiber to generate tunable twisted light. The
advantages of this simple technique will then be demonstrated by developing
improved sensing and imaging technologies that are enabled with the use of
twisted light. This work has the potential to broadly impact the fields of
engineering, physics and materials science by making twisted light sources and
measurements inexpensive and reliable. Research results will disseminated to
K-12 students, college and graduate students through outreach activities and
research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: Since the
discovery of the orbital angular momentum of light in 1992, numerous high-impact
applications have been suggested, including biological imaging beyond the
diffraction limit and faster communications through multiplexing with orbital
angular momentum channels. However, implementation of these applications has
been slowed by the complicated and expensive methods of generating twisted
light. The proposed research will investigate the controllable manipulation of
orbital angular momentum of light using a simple and elegant approach: multimode
optical fiber. The resulting twisted light sources will be used to demonstrate a
new class of orbital angular momentum-enabled photonics applications, including
sensing and imaging. This research will result in a paradigm shift in research
and application development with twisted light: away from the top-down methods
of custom phase-plates and programmed spatial light modulators, and toward a
bottom-up approach involving careful control of simple optical elements. This
new bottom-up approach represents a dramatic shift in the tools and techniques
for generating light with orbital angular momentum, a second generation of
manipulation that will provide the means for a variety of twist-enabled
photonics applications. New applications of the orbital angular momentum of
light in sensing, super-resolution microscopy, nonlinear optics, and magnetism
will also be demonstrated. The research will have high impact on a number of
fields ranging from physics to engineering to materials science.