* 1509391
* Towards label-free single virus identification with nano-optomechanofluidics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Gaurav Bahl, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 12/31/2020
* USD 361,774.00

PI: Gaurav Bahl, Mechanical Science and Engineering&lt;br/&gt;University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCSS-1509391 &lt;br/&gt;1-
Proposal Title: Towards label-free single virus identification with nano-
optomechanofluidics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2- Brief description of project
goals:&lt;br/&gt;We aim to experimentally demonstrate simultaneous optical and
mechanical sensing of single virus nanoparticles that can permit rapid label-
free identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3- Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3a
Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout history, viral diseases
have inflicted great damage to human populations. Swift identification of a
viral pathogen can enable a rapid healthcare response for arresting major
outbreaks, and even for speedy drug development. This pressing need is
highlighted by outbreaks of H1N1, H5N1, SARS, and Ebolavirus over the last
decade. Simultaneous sensing of optical and mechanical properties of viruses
could permit the rapid identification of individual virus particles without any
chemical tests. This is a new perspective in comparison to existing optical-only
or mechanical-only methods that provide limited information. This proposal
addresses the associated fundamental problems of measurement throughput,
sensitivity, and particle identification by means of a novel nanofluidic opto-
mechanical resonator. Such devices could some day be deployed in the field for
the label-free identification of viral pathogens, and for generating a swift
response by healthcare authorities. In pharmacological studies, these devices
could assist in drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is
fundamentally interdisciplinary and of high value from an educational
perspective. This project provides rich opportunities for the training of
students at all&lt;br/&gt;levels (graduate, undergraduate, high school) at the
intersection of optical physics, solid mechanics, and fluid mechanics, using
advanced experimental tools. The STEM education impact of this work will be
broadened through the development and distribution of educational activities on
the optical measurement of Brownian motion of microparticles. These activities
will be&lt;br/&gt;targeted towards K-12 students at local schools, with wider
distribution through existing on-campus partners. An undergraduate research
assistant will also be recruited for the research and educational efforts with
preference towards underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3b Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, fast label-free techniques for
detecting viral nanoparticles rely on either photonic sensing or on vibrational
mass sensing, but not both, and can only provide limited one-dimensional
information. For instance, mechanical methods primarily operate on the principle
of mass-loading of a resonator and the associated frequency. In this manner, the
mass of a particle can be estimated with extremely high resolution, but size and
density are not obtainable without additional assumptions. Photonic methods, in
contrast, rely on the shift of optical resonance frequency or optical mode
splitting. This provides information on the polarizability, approximate size of
a nanoparticle, but does not permit further identification. As a result, there
remains an ambiguity in the label-free identification of a pathogen (as opposed
to mere detection) without the use of specific antibody binding or chemical
processes. Having both optical and mechanical properties can shed much needed
light on a single virion's size, mass density, and optical density (or
polarizability), and could help narrow down the protein folding and virus
structural properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has multiple objectives
&lt;br/&gt;(1) Elucidate the fundamental limits of sensing single virions with
simultaneous optomechanical measurements using a nano-optomechanofluidic device.
&lt;br/&gt;(2) Develop models of optical as well as mechanical noise sources,
and incorporate the effects of radiation pressure and optomechanical back-
action.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Develop a method of throughput enhancement in mechanical
resonance sensing, by using simultaneous optical information to spatiotemporally
locate the nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Improve the ability to detect and
identify single virus particles, not only based on their optical properties but
also their mass, through the use of nano-optomechanofluidic resonators.