* 1509875
* GOALI: Novel Magnetic Structures for Energy-Efficient Spin-Based Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Arunava Gupta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2020
* USD 422,343.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Spin-based electronics, commonly referred to as spintronics,
exploits the spin of the electron in addition to its charge to provide more
functional and energy-efficient devices. In recent years the concept of spin-
transfer torque has gained much attention since it offers high density in
computer memory and logic devices based on spintonics. However, existing
electronic spin-torque efficiency is low, and, as a result, requires high
current for information storage in devices. This proposal from the university-
industry team at the University of Alabama and IBM Research Center puts forward
an investigation into novel spin-based electronic device structures that
utilizes a potentially extremely efficient means of generating spin-transfer
torque - by spin currents generated by a temperature difference in magnetic
multilayer structures. Understanding the spin transfer properties at the
interfaces and successful demonstration of the proposed concept can lead to
considerable improvement in the energy efficiency of spin-based devices that
will open up new applications. The proposed project requires a multidisciplinary
effort that will make significant contributions to scientific knowledge,
education outreach and infrastructure. Project personnel will play a key role in
several ongoing education and outreach activities related to the proposed
research. These include collaboration with local schools to facilitate
participation by high school students in research, public tours and
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will investigate a
novel spintronic device concept that addresses the issue of high write currents
required for present spin-transfer torque devices. The physical principle behind
the project goals is based on a recent theoretical prediction that outlines a
thermal route of enhancing the spin torque efficiency required to switch an
ultra-thin magnetic layer. The key material is a magnetic insulator which
generates spin waves (or magnons) when thermally excited. The net result is
amplification in the spin-polarized current when the magnons transfer spin
information to the conduction electrons in an adjoining conducting spacer layer.
The proposed thermagnonic method has the potential for achieving one to two
orders-of-magnitude greater quantum yield in spin-transfer torque devices. The
research collaboration will develop fundamentally new knowledge and
understanding of the theoretically predicted thermal spin-torque effect from
magnons generated within oxide-based magnetic insulators. Fundamental
investigations of spin-torque and spin-pumping behavior in candidate
heterostructures shall be undertaken. Ferromagnetic resonance, magneto-optic
techniques, and magnetic microscopy of patterned nanostructures shall elucidate
the thermal spin-transfer torque effect and quantify the thermal-to-spin-current
conversion efficiency. Unique synthetic strategies shall be pursued that exploit
low temperature growth processes for magnetic spinel oxide and garnet films,
which is expected to be crucial for integrating a disparate set of materials.