* 1509420
* Model-based Approach for System-Level Testing and Validation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Ratnesh Kumar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

Modern distributed Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) such as avionics, automotive,
power systems, nuclear reactors, medical devices are safety-critical, requiring
high-degree of dependability and must be carefully tested, validated, and
verified for correctness, safety, security, performance and fault-tolerance. The
project proposes a unified model-based framework offering innovations in
modeling, test generation and validation, error-localization and compositional
verification methods. The importance of model-based approaches to correctness
and robustness of distributed CPS designs is well recognized by industry, and
several efforts are underway in academia and industry. The project will make
additional contributions by identifying and filling some of the gaps/limits of
the current state-of-art. The translation from heterogeneous behavioral models
of distributed CPS components to common unified automata based models shall find
its use in other formal reasoning (e.g., monitoring, model-checking, synthesis,
security analysis). The research outcomes, including supporting software, will
be made available through PI's homepage and publications.

The PI has been developing Model-based approaches for Cyber-Physical Systems--
both design-time (testing and validation) and run-time (monitoring, diagnosis
and control), including testing approach for reactive software developed using
Simulink/Stateflow, and fault-tolerance approach for such reactive software. For
system-wide testing and validation, a system-level modeling language (AADL or
SysML) can formally capture the end-to-end CPS architecture, component
behaviors, requirements, and failure-modes. Also, modeling and analysis tools,
including code-generators and model-checkers, exist. Our contribution will be to
provide new additions on unified system-level modeling, testing and verification
for distributed CPS, supporting new features: (i) Novel approaches for CPS
components modeling capturing implementation imperfections, process randomness,
timing and concurrency features; (ii) Approach to interface and adjoin component
models to obtain an overall model for system-level analysis; (iii) Model-based
system-level testing approach for stochastic dynamical systems introducing
probabilistic guarantees of coverage, and error-localization; (iv) Quantifier
elimination based compositional property verification; (v) Scalable approaches
to reachability analysis in hybrid systems. Specifically, these would be enabled
through (i) A modeling approach for software under hardware constraints of
computing precision and delays to enable an early and cost-efficient processor-
in-the-loop testing/verification; (ii) For system-level testing/verification, a
unified components-based concurrent system modeling in form of communicating
Input-Output Stochastic Hybrid Automata, capable of capturing timing issues
(delays, drifts, multi-rate processing), randomness of physical components, and
concurrency; (iii) Model-based probabilistic approach for system-level testing,
validation and error localization, accounting for uncertainties. (iv)
Compositional verification approach in a component-based design paradigm by
employing quantifier elimination; (v) Novel scalable approaches to reachability
analysis in hybrid and real-time systems using iterative face-lifting and
partitioning, and for real-time systems using mixed integer linear programming
based bounded model-checking.