* 1509653
* Refractory Metal Doped Gallium Oxide Sensors for Extreme Environmental Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Ramana Chintalapalle, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2019
* USD 367,474.00

Proposal # 1509653&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Title: Refractory metal doped gallium
oxide sensors for extreme environment
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, an enormous amount of interest exists in the
research and development of combustion processes for energy harvesting. Recent
analysis shows that by improving coal-based firing/combustion processes in power
plants, a cost saving of up to $409 million a year can be achieved. However, in
order for this savings and efficiency improvements to occur, sensors and
controls capable of withstanding extreme environments such as high temperatures,
highly corrosive atmospheres, and high pressures are in critical demand. Besides
the economic benefits of reduced costs, controlled combustion can also eliminate
the pollutant emissions that are critically impacting our environment, health
and energy resources. Optimization of the combustion processes in power
generation systems can be achieved by sensing, monitoring and control of oxygen,
which is a measure of the completeness of the process and can lead to enhanced
efficiency and reduced greenhouse gas emissions. However, despite the fact that
there exists a very high demand for advanced sensors for combustion monitoring
and control in power generation systems and automobiles, the existing oxygen
sensing technologies suffer from poor response and recovery times as well as
long-term stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is intended to investigate the high-temperature oxygen sensors
operational to temperatures greater than 700 degrees Celsius in a corrosive
atmosphere for application in power generation systems. The overall objective of
the research project is to investigate nanostructured gallium oxide (Ga2O3)
based sensors for oxygen sensing, where we propose to conduct in-depth
exploration of the role of refractory metals (RM) for doping the gallium oxide
to enhance the sensitivity, selectivity, stability (3S) criteria) and
reliability of such sensors while at the same time keeping device cost
economical. The ultimate objective is to design oxygen sensors that combine
rapid response, criteria, reliability, and robustness at extreme environments.
Specifically, we will focus on engineering the nanostructured Ga2O3 with
controlled dopants. The project work will be mainly directed towards fabricating
the nanostructured W-Ga2O3, Mo-Ga2O3 and W-Mo-Ga2O3 sensors and gaining a
fundamental understanding of dopant-induced structure-composition-electronic
property changes on the oxygen sensor performance. The emphasis is to understand
changes in the electronic structure of RM-incorporated Ga2O3 sensor as a result
of interaction with oxygen. The obvious goal is to study the chemical reactivity
of W-Ga2O3, Mo-Ga2O3 and W-Mo-Ga2O3 sensors and quantify the changes in
electronic structure so as to derive a structure-property-performance
correlation. The proposed study will provide a better understanding of the
nanoscale phenomena, adsorption/desorption processes at nanoscale, and size-
dependent reactivity to optimize the conditions to enhance the 3S criteria of
the oxygen sensors in addition to response time. The results on the
nanostructured W-Ga2O3, Mo-Ga2O3 and W-Mo-Ga2O3 sensors are expected to offer
exciting opportunities to design and fabricate oxygen sensors with superior
performance compared to the existing ones. The project success will, thus,
potentially transform the sensor technology and will have a substantial impact
on the investigators and students at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP),
a Hispanic serving minority institution.