* 1509188
* Low-Complexity High-Bandwidth Multiport Matching Networks for Coupled Loads
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Patrick Fay, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 399,999.00

Wireless devices that transmit and receive signals usually have antenna elements
as part of their design. These antenna elements need to be "matched" to the
radio-frequency amplifiers they are connected to, much in the way audio speakers
need to be matched to amplifiers to optimize the sound of a music system.
Matching circuits can be complicated when there are many antennas in a compact
device since these antennas interact and couple with each other. Because of this
coupling, any connection with one antenna disturbs the connections with
neighboring antennas. Hence, the problem of connecting amplifiers to antennas
when they are closely spaced requires careful consideration and a systematic
circuit design process. Existing designs tend to be complicated, non-systematic,
and difficult to implement in a compact manner; as a result, much transmitter
power is lost to a poor match. This research effort looks at simple systematic
circuit designs that achieve a good match across a wide range of transmitter
frequencies. Since wireless devices are being asked to operate in many bands
simultaneously and with high data rates, such circuits can yield great
improvements in wireless connectivity in existing frequency bands as well as
next-generation bands where the demands on the number of antennas, data rates
and device performance are expected to be even more extreme. The theory and
experimental validation developed under this effort for low-complexity, high-
bandwidth networks is expected to have significant impact on the performance of
low-cost high-performance devices, with benefit to society at large, including
applications in personal communications and medical telemetry. The effort also
has significant educational benefits since it will train an interdisciplinary
mix of graduate students in topics within communications, circuits, and
microwave engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort advocates the
design and analysis of low-complexity high-bandwidth multiport matching networks
to compensate for coupling in radio-frequency transmitters, receivers, and
circuits. The ideal multiport matching network inserted between independent
sources and coupled loads compensates for the coupling by eliminating both
reflected power and also power transferred from one source through a load to
another source. Among the design limitations of such networks, complexity and
bandwidth are usually the most important, especially for compact wideband
wireless communication devices. These limitations have not been well studied,
and this effort includes an integrated two-pronged exploration of these issues
in microwave and millimeter-wave matching networks. The first prong uses
network-theoretic analyses to explore systematic, unified, design methods that
work for any load structure. The effort also seeks standardized limits against
which network performance in both complexity and bandwidth can be measured. The
second prong couples an experimental program to both validate as well as inform
the modeling choices made in the design and optimization of the matching
networks. Practical issues such as undesired parasitic coupling and
electromagnetic discontinuities in distributed circuit implementations will be
examined. Of particular interest are the microwave (2.4 GHz) and millimeter-wave
(60 GHz) frequencies with both lumped and distributed radio-frequency
components, and an emphasis on simple module layouts. The effort is
transformative because it will offer a comprehensive unified set of metrics,
design criteria, and methodologies for complexity and bandwidth of multiport
matching networks applicable to compact radio-frequency devices.