* 1509633
* Variational Problems and Nonlinear Equations in Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Matthew Gursky, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 197,299.00

The interaction of geometry and analysis dates back to at least the eighteenth
century, and yet continues to be an important and highly active field of
mathematical research. The classical subject of geometry grew out of our desire
to understand certain properties of the physical world such as angles, distances
and properties of certain shapes. Differential geometry was developed to use the
tools of calculus to understand the geometry of curved spaces--for example, the
curvature of space by matter as predicted by general relativity, or the
properties of soap bubbles (which turn out to be related to the equations
describing black holes). In the same way that Descartes realized that plane
geometry can be studied using algebra, so differential geometry can be studied
using techniques from analysis, especially differential equations. The research
in this project involves disparate problems from geometry and mathematical
physics but are united by the role played by mathematical analysis in their
study.

The functional determinant of an elliptic operator is a problem originating in
spectral theory and mathematical physics, and the analysis of the particular
problem the PI considers is a variational problem leading to a fourth order
elliptic equation. The associated Lagrangian is unbounded, and the existence of
solutions and their qualitative properties is highly nontrivial. Similar
equations are used to model the properties of thin films. Another problem the PI
studies concerns the moduli space of Riemannian metrics that are critical points
of functionals given by the integral of quadratic curvature quantities. In work
of the PI with J. Viaclovsky, they constructed new examples of critical points,
but this construction naturally leads to various conjectures about the moduli
space of solutions. An important example of a quadratic curvature functional is
the Weyl functional. Critical points are called Bach-flat metrics, and include
important examples such as self-dual metrics. One moduli space problem the PI
studies is a question of Singer about the linearized problem for self-dual
manifolds of positive scalar curvature.