* 1509377
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Stem Cell-inspired Nanotherapeutics for Regenerative Repair of Elastic Matrix
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Raj Rao, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 10/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Ramamurthi, Anand/ Rao, Raj R &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1508642 / 1509377
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Restoring structurally damaged soft, elastic tissues to a
healthy state is difficult since adult cells are poorly capable of building new
elastic fibers, which allow tissues to stretch and recoil. In this project, the
investigators propose identification and characterization of factors derived
from stem cells towards regenerating and repairing elastic fiber assembly and
structure. Further, the studies aim to deliver factors in a sustained manner
using degradable polymeric particles which are themselves chemically modified to
stimulate new elastic fiber formation and prevent its breakdown. The
investigators will then test the effectiveness of the particles in treating
abdominal aortic aneurysms, a disorder characterized by breakdown of the
structure of the major elastic blood vessel (aorta). In the future, this
platform technology can be extended to treat other non-vascular elastic tissue
types (e.g., lung tissue) in need of structural repair.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop innovative, new approaches
to enable in situ, biomimetic elastic matrix regenerative repair in soft,
elastic tissues structurally compromised by proteolytic injury. The proposed
approach seeks to overcome intrinsically-poor auto-regenerative repair of
disrupted elastic matrix by stable adult cell types. The investigators have
recently shown bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (BM-MSC)-derived smooth muscle
cells (BM-SMCs), but not undifferentiated BM-MSCs, to be significantly more
elastogenic than adult vascular SMCs (healthy, diseased), and their secretions
to stimulate elastic matrix regenerative repair by SMCs of a diseased, matrix
assembly-impaired phenotype. As physical delivery of stem cells faces several
challenges, this project proposes to design and test a stem cell-inspired, but
cell-free regenerative approach to in situ ECM regenerative repair. The approach
is based on sustained, local delivery of BM-SMC secretome components identified
to be necessary and sufficient for pro-elastin regenerative stimulus from novel
polymer nanocarriers that themselves exhibit pro-elastogenic and anti-
proteolytic properties. Through experiments designed to address three specific
aims, the investigators will test hypotheses that a) human BM-MSCs (hBM-MSCs)
can be efficiently differentiated into SMCs (hBM-SMCs) exhibiting distinct,
elastogenicity-determining phenotypic states; b) pro-elastogenic effects of hBM-
SMCs on abdominal aortic aneurysm SMCs are mediated by their secreted trophic
factors (secretome); c) key components of hBM-SMC secretome individually or in
combination are necessary and sufficient for pro-elastogenic and anti-
proteolytic effect; and d) integrating sustained delivery of key hBM-SMC
secretome factor(s) with nanocarriers will augment quantity &amp; quality of
regenerative elastic matrix repair in an ECM-disrupted, 3-D tissue space. The
broad research impact of this project is based on its potential that a novel
nanotherapeutic approach may enable regenerative elastic matrix repair that
recapitulates regenerative effects of SC secretions. Through this project, the
investigators will a) develop educational modules for students at several
educational levels to better understand stem cell- and tissue engineering, and
b) provide unique inter-institutional collaborative training opportunities for
students at Cleveland Clinic and Virginia Commonwealth University. By working
through well-established summer internship and outreach programs at these
institutions, the investigators will develop educational modules that will
benefit high school students, undergraduate students and the general public.
This proposal is co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering Program in the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division, and by
the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research.