* 1509652
* Equivariant Derived Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Michael Hill, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2019
* USD 215,287.00

The project addresses directly the heart of algebraic topology: computing
invariants like numbers, groups, and rings to understand spaces. The goal of
algebraic topology is to systematically build a connection between algebraic
objects like numbers and geometric objects like spaces. This connection allows a
two-way flow of information, with algebraic invariants distinguishing spaces and
topological methods informing algebraic problems. A beautiful example of the
latter is the Goerss-Hopkins-Miller theory of topological modular forms, a way
to encode elliptic curves (a fundamental object in algebraic geometry) in
topological language. This builds new kinds of elliptic curves and highlights
commonalities not visible through ordinary algebra. "Equivariant algebraic
topology" remembers a collection of symmetries inherent in a space as part of
the data, systematically grouping spaces with the same symmetries, and the
numbers and invariants produced must reflect this. Remembering the extra
structure makes richer, but more complicated, computations, and it allows one to
tease apart otherwise interconnected problems. For example, using equivariant
methods, the PI, Hopkins, and Ravenel solved the Kervaire Invariant One problem,
the oldest outstanding problem in algebraic topology with roots dating back to
the 1930s. This in turn gave information about how one can build spaces out of
simpler ones like spheres. This project aims to build on the techniques
developed in the solution, tackling other computational problems in algebra and
topology. In particular, the project seeks to explore the interaction between
the visible equivariance in settings like topological modular forms arising from
underlying algebraic data and the constraints placed by the
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern stable homotopy theory heavily utilizes
the fact that the stable homotopy category behaves like a derived category of
modules. Here the ground ring is not an ordinary ring but rather a ring
spectrum, the sphere spectrum. Work over the last twenty years has described how
to do algebraic geometry directly with commutative ring spectra: the theory of
derived algebraic geometry. Many of the naturally occurring examples arise as
commutative ring spectra with an action of a finite group, so one asks when
there is an underlying equivariant commutative ring spectrum which is
computationally accessible. This is the main focus of this project, a new area
of research called "equivariant derived algebraic geometry". From a
computational perspective, the goal is to understand the interplay between the
homotopy groups of fixed points of a group action on a spectrum and the
underlying homotopy groups of the spectrum. In general, this is a very difficult
problem. One of the most exciting new tools developed to solve the Kervaire
problem is a general slice filtration, a method which directly computes homotopy
groups of fixed points. For Real Landweber exact theories, theories well-rooted
in the underlying algebraic geometry, this is an extremely efficient tool. For
larger groups, computations are tractable but much more mysterious. One of the
goals of the project is to determine when the kinds of spectra arising from
equivariant derived algebraic geometry have slices as nice as those for Real
Landweber exact theories. Equivariant homotopy is also central to the
homotopical approach to algebraic K-theory. Algebraic K groups are also
exceedingly difficult to compute, and even knowing whether or not they are zero
would settle long-standing number theory conjectures. The primary approach in
homotopy is via a tower of spectra, the TR tower, built inductively out of fixed
point spectra for topological Hochschild homology. The new equivariant machinery
provides alternate, simpler construction of topological Hochschild homology,
allowing us to evaluate it on Thom spectra and to build relative versions.