* 1509624
* Using Measurement-based Approach to Model, Predict and Control Large-scale Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Yilu Liu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 289,733.00

The electric power grid is the backbone of all modern societies. With increasing
renewable power generation, it becomes a challenge to operate the already aging
U.S. power grids efficiently and reliably. The 2003 U.S. Northeast/Quebec and
2012 India blackouts have demonstrated the catastrophic consequences of a
massive blackout. However, blackouts such as these could be prevented if the
power system could be monitored and controlled more accurately and timely. The
transformative research proposed in this project could potentially make full
usage of the high-resolution measurement data available in the power grids and
develop a completely new measurement-based approach to steer the power grids
away from large blackouts early on. The proposed project is also coupled with a
strong educational component to engage students from underrepresented groups and
a broad dissemination of research findings.

Based on over ten years of observation of the three major North American grids
and major grids worldwide via synchrophasor measurement, strong linearity of
large-scale power systems has been observed. This observation can also be
verified by the interconnection-level dynamic simulations. No longer constricted
by the habitual belief that the electric power grid is a nonlinear network that
should be always represented by a high-order circuit-based model, this project
proposes an entirely new measurement-based method to model, predict and control
a large-scale interconnected power grid, especially in regard to small-signal
dynamic behaviors.

This project will develop measurement-based power system analysis and control
applications that take full advantage of this underutilized system linearity.
Specifically, the proposed linearity study will characterize the strong
linearity of large-scale power grids, which has been understandably neglected by
the research community, as the first step. The study will analyze the source of
large-scale power grid linearity and re-examine the conventional definition of
small signal. Secondly, this project will construct a linear-structured model
using measurements to predict a large-scale power grid?s dynamic behavior
following a small-signal disturbance. Predicting a power grid's behavior is very
important for large-scale interconnected power systems and this predictive
capability will provide system operators with true look-ahead capabilities.
Thirdly, another novel application of a large-scale power grid?s linearity
involves representing the less-interested areas of a large-scale circuit-based
model with measurement-based equivalent models. This hybrid circuit and
measurement model will easily achieve several orders of magnitudes higher
simulation speed while maintaining acceptable accuracy. Finally and most
importantly, compared to the circuit-based model that cannot be easily updated
frequently, this measurement-derived model could be updated using real-time
streaming measurements and keep track of the continuous change of power grids.
For example, a measurement based oscillation damping controller could be updated
in real time and would be much more accurate and robust, improving the stability
of an interconnected power grid. With more high-resolution measurement data
available, the proposed research will have a direct and immediate impact on how
the U.S. interconnected power system should be modeled, analyzed, and
controlled; and this advanced approach will contribute to the energy security
and efficiency of the U.S. electric power grid infrastructure.