* 1509921
* A Microfluidic Platform for Detecting Circulating Endothelial Cells at the Point-of-Care
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Michael Lustig, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 06/30/2018
* USD 359,957.00

Proposal Title: A Microfluidic Platform for Detecting Circulating Endothelial
Cells at the Point-of-Care&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals: This project
involves developing a point-of-care platform to detect circulating endothelial
cells for diagnosing or monitoring vascular disease or
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract: Circulating endothelial
cells (CECs) are indicators of vascular injury and/or disease. Clinical studies
have shown that individuals with vascular disorders, such as ischemia, vascular
trauma, acute myocardial infarction, sickle-cell anemia, vasculitis, pulmonary
hypertension, and deep-vein thrombosis, have higher levels of CECs than healthy
controls (who had no little to no CECs). Importantly, the number of CECs
strongly correlated with the severity of injury or disease. Thus, CECs have
diagnostic and prognostic importance. Current methods to detect CECs are overall
inadequate, as they lack sensitivity, require a highly trained physician-
scientist to interpret results, and cannot be performed in a physician's office.
This project will develop a microfluidic platform that can detect CECs in
patient blood at the point-of-care, enabling a physician to diagnose and monitor
a patient's vascular disease or injury and also to respond quickly in acute
cases. Beyond the obvious high medical/clinical impact, this project will have
strong societal impact, as workshops will be held to demonstrate to students how
different disciplines in engineering and science can come together to address
real and important problems, just as had done for this medical project, and how
students are capable of both engineering and scientific
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The overarching goal of this
project is to develop a novel label-free microfluidics platform that screens for
circulating endothelial cells (CECs). CECs are indicators of vascular injury
and/or disease and are either shed from the vascular wall (mature CECs) or
recruited from the bone marrow (endothelial progenitor cells or EPCs).
Representing 0.01% to 0.0001% of the total mononuclear cells in peripheral
blood, CECs are challenging to detect. The platform to be developed will utilize
inertial fluid dynamics within a contraction-expansion array (CEA) to isolate
candidate CECs from whole blood based on size. The platform will then screen the
isolated cells using Node-Pore Sensing (NPS) to not only identify CECs from
white blood cells but also to differentiate mature CECs from EPCs based on
specific phenotypic profiles. NPS measures the transit time of a cell as it
interacts (specifically or non-specifically) with antibodies functionalized in a
microfluidic channel that has been segmented by nodes. Specific interactions
between cell-surface receptors and the functionalized antibody retard the cell,
leading to longer transit times and subsequent determination of a particular
surface-marker presence. Overall, having the ability to identify and distinguish
between mature CECs and EPCS in patient blood at the point-of-care would enable
a physician to diagnose and monitor a patient's vascular disease or injury and
also respond quickly in cases such as an acute myocardial
infarction.&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project has three specific
aims:&lt;br/&gt;-Aim 1: To optimize a contraction-expansion array (CEA) device
such that it enriches CECs from whole blood. The CEA device will rely upon
inertial forces to fractionate blood and CECs based on size. The device will be
optimized for 100% recovery of cancer cells.&lt;br/&gt;-Aim 2: To expand the
capabilities of NPS to screen for mature CECs and EPCS. A unique NPS platform
with optimized coding and processing (optimum Barker codes, matched filtering,
sparse deconvolution, linear classifiers, all of which are inspired by radar and
telecommunications theory) will be designed and developed to enable high-
resolution detection and classification of CECs.&lt;br/&gt;-Aim 3: To integrate
the optimized NPS with the CEA device and also include a sorter downstream. The
CEA device with NPS will be integrated onto a single platform, enabling
isolation, analysis, and sorting of CECs from peripheral blood.