* 1509749
* Nonlinear Nano-Optomechanics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Qiang Lin, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this project is to explore the interactions between light and
mechanical motions of micro/nano-photonic devices in the highly nonlinear regime
that exhibits profound nonlinear physics which has not yet been systematically
studied. By engineering micro/nano-photonic structures to produce intriguing
highly nonlinear coupling between light and mechanical motions of the devices,
the PI's group aims to open up a transformative research avenue for processing
information on chip, in both classical and quantum regimes and in both optical
and mechanical domains, that would offer diverse novel optomechanical
functionalities beyond the reach of conventional approaches. The proposed
research is expected to significantly advance the capability and capacity of
nano-optomechanics, photonic information processing, and quantum measurement.
Fundamental research findings and device innovations will be disseminated to the
broader research communities through published papers; the research outcomes
will be also incorporated into the courses offered by the PI at the University
of Rochester. The proposed research would result in training graduate students
and undergraduate students in the diverse interdisciplinary areas of
nanophotonics, optomechanics, and quantum optics. Through the outreach programs,
this project will also help promote the interests and participations of K-12
students, and broaden the participations from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to explore cavity nano-
optomechanics in the highly nonlinear regime that is inaccessible to any current
approach. The gigantic nonlinear optomechanical coupling in the developed nano-
optomechanical structures produces very profound nonlinear optomechanical
dynamics that offers diverse novel functionalities in both classical and quantum
regimes. With strong expertise in both physics and engineering of nanophotonic
and nano-optomechnaical devices, the PI's group will carry out explorative
research to study the intriguing physics of nonlinear optomechanics and to apply
it for probing and engineering mechanical motion and noise characteristics of
nano-optomechnaical systems in the regime inaccessible to conventional
approaches, and for processing photonic signals with performance significantly
beyond current state-of-the-art. The preliminary results have shown great
promise to achieve these goals.