* 1509674
* High Performance Polar Decoders: Algorithm and Hardware Implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Zhiyuan Yan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 308,000.00

Error correction codes provide data reliability against possible errors, and
hence are essential to all digital storage and communication systems. Polar
codes, a recent breakthrough in the theory of error correction codes, are the
first practical error correction codes that are asymptotically optimal in the
sense of channel capacity. Their asymptotically optimal performance and low
error floor make them promising candidates for future storage and communication
systems. However, existing polar decoders suffer from inferior finite length
error performance, long decoding delay, and inefficient hardware
implementations. These issues form important obstacles to the adoption of polar
codes in practice. Jointly addressing these interplaying challenges, the
proposed research is a comprehensive investigation of polar decoders from the
perspectives of error performance, complexity, delay, and hardware
implementation, based on an integrated framework that harnesses the intricate
relation between algorithms, their complexities and delays, and their hardware
implementations.

The proposed research aims to devise new polar decoders that not only achieve
superior error performance but also have reduced delay, low complexities, and
efficient hardware implementations. To this end, the objectives of the proposed
research include: 1) New decoding algorithms for polar codes with improved
performance and reduced complexity and delay; 2) Efficient architectures and
hardware implementations of polar decoders; 3) Analytical, numerical and
experimental performance evaluation of the proposed polar decoders, including a
field-programmable gate array emulation platform.

The proposed research tackles several key open research problems, such as error
performance analysis of symbol-decision polar decoders, how to optimize the
schedule of belief propagation decoding of polar codes, and belief propagation
decoding of polar codes on over-complete factor graphs. The proposed research
also will analytically characterize the error performance of symbol-decision
polar decoders, thereby providing theoretical foundations for their future
applications. The proposed field-programmable gate array emulation platform not
only provides fast performance evaluation of proposed polar decoders, but also
facilitates the selection of the appropriate values for various tradeoff
parameters.

The proposed research is transformative in both theory and practice. The
proposed polar decoding algorithms as well as error performance analysis enrich
the theory of error correction codes. The proposed decoders for polar codes will
lead to better error performance, and have reduced decoding delay and efficient
hardware implementations. These factors enable the adoption of polar codes to a
wide variety of storage and communication systems, such as digital television,
Ethernet, home networking, and Wi-Fi. The integrated design methodology,
techniques, and results of the proposed research can be extrapolated to the
implementation of other advanced algorithms, and hence impact a wide range of
communication and signal processing systems. The integrated education program
strengthens and diversifies the science and engineering workforce, and also
bridges the gap between advanced signal processing algorithms and their
efficient implementations, thus helping to maintain the nation's technological
advantage.