* 1510531
* UNS: U.S.-China: Systems-Based Approaches for Sustainable Steel Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* John Crittenden, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 549,924.00

1510531 &lt;br/&gt;Bras, Bert &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S. - China project
will create a systems-based approach to reducing environmental impacts of
manufacturing. The approach will be centered on design and operation of eco-
industrial parks (EIPs). The methods to be developed focus on systems-based
modeling and analysis in order to understand and manage the complexity of
sustainable manufacturing. The general approach is relevant to a wide variety of
problems at different industrial scales. Thus, this research can help develop
methods and approaches useful in many applications and both the U.S. and China
will benefit from the expected findings in developing more sustainable
economies. The U.S.- China research team will develop this systems-based
approach with tools from plant to market scale in order to (a) improve the
sustainability of manufacturing and (b) understand interactions across scales to
identify synergies and constraints that affect the ability to enhance
sustainability in production of manufactured products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research thrusts will be pursued. Thrust 1 is
focused on the development of systems-based technology solutions at the plant
scale to increase water, energy and material efficiency and reduce environmental
impacts for manufacturing processes. This thrust involves data collection, model
development and visualization of typical manufacturing processes and allows
plant level comparisons of water, energy and material flows between the U.S. and
China. Thrust 2 is focused on developing strategies for transforming
manufacturing plants into eco-industrial parks by means of industrial symbiosis
with other companies. Insights gained from ecological systems organization will
be used to build industrial ecosystems at the eco-industrial park scale to
increase the sustainability and resilience of manufacturing industries. In
Thrust 3, an integrated framework coupling agent-based model and life-cycle
assessment will be developed for evaluating the adoption of the solutions
proposed at the plant and eco-industrial park scales from Thrusts 1 and
2.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A case study of focus is steel manufacturing because of
the potential for significant potential positive environmental benefits.
Reducing the environmental footprint of China's steelmaking directly improves
the competitiveness of goods produced and sold by US companies with parts that
are sourced from China. Focusing on the steel industry will provide immediate
benefit to consumers, industries, and other stakeholders associated with steel
production (which is fundamental to many industrial products), but the general
approach is relevant to a wide variety of problems at different industrial
scales. Traditional process engineering improvements will be considered in
conjunction with the role of steel mills in eco-industrial park settings where
other companies may receive synergistic benefits from process improvements. The
combined effects will be evaluated at the market level using an agent-based
modeling and life-cycle analysis framework. Such a multi-scale approach to
achieving higher degrees of sustainable manufacturing is unique. The team will
have unique cutting-edge access to the Chinese steel industry as well as eco-
industrial parks in China. The insight gained from these Chinese eco-industrial
parks (which are very capital intensive to set up) will be used to develop "best
practices" that will be used to assess the benefits and costs of pursuing such
parks in the U.S. around U.S. steel mills and other manufacturing companies. A
comparison of environmentally sustainable steel manufacturing practices in both
China and the U.S. will be made. Unique insights will be gained by coupling
technology-related production decisions and policies to their effects on the
market and environment by means of the integrated agent-based modeling and life-
cycle analysis framework. The project will evaluate policies from the U.S.
perspective in promoting the environmental sustainability of the Chinese steel
industry. For example, the project will investigate whether the enforcement of
strict environmental regulations for electrical products exported to the U.S.
market will lead to a more environmentally sustainable steel industry in China
or increase product demand from U.S. companies in this market, or both. The
project will capitalize on the opportunity for collaboration between two
different countries with different cultures, as well as different steel
manufacturing technologies and leverage the project to develop new educational
and outreach materials. The combined influence and size of the participating
schools and organizations, and the multidisciplinary team provides a unique
training opportunity. Inclusion of project methods and outcomes in coursework
will have significant impact on the education of future engineers in the U.S.
and China, and enhance their ability to solve complex challenges in
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is co-funded by the Global
Venture Fund (GVF) of NSF's International Science and Engineering section (ISE)
and the CBET/ENG Environmental Sustainability program.