* 1510511
* Multi-Scale Analyses of Microtubule Arrays
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Michael Koonce, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2020
* USD 547,956.00

The interphase microtubule array is a key cellular scaffold that provides
structural support and directs organelle trafficking in nearly all eukaryotic
cells. Its arrangement is fundamentally important for cell secretion, cell
shape, growth, motility, and communication. Although the basic assembly of
microtubules is well studied, very little is understood on how the array itself
is organized. This is particularly important in multinucleated animal cells
where multiple microtubule arrays are present and must maintain spatial
separation so as not to interfere with each other. Establishing how these
microtubule arrays are organized represents a fundamental challenge in
understanding the basic organizational principles of eukaryotic cells. The
preliminary data have identified multiple motor and cross-linker proteins that
interact with microtubules and when deleted, result in broad alterations in
array organization. The research plan is four fold: to understand at the
cellular level where these effector proteins operate, to understand at the
biochemical level how these effector proteins interact and function, to develop
computational models that incorporate these activities and can predict/test
understanding in multiple different scenarios, and to provide robust educational
experiences to stimulate the next generation of scientists. This project will
provide training opportunities for undergraduates recruited from a local
teaching college and through Wadsworth's Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program, will strengthen research ties with neighboring institutions in the
Albany Capitol region, and develop a new working relationship with an expert
computational modeler. The investigator will further initiate a mentoring
activity for postdocs and new investigators that provides a fresh perspective on
career opportunities and pathways in the biological
sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In detail, the investigator will use combinations
of fluorescent reporter fusions and live cell light microscopy to quantitate
protein and organelle distributions in multiple mutant backgrounds. This work
will provide quantitative values and context for relevant protein interactions
in cells. Participants will purify the known effector proteins and develop in
vitro assays to determine specific associations and mechanistic detail on how
they function. Results obtained from these two objectives will be fed into
stochastic agent-based modeling efforts to build simulations that replicate the
live cell results, inform whether the investigators need to consider alternate
strategies and, importantly, enable prediction on how other microtubule arrays
are organized in a broad range of organisms and strategies that are generally
understudied in the biosciences. This project will provide training
opportunities for undergraduates and mentoring activity for postdocs and new
investigators that highlight different career pathways in the biological
sciences.