* 1510612
* UNS: Rapid synthesis of ordered mesoporous materials through microwave processing of cooperatively assembled composites
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Bryan Vogt, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,996.00

1510612-Vogt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesoporous (2-50 nm pore size) materials are
widely used in numerous applications from catalysis to drug delivery to energy
storage and generation. In most of these cases, the connectivity and size of
these pores are critical to their performance. Templated synthetic methods
provide one route to control both of these properties. The typical direct
synthesis scheme for these materials involves the assembly of block copolymers
or surfactants with functional precursors such as sol gel nanoparticles (NPs) or
crystalline NPs. The efficient fabrication of these materials remains
challenging in many cases, especially with regards to complex transition metal
oxides. Even for the synthesis of a common silicate, SBA-15, the standard
process involves 48 hours of hydrothermal synthesis and calcination at 550 Â°C
for 5 hours (with an additional 3 hours for heating and cooling). These lengthy
fabrication processes and energy intensive calcination processes are significant
limitations to material diversity and commercial innovations. Using microwave
reactors can reduce the synthesis time for mesoporous silicates from days to
hours. With the advances in microwave technology for controlling power output,
the full synthesis of ordered mesoporous silicas, including template
degradation, can be performed in a single step in a few hours instead of days.
But there is limited information on how to rationally select precursors and
templates for use in microwave reactions that enable the direct fabrication of
highly functional ordered mesoporous materials in a single step. Here the PI
aims to investigate the utility of microwave methods for the synthesis of a
diverse class of mesoporous materials including metal carbonates and
oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will
elucidate how the morphology of self-assembled ordered mesoporous materials is
impacted by the template and precursor selection and show how microwave
processing enables the formation of mixed metal oxide nanoparticles that are not
possible using conventional methods. The PI hypothesizes that (1) the thermal
stability of the block copolymer template is critical to the final structure of
the mesoporous material, (2) high throughput screening will enable
identification of compositions where ordered mesoporous structure can(not) be
obtained, (3) microwave processing will enable synthesis of compositions not
accessible by conventional paths, and (4) roll-to-roll processing provides a
continuous route to the rapid and scalable fabrication of these materials. To
test these hypotheses, the PI will utilize a systematic series of block
copolymers and metal nitrate-citrate (Fe, Co, Ni, and Mn) chemistry for
precursors to the metal oxides. The conversion of the metal nitrate to metal
oxide and the degradation of the polymer template will be examined using Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and ellipsometry. The reaction kinetics
will be examined as a function of microwave power and contrasted against
conventional thermal methods. The chemical transformations will be correlated
with the structure as elucidated by small angle x-ray scattering, atomic force
microscopy, and x-ray diffraction to provide information on both the atomic
crystal structure and the self-assembled nanostructure. Finally the
electrochemical properties of these materials will be examined to understand how
the structure impacts performance for batteries and supercapacitors based on
these self-assembled materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable, cheap energy is a significant challenge. Energy
generation (solar cells) and storage (batteries and supercapacitors) properties
can be significantly enhanced by exercising control over morphology, porosity,
and interfacial modifications. The understanding garnered through this project
could provide guidelines for improving the properties of these materials that
could be utilized in these applications, which could help the US toward energy
independence. The broader educational impact will involve participation of
underrepresented undergraduate students. Partnerships with the Akron Global
Polymer Academy and St. Vincent St. Mary's high school will include teachers and
high school students in both research and dissemination to a broad audience of
K-12 students, whereby high school students involved in the research will
disseminate to other K-12 students and parents through participation in Science
Fair competitions. The outreach efforts will include graduate students who will
thus have an opportunity to present at less technical levels necessary for
improving overall science literacy.