* 1510717
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Numerical/Experimental Investigation of Solar Chimney Power Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Hermann Fasel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 204,548.00

1510179(Gross) &amp; 1510717(Fasel)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to investigate the fluid dynamics processes that occur in solar
chimney plants, in order to enable their use at a large scale. In solar chimney
power plants, air under a circular collector is heated by the sun. The hot air
rises through a central chimney and the resulting thermal convection drives
turbines at the inflow to the chimney. Large-scale plants could provide
electricity at a competitive cost, but the fluid dynamics involved are not well
understood. Such research in energy generation is of National interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fluid dynamics process that plays a dominant role here
is the radial Rayleigh-Benard-Poiseuille flow. The proposed work is about
understanding of the instabilities for inward and outward radial Rayleigh-
Benard-Poiseuille flow that will advance the science of primary and secondary
instability with convection, but in addition, this understanding can help the
informed design of solar chimney power plants. As part of this research project
the flow instabilities governing laminar, transitional, and turbulent inward
radial Rayleigh-Benard-Poiseuille flow will be explored. Towards this end,
computer simulations will be carried out for investigating the primary and
secondary instabilities and their role in the evolution and dynamics of flow
structures that affect both heat transfer and streamwise pressure drop in the
collector. For the laminar and transitional regime, the simulation strategies
will be validated by experiments using scientifically instrumented scaled solar
chimney models. Once validated, the Reynolds number of the simulations will be
increased to investigate the instabilities of the turbulent flow in full-size
solar chimney collectors. Both the University of Arizona and New Mexico State
University have a large body of Hispanic and Native American students who can
form a diverse pool of candidate students who will work in this research. The
project will allow the continuation of an already established high school
outreach program. In addition, a website will be created to inform the public
about the project, to post daily operating data of the demonstrator, and to
share results with other researchers.