* 1510556
* Group Theoretical, Combinatorial, and Dynamical Aspects of Mapping Class Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dan Margalit, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 259,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1510556, Principal Investigator: Dan Margalit

The main goal of this project is to study surfaces and their symmetries. A
surface is a two-dimensional space, in other words, a two-dimensional version of
the world we live in. Surfaces come in many shapes (for instance the surface of
a ball is different from the surface of a doughnut) and they arise in many
varied contexts, from physics to robotics to data analysis to quantum field
theory. The symmetries of a surface form a beautiful and rich theory that has
been the focus of intense study over the past century. One surprising phenomenon
is that there are combinatorial objects called curve complexes - looking nothing
themselves like a surface - that have the same symmetries as a surface. Many
such objects have been discovered in the past twenty years. The first goal of
this project is to give (essentially) a complete list of such curve complexes.
This will be a capstone in the well-studied theory of symmetries of curve
complexes. The second project is to study a certain centrally important subset
of the set of symmetries of a surface - the so-called Torelli group. These
symmetries are significant because of their strong connections to algebraic
geometry and representation theory. Basic properties of the Torelli group are
unknown, despite the fact that this group has been studied heavily for fifty
years. This project aims to understand the basic finiteness properties of the
Torelli group - for instance finite presentability. This is one of the main open
problems in the theory of surfaces. Using a computer-aided search, new footholds
have been found into this problem. The third project is a proposed algorithm for
quickly computing the basic properties of a single symmetry of a surface. For
instance, this algorithm computes the entropy, which is the amount of mixing
being achieved on the surface. Other such algorithms exist, but ours is much
faster. For instance, using an appropriate notion of size (called word length),
the existing algorithms can handle symmetries of size 30 (or so) and our
algorithm can very easily handle symmetries of size upwards of 30,000. In
conjunction with these projects, the principal investigator will also be
completing a textbook for undergraduates on a related subject, called Office
Hours with a Geometric Group Theorist, and also will continue to run a
professional development workshop for graduate students, the Topology Students
Workshop.

The mapping class group of a surface is the group of homotopy classes of
orientation-preserving homeomorphisms of the surface. Among other things, the
mapping class group encodes the outer automorphism group of the surface
fundamental group, the (orbifold) fundamental group of the moduli space of the
surface, and the isomorphism types of surface bundles over arbitrary spaces. The
mapping class group also has connections to many, many areas of mathematics,
including dynamics, group theory, number theory, quantum field theory,
representation theory, and algebraic geometry, just to name a few. The goals
laid out in this project are threefold: (1) find a general theory for when a
combinatorial, algebraic, or geometric object associated to a surface has the
extended mapping class group as its group of automorphisms; (2) determine the
finiteness properties of the Torelli subgroup of the mapping class group,
specifically whether or not the Torelli group is finitely presented; and (3)
establish a polynomial-time algorithm to compute the conjugacy invariants for a
pseudo-Anosov mapping class. Problem (1) was conceived by Ivanov; with Brendle,
the PI has made substantial progress on this question. Problem (2) is one of the
most important open problems in the theory of mapping class groups. It is a very
hard question going back to the work of Dehn and Nielsen in the 1920s. Bestvina,
Lucarelli, Vogtmann, and the PI are making significant progress by performing a
computer-aided search. Various algorithms for Problem (3) are known, most
notably the Bestvina-Handel algorithm. With Yurttas the PI has a new algorithm
for computing train tracks that works in quadratic time; in practice it is much
quicker than the Bestvina-Handel algorithm (which we conjecture to be doubly
exponential). All three projects address fundamental questions in the theory of
mapping class groups and in all three cases the PI and his collaborators have
already made significant headway. In addition to these research goals, the PI
also proposes to continue work on two major projects that have direct impact on
graduate and undergraduate students. The first is the Topology Students
Workshop, a conference that serves both as a research conference in topology for
graduate students as well as a professional development workshop. The second is
Office Hours with a Geometric Group Theorist, an introductory text on Geometric
Group Theory for undergraduates.