* 1510665
* UNS:  Selection of Granules in Activated Sludge for Nutrient Removal and Phosphorus Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2019
* H.David Stensel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,718.00

1510665 Stensel

This research project merges two major needs in wastewater management, the
recovery and reuse of phosphorus, a nonrenewable essential element for all life,
and the need for nitrogen and phosphorus removal to protect surface water
quality, with a dramatic development in aerobic granular sludge that offers many
advantages over the older more established flocculent activated sludge process.
The research objectives are centered around the evaluation of granular sludge to
be developed in two process design innovations that facilitate enhanced
phosphorus biological removal by retrofitting of existing activated sludge
facilities to granular sludge. The work is transformative in that it is a
totally different approach to improve nutrient removal of conventional
biological process applications while providing a cost effective phosphorus
recovery and a sustainable engineering approach. The project will benefit
society in the area of food production and economics by providing phosphorus
recovery for reuse in an immediate area and to provide a means to slow down the
long-term depletion of phosphorus reserves.

The key research needs are related to process conditions that select for
granular sludge and affect the granular sludge microbial and physical
characteristics. Key specific objectives are as follows: 1) test hypotheses on
how to select and maintain granular enhanced phosphorus biological removal
sludge in the retrofit designs, 2) determine the microbial ecology and long term
integrity of granular sludge produced, 3) determine the effect of the relative
and uncoupled flocculent and granular sludge solids retention times and
dissolved oxygen control strategy on their microbial populations phosphorus and
nitrogen removal abilities, and, 4) determine the rate of phosphorus release and
attainable phosphorus concentration possible in a waste sludge phosphorus
stripping tank. To meet these objectives laboratory reactors will be designed
and operated to simulate a granular sludge system for phosphorus removal only
and the use of granular sludge in an activated sludge biological nutrient
removal system retrofit. Fundamental molecular biology technique will be used to
evaluate the granular sludge microbial populations and microscopic and other
physical test methods will be used to assess the granules size, density and
strength. Process performance data for enhanced phosphorus biological removal,
nitrification, and denitrification will be obtained. The proposed project will
be important for attracting under represented and female students to a career in
engineering with interest in solving important issues of water supply,
environmental protection and resource recovery for the public. The project
through collaboration with an EPA nutrient management center and the Water
Environment Research Foundation will advance new cost effective technology to a
wider audience including design engineers, regulators and utilities. A very
important impact of the project is in providing a greater opportunity for
recovery of phosphorus, a finite and essential element for all life.