* 1510898
* SBIR RAPID:  Plant Bioproduction of Antibodies for the Treatment of Ebola Infection
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Ryan Shepherd, PhylloTech Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will be the development
of genetically engineered tobacco plants that produce antibodies for the
treatment of individuals infected with the Ebola virus. In the current Ebola
outbreak, a new drug was tested in infected patients that is based on a tobacco-
produced Ebola antibody cocktail called ZMapp (Mapp Biopharmaceutical, Inc, San
Diego, CA). Unfortunately, the company's supply of antibody was quickly
depleted, and the manufacturing method was not able to keep up with demand. The
technological innovation in this proposal is the targeted production of
antibodies within the gland cells of the tobacco leaf surface structures called
glandular secreting trichomes. The research objectives will be to demonstrate
the secretion of antibodies to the Ebola virus from trichome glands. The goal is
to generate a line of N. tabacum plants that is optimized for antibody
production in plant trichomes to provide an urgently needed biomanufacturing
platform for the large-scale production of antibodies that may be used in the
treatment of Ebola infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR RAPID project
proposes to use a recently developed plant-based biomanufacturing system to
scale-up the production of antibodies to the Ebola virus for use as a
therapeutic. Mapp Biopharmaceutical has produced a drug based on antibodies to
the Ebola virus produced in a tobacco plant transient gene expression system.
Using this system, they have identified a glycosylated antibody variant
(glycoform) with enhanced antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity. Using glycosyl-
transferase knockout lines of N. benthiamiana and transient expression
strategies, the company utilizes plants to produce glycosylated antibodies that
produce optimal recruitment of natural immune effector cells. Other expression
hosts (Chinese hamster ovary cells, yeast) yield product with reduced potency,
and are not considered suitable alternatives. To recover active antibody with
their current plant expression technology, Mapp Biopharmaceutical must
destructively harvest plants, and isolate antibody from plant tissue
homogenates. Unfortunately, this method has not been able to produce enough
antibodies to satisfy the demand. The proposed method will allow for the
production of antibodies in tobacco plants in large scale. In addition, the
proposed system will use antibody harvesting strategies that do not require
destructive homogenization as the antibodies will be secreted onto the surface
of the leaf, and recovered by washing. The goals of this project are to
demonstrate secretion of Ebola antibodies, and to generate a line of N. tobacum
for optimized antibody glycosylation.