* 1510671
* UNS: Design of stable spontaneous Pickering emulsions by modulating nanoparticles interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2019
* USD 343,871.00

#1510671&lt;br/&gt;Frechette,Joelle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pickering emulsions are
oil-water emulsions stabilized by solid particles. They are important in food
science, consumer products, flotation, oil recovery, and catalysis. As with all
emulsions, mechanical agitation is necessary to create droplets and to bring the
particles to the drop surfaces, and over time coalescence breaks the emulsions.
In standard oil-water emulsions, thermodynamic stability yields clear
suspensions with droplets that are very small and uniformly sized. To date there
is not an equivalent, well-understood, sub-class of Pickering emulsions that are
thermodynamically stable and spontaneous (i.e., form without agitation).
Spontaneous emulsification has only been reported for a limited set of unique
materials. Based on this background, there is an important engineering rationale
to design spontaneous Pickering emulsions: uniform sizes, smaller droplets,
optically accessible clear solutions, long shelf-life, and no need for
agitation. Our overarching objective is to develop the scientific understanding
necessary to design thermodynamically spontaneous, stable, and reversible
Pickering emulsions, with the engineering goal to enable numerous new
technologies based on the their advantageous properties. The design guidelines
obtained will apply to a range of problems, including those with anisotropic or
patchy particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to understand and
manipulate nanoparticle-nanoparticle and nanoparticle-interface interactions to
develop a unique means to create thermodynamically stable, spontaneous, and
reversible Pickering emulsions. To achieve this goal, a better understanding of
the thermodynamics of nanoparticle adsorption at fluid interfaces is needed, and
the role played by particle-particle interactions as well as between a particle
and the interface needs to be elucidated. As a first step, the experimental
systems will be screened via the characterization of the adsorption of
nanoparticles to the fluid interface (partitioning, reversibility, surface
pressure, stability). A thermodynamic model for the formation of spontaneous,
stable, reversible Pickering emulsions based on interaction potentials and
material properties will be developed next. Finally, the model will be validated
by measuring material dependent particle-particle (in bulk and interfacial
phases) and particle-interface interaction potentials. The novelty of the
proposed work lies in the systematic and iterative approach toward extensive
adsorption characterization, rigorous modeling, and unique measurements of
interparticle potentials, which will dovetail to provide: 1) conditions for
reversible equilibrium, 2) material parameters to achieve spontaneous
emulsification, 3) quantitative determination of nanoparticle interactions at
fluid interfaces, and 4) conditions where reversibility cannot be achieved,
either due to metastable configurations at the interface or slow adsorption
kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THe focus on thermodynamic reversibility opens
the door to technologies relying external modulation of adsorption or
emulsification, such as cleanup of oil spills, sensing and detection, or
separation. The work will accelerate the development of technologies based on
Pickering emulsions by increasing shelf-life and by the design of smaller and
optically accessible droplets. Throughout the duration of the project the PIs
will visit an afterschool program weekly and provide mentoring to students as
they engage in STEM design projects, and will introduce a project on emulsions.
Assessment of outcomes will be done via collaboration with the School of
Education and outside consultants. The PIs will also recruit several high school
students and undergraduate students for this project. The PIs will incorporate
the results of this project into two core graduate courses.