* 1510024
* UNS:  Nanowire Growth on inductively heated metal films: new reaction diagnostic and pathways towards roll-to-roll processing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Tobias Hanrath, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 12/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1510024 (Hanrath)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor nano wires (NWs) are
essential building blocks of many emerging nanotechnologies. The technological
impact of NWs ranges from energy technologies, optoelectronics, and new
applications emerging at the intersection of nano- and biotechnology. In the
case of energy storage technologies, silicon nano wires (Si NWs) present one of
the most attractive electrode materials for high-capacity lithium ion batteries
(LIB). Si NWs are also poised to play a key role in emerging solar energy
technologies and have garnered significant interest as electrodes in next-
generation photoelectrochemical cells. Beyond energy technologies, NWs also have
potential as components in a range of emerging optoelectronic and
nanobiotechnologies. Multicolor light emitting diodes (LEDs) have been made
possible by controlling the composition of the NW, for example, GaN, CdS, and
CdSe, for ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared emission. Precise control over
the NW surface functionalization has enabled the fabrication of NW-based
chemical and biosensors, including multiplexed electrical detection of cancer
markers and detection of single viruses. Vertical Si NW electrode arrays have
also been demonstrated as a promising platform to interface with nerve cells to
enable neural prosthetics and studies of neuronal circuits in vivo. To meet the
growing expectations generated by the rapid progress with NW prototypes,
attention in the field is now shifting to the design of scalable and cost-
effective processing methodologies. The scale-up challenge is particularly
prominent in battery applications requiring high production volumes; e.g.; a 85
kWh battery for en electric vehicle would require approximately 40 kg of Si NWs
for the anode. The approach to fabricate NW devices introduced in this proposal
is aimed at advancing that goal. Aside from the technical considerations of NW
growth mechanism and fabrication methods, there are also important environmental
and health aspects to consider. Due to their small size and high mobility NWs
and nanotubes have raised concerns about asbestos-like effects. The NW
processing technology developed in this project grows NW directly on the current
collector metal; this eliminates separate processing of the NW raw material and
mitigates potential exposure steps and facilitates the direct integration into
the desired device structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is based on recent discoveries
in the PI's lab that Si and Ge NWs can be fabricated on resistively and
inductively heated metal surfaces submersed in a fluid precursor environment.
This approach provides an opportunity to study outstanding fundamental
scientific questions concerning the mechanism and rate-determining step of NW
growth. The focus on Si NW growth on Cu films as a model systems is motivated by
the technological importance of Si NWs and the prospect of advancing NW
processing technique to address outstanding challenges concerning scalable
fabrication and device integration. The main objective is to establish the
fundamental engineering principles for NW growth on flexible substrates and to
enable their processing via roll-to-roll processes. The proposed research is
structured along three main aims: to (i) establish the fundamental growth
mechanism of NWs grown on heated metal films, (ii) understand the complex
interplay between reaction kinetics and precursor transport phenomena and (iii)
analyze, design and demonstrate NW growth integrated into a roll-to-roll
process. The innovative character of the proposed work is in applying resistive
and inductive heating of bulk metal foils as a precisely programmable activation
technique to initiate NW growth. The fast dynamic response of the reactor system
presents an opportunity to gain new insights into the fundamental thermodynamics
and kinetics of NW nucleation and growth. The current-voltage and temperature
transients of the heated metal will be investigated as a diagnostic tool to
study the dynamics of NW growth. The versatility of the reactor design could
provide a foundation to spur advances in other areas of nanostructure formation
at heated surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology in this project could have far-reaching
industrial applicability as well as use in medical applications. In addition,the
PI will leverage established connections to K-12 programs to develop interactive
learning modules. The engagement of high school teachers should have effects in
illustrating nano fabrication opportunities and challenges to the next
generation of scientists and engineers. The PI will work with the learning
lending library of the Cornell Center for Materials Research to make the module
freely available to be used in high school science classes nationwide. The
educational activities will integrate scientific discoveries into the
undergraduate and graduate classrooms by creating a new interdisciplinary design
course; this module will provide students with the required skills to conceive,
design, and evaluate the feasibility of new fabrication processes and chemical
products.