* 1510741
* RI: Medium: Machine Learning for Agricultural and Medical Entomology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Eamonn Keogh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,100,000.00

This award will enable a team of computer scientists and entomologists at the
University of California-Riverside to develop sensors and software that will
allow the classification of flying insects. The ability to automatically and
accurately classify flying insects has the potential to have significant impact
human affairs, because insects spread disease, feed on crops and livestock, and
ruin food stores, at a combined annual cost of billions of dollars and
incalculable human suffering.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project is in producing algorithms, devices, and procedures that will
radically expand the ability to conduct insect surveillance. Recent advances in
sensor technology and machine learning and the ongoing revolution in Big Data
are just beginning to enable development of advanced algorithms that will help
usher in a new era of computational entomology. The investigators will build
inexpensive devices that can detect and classify flying insects. For at least
some genera of insects the resulting classification labels will go beyond
species-level to predict sex and physiological states (such as virgin vs. gravid
and newly emerged vs. mature) of individual insects. The investigators will
create computational devices that can determine the origin of selected insects,
and selectively capture targeted insects for downstream molecular diagnostic
analysis. Producing such information will both accelerate basic research in
entomology and will allow more effective vector control. The broader impacts of
the project are inherent in the potential to significantly improve the quality
and volume of insect surveillance, thus allowing more effective Integrated
Vector Management. In the case of mosquitoes, more effective interventions are
known to directly save lives. Resulting algorithms will allow the creation of
systems to provide actionable information on multiple scales, from informing a
policy committee to instructing an agricultural robot to open a valve. The
projects comprehensive educational and outreach activities have already been
piloted on a small scale and include detailed plans to reach out to underserved
communities at the K-12 and college levels.