* 1510015
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Unique binding geometries:  Engineering &amp; Modeling of Sticky Patches on Lipid Nanoparticles for Effective Targeting of Otherwise Untargetable cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Stavroula Sofou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2019
* USD 344,185.00

PI: Sofou, Stavroula / Kevrekidis, Yannis G. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1510015
/ 1510149&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to explore and understand the
behavior of drug-carrying nanoparticles whose surface becomes reorganized and
forms "sticky patches" when they get close to cancer cells. These new binding
geometries have the potential to significantly expand the types of cancer cells
that can be targeted with therapeutic agents. The project combines this
targeting approach with single molecule optical measurements and mathematical
modeling, to understand the mechanisms, and inform the design of optimized
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on promising initial results in
selectively targeting and treating cancer cells using drug-carrying
nanoparticles, the investigators will explore and understand the behavior of
drug-carrying lipid nanoparticles whose surface phase-separates to form "sticky
patches" proximally to tumor cells. The underlying hypotheses are that the
targeting success lies in the dense concentration of the binding ligands on
these patches, and that the transport and binding kinetics of these novel
binding geometries give significantly longer binding times resulting in
internalization. These hypotheses will be addressed through four specific aims,
which include: 1) Using collective measurements, evaluation of the kinetics of
effective cell binding (association), dissociation and internalization processes
of sticky lipid nanoparticles; 2) Using single molecule optical tracking
techniques, evaluation of the lifetime of the nanoparticle-receptor(s) complex,
of the number of nanoparticle-associated receptors that lead to cellular
internalization of the complex, and of potential co-localization of receptors
for each cell-associated nanoparticle; 3) Development, implementation and use of
an experimentally informed general computational tool to test the mechanistic
hypotheses, to evaluate the relative importance of the physical and chemical
attributes of the nanoparticles used, and ultimately to help design them so as
to optimally/selectively target otherwise untargetable cancers; and 4)
Utilization of the mathematical model to optimize the design of sticky lipid
nanoparticles, and to evaluate their efficacy in vitro. The proposed approach
introduces an new geometry for nanoparticles to bind otherwise untargetable
cancer cells, and has the potential to ultimately improve the quality of life of
patients with advanced cancer and extend their life expectancy. Through this
activity the investigators will cross-train one Ph.D. student (at Rutgers) with
focus on physical chemistry and self-assembly of heterogeneous lipid membranes,
and a second Ph.D. student (at Princeton) with focus on multiscale modeling and
experimental biophysics optics. An international collaboration with Applied
Mathematics in Oxford will involve a third PhD student, who will repeatedly
visit Princeton/Rutgers to interact with the PIs. The investigators will
integrate this research in their mentoring of undergraduate students, curriculum
development and expansion of undergraduate programs. High school student
outreach programs already in place will be supported, in addition to the
development and dissemination of educational materials highlighting this
research. This award is co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering Program in the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division; by
Mathematical Sciences through the Mathematical Sciences Innovation Incubator
Program; and by the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences through
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.