* 1510503
* UNS: Exploring the feasibility of plasmonic nanocrystal solar cells utilizing strongly confined radiation.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mikhail Zamkov, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 358,550.00

PI Name: Mikhail Zamkov&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
1510503&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun represents the most abundant potential
source of sustainable energy on earth. Solar cells convert sunlight to
electricity through the use of photovoltaic (PV) materials, which are expensive.
One method to reduce the cost of making PV materials is to cast suspensions of
nano-sized semiconductor crystals called quantum dots into a continuous thin
sheet, a process called solution processing. However, thin-film PV materials
made by this method have a poor trade off with respect to the thickness needed
to provide good solar energy absorption versus good electrical conduction
through the film. To address this issue, the goal of this project is to
introduce another type of nano-sized metal particle into the solution processing
scheme that will improve the power conversion performance of the thin film. This
specially designed metal particle, called a plasmonic particle, exploits a
quantum mechanical principle called confined radiation to improve the light
absorption of the film, leading to potential improvements in the power
conversion efficiency. The educational activities associated with the project
will involve undergraduates in research through the Building Ohio's Sustainable
Energy Future (BOSEF) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solution-based
fabrication of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (quantum dots) into thin-
film photovoltaic (PV) devices offers a route for low-cost manufacture.
Unfortunately, the electrical conductivity in solution-cast semiconductor PV
thin films is poor, requiring exceptionally thin films that cannot fully absorb
the incident light. The overall goal of the proposed research is to fabricate
and study the performance of photovoltaic cells which rely on the near-field
antenna emission of metal nanoparticles to funnel solar energy into the absorber
layer. Theoretically, this type of plasmon radiation can enhance the optical
density of photovoltaic devices beyond the conventional far-field scattering
employed by most plasmonic or photonically-enhanced crystal cells. If
successful, this enhanced absorption layer can fully absorb light at film
thicknesses needed to maintain low conduction losses, leading to enhanced
photovoltaic performance. To enable the photovoltaic conversion of near-field
emission into electric power, plasmonic films will be assembled by doping the
semiconductor nanocrystal solids with electrically-insulated metal nanoparticles
where the far-field emission is suppressed. In this way, the near-field emission
will be harvested by coupling the plasmon radiation directly to resonant
transitions of semiconductor nanocrystals. Photoconductivity and time-resolved
spectroscopy will be used to measure near-field energy conversion into
electrical power. The thermal impact of heat-prone metal nanoparticles will be
alleviated by using a matrix-encapsulation approach, where colloidal
nanocrystals are imbedded into all-inorganic matrices that have tunable
interparticle distances. The proposed research will be conducted in
collaboration with the Wright Center for Photovoltaics Innovation and
Commercialization (PVIC), where students will be trained the industry-grade
equipment and build scientific relationships with industry partners.