* 1510707
* UNS: Robust Superhydrophobic Surfaces for Enhanced Propulsive Performance and Maneuverability at Intermediate Reynolds Number
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2021
* Paul Krueger, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 381,000.00

#1510707&lt;br/&gt;Krueger, Paul S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to improve propulsion by using superhydrophobic surfaces. A surface
is defined as superhydrophobic when water droplets bead on the surface, and the
angle between the drop and the surface is larger than 150 degrees. In cases like
this, one can achieve drag reduction, since water slips on the superhydrophobic
surface, and energy savings can be realized in propulsion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The introduction of apparent slip at the superhydrophobic
surface using gas trapped near the surface by the microtexture of the surface
can lead to drag reduction. However, it is known that such surfaces have their
own challenges, including collapse of the gas film under increased hydrostatic
or dynamic pressure, gradual depletion of the gas film by diffusion, and slip
lengths limited by the spacing of the microtexture features. The proposed effort
seeks to expand the applicability of superhydrophobic surfaces by pressurizing
the gas film, which will allow for robust stabilization of the gas film against
pressure disturbances and diffusion. Pneumatic stabilization has the additional
advantages that changing the gas film pressure will allow mictotextured features
to be spaced further apart, increasing the apparent slip, and dynamic variation
of the pressure will allow for direct control of the surface behavior, including
re-initialization of the gas film. Pneumatically controlled surfaces will be
constructed from polydimethylsiloxane using laser micromachining and soft
lithography techniques and tested on flapping-fin and pulsed-jet propulsion
methods at intermediate Reynolds number (Re) flows. The effect of apparent slip
introduced by the superhydrophobic surfaces on the propulsive performance of
flow fields generated by flapping-fin and pulsed-jet propulsion will be
investigated as a function of Re. The ability to dynamically actuate the gas
film will also be investigated. A secondary outcome would be an improved
technical capability in developing and sustaining superhydrophobic surfaces
broadening the areas of their application to other cases of drag reduction and
self-cleaning surfaces. Activities on undergraduate education through summer
immersion were proposed and a web-based tutorial on mechanical and biological
propulsion will be developed and made available to students and the community.