* 1510332
* UNS:  Spatial and Temporal Variability in CDOM by Optical Remote Sensing: Effects on Water Quality, Water Treatment, and Aquatic Ecosystem Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Leif Olmanson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 438,836.00

1510332 &lt;br/&gt;Hozalski &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissolved organic matter
occurs in all natural waters, and chromophoric dissolved organic matter is the
most abundant fraction in many natural waters, especially in forested watersheds
with wetlands. Dissolved organic matter and chromophoric dissolved organic
matter strongly affects water quality through its ability to mobilize metals and
hydrophobic chemicals, serve as a source of reactive photochemical
intermediates, and control many aquatic ecosystem processes. Dissolved organic
matter has negative effects on production of safe drinking water resulting from
the formation is disinfection by-products in treatment plants. This project will
dramatically improve the state of knowledge on chromophoric dissolved organic
matter by refining procedures to retrieve chromophoric dissolved organic matter
from satellite imagery, using the new (Landsat 8) and forthcoming satellites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the first census-level assessment
of chromophoric dissolved organic matter levels across a large region comprising
three major ecoregions of the Upper Midwest. The goals of this multidisciplinary
project are to leverage the teams optical remote sensing capabilities with
modern field and lab techniques to: (i) dramatically improve understanding of
the distribution, time trends, and environmental factors affecting Dissolved
organic matter and chromophoric dissolved organic matter levels in surface
waters and (ii) advance understanding of their source-dependent characteristics
relevant to their potential to cause water treatment problems. With specific
objectives of the proposed to: (1) develop robust equations to retrieve
chromophoric dissolved organic matter data from satellite imagery and use the
results to develop census-level chromophoric dissolved organic matter data for
all lakes in three Upper Midwest ecoregions; (2) investigate long-term trends in
lake chromophoric dissolved organic matter in the northern US using historical
Landsat imagery; (3) determine relationships between landscape properties,
climate and chromophoric dissolved organic matter levels and characteristics;
and (4) elucidate relationships between dissolved organic matter characteristics
and effects on water treatment. The proposed research will provide educational
benefits for up to six individuals: a postdoctoral researcher, graduate research
assistant, and 2-4 undergraduate students. The PIs will organize workshops for
managers of regional water management agencies and make presentations at state
conferences and meetings of citizen-based lake associations. Project results
will be used to update a heavily used public database of lake water clarity
(http://water.umn.edu) to include the chromophoric dissolved organic matter
census and time-trend data and their relevance to citizens. Additional
enhancements to the web site include a blog and an interactive interface for
citizens to ask questions and share information. Finally, we will explore
several possibilities to permit citizens to gather chromophoric dissolved
organic matter data, including a low-tech color wheel comparator and cellphone
app. Citizen engagement will be a key component of the project.