* 1510216
* Geometry of Deformation and Moduli Spaces of Complex Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Kefeng Liu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 425,997.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1510216, Principal Investigator: Kefeng Liu

Deformation theory, moduli spaces and modular forms are fundamental to many
subjects of mathematics and physics from geometry, topology, algebraic geometry,
number theory to theoretical physics like string theory and cosmology. Many deep
results in mathematics and string theory crucially rely on moduli spaces, which
describe large families of geometric structures within a related geometric
space, which is sometimes larger and less directly defined than the original
geometry. A simple example is the collection of isometry classes of metric
structures on a circle - these are determined by the circumference of the circle
and so correspond to the open line of all positive real numbers; in this example
a deformation would be an expansion or contraction of one circle to another of
larger or smaller circumference. Understanding of deformations and moduli spaces
of projective manifolds from global geometric point of view will reveal deep
connections among geometry, algebra and physics, will have fundamental impacts
in many research fields in mathematics and physics.

The principal investigator will study the geometric and topological structures
of the deformation theory, Teichmuller and moduli spaces of projective
manifolds, and the modularity of certain generating series of the dimension of
the tautological rings on the moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces. More precisely,
the PI will study the following three important problems: (1) using the new
formulas and iteration method discovered by the PI and collaborators to
systemically study global deformation theory and prove deformation invariance of
the dimension of pluricanonical sections of Kahler manifolds as conjectured by
Siu by explicit geometric constructions; (2) proving a conjecture of Griffiths,
which asserts the existence of simultaneous uniformization of all the periods
for a family of projective manifolds; (3) exploring a striking relation
discovered by the PI and Hao Xu between the Ramanujan mock theta-function and
the dimensions of the tautological ring of moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces. In
carrying out the projects the PI will train several young students and
postdoctors to conduct research in these projects through collaboration,
seminars, and lectures.