* 1510192
* Singular Ricci flow, Einstein flow and index theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* John Lott, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 386,269.00

The PI proposes to work on three projects in differential geometry and analysis
on manifolds. These involve both linear and nonlinear aspects of geometric
analysis. Geometric flows, such as those addressed in this proposal, have
applications to many branches of science, including materials science and
cosmology. The research in this proposal will enhance the theoretical
understanding of such flows. The Ricci flow is fundamental in modern geometry.
Most of the work on Ricci flow has been done on smooth Ricci flows or Ricci
flows with surgery. On the other hand, many partial differential equations have
a well-defined class of singular solutions. The proposed work will explore a
remarkable class of singular solutions for the three-dimensional Ricci flow.
Similarly, for many partial differential equations, there are good notions of
weak solutions. Understanding limits of Ricci flow with surgery may shed light
on the problem of developing a good notion of weak Ricci flow. The Einstein flow
is a geometric flow with very different features than parabolic flows. The
proposed research will elucidate some general features of the Einstein flow. The
long-time behavior of vacuum spacetimes is of evident interest in cosmology.
Finding a framework for differential K-theory based on infinite-dimensional
cocycles will lead to new directions in local index theory and the associated
functional analysis. It may also have topological
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three main topics in this
proposal.(1) Singular Ricci flows. In joint work with Kleiner, the PI has shown
that there is a limit of Perelman's Ricci flow with surgery, as the surgery
parameter goes to zero. The PI proposes to study refined properties of such
limits, and more generally of singular Ricci flows.(2) Einstein flow. The
Einstein flow is a flow which describes the long-time behavior of a vacuum
spacetime that has a foliation by constant mean curvature spatial hypersurfaces.
The PI will use techniques from collapsing theory in order to understand the
geometry of the Einstein flow in the collapsing case.(3) Differential K-theory.
Differential K-theory is a topological theory that combines K-theory with
differential forms. In joint work with Gorokhovsky, the PI will construct
infinite-dimensional models of differential K-theory.