* 1510142
* UNS: Investigations on Hydrodynamic and Diffusional-thermal Flamefront Instabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Chung Law, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 05/31/2018
* USD 277,000.00

1510142 (Law)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to better understand how
burning of fuel-air mixture takes place under high-pressure and very turbulent
conditions, similar to those in an engine. The Principal Investigator has
recently developed an experimental method that enables obtaining data with very
high resolutions that was not previously available. The data can help explain
the behavior of combustion and potentially help design energy-efficient
combustion devices. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in
the proposed research and the knowledge gained will be published and taught in
the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is aim to differentiating
the effects due to hydrodynamic and diffusive-thermal instabilities, especially
under high pressures (60-80 atmospheres). Because of the reduced flame thickness
with increasing pressure, hydrodynamic instability is relevant to high-pressure
reciprocating and gas turbine combustion engines. The interest to increase the
compression ratio and thereby combustion efficiency of these engines further
accentuates the preponderance of the hydrodynamics instability. The PI designs
the laminar flame conditions for investigation, but these conditions will
impact, with possible revisions to, the classical turbulent premixed regime
diagram. Newly developed diagnostic tools with high temporal and spatial
resolutions will help to obtain high-quality data that allows validations of the
proposed hypothesis.