* 1510797
* UNS: Deconstructing Complex Flight Aerodynamics by Data-Driven Identification of Low Order Non-linear Motion Models
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Danesh Tafti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2020
* USD 418,876.00

1510797(Tafti)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to investigate the
unsteady flow around the wings of a bat and to uncover the fluid dynamics
phenomena that are responsible for the highly maneuverable flight of bats. Bat
wings are very different than wings of birds and insects, and these differences
allow them to adapt to different flight conditions. Results from the proposed
work could have wide-ranging applications from the design of autonomous flying
vehicles to the development of more efficient turbines for the extraction of
wind or water current energy, addressing a National need in energy
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to study the fluid
dynamics around flexible, flapping membrane-like wings that can provide unique
maneuverability and flight efficiency. Bats can control their wing beat
amplitude and frequency, stroke plane, wing membrane deformation, wing camber,
wing area and aspect ratio in a synthesis of a very complex motion. Much of the
current work in understanding the mechanics of flapping flight is not applicable
for such multi-articulated wing motion and the ensuing unsteady fluid dynamics
observed during bat flight. It is proposed to use flight experiments and
computations to understand the mechanics of bat flight. Flight measurements will
be conducted with live bats using 3D high-resolution cameras in redundant
configurations to generate complete, detailed and accurate motion data of
maneuvering in flight. The images will be analyzed to produce kinematic
descriptions of fixed points located on the bat body. Based on the flight data,
a general and rigorous formulation for deriving low dimensional dynamic models
of flapping flight will be developed. The goal is to identify the low-
dimensional manifolds that characterize the flight dynamics and the induced
forces on the wings. The approach can be viewed as an extension of the proper
orthogonal decomposition (POD) method to consider a wider class of nonlinear,
low-order models of wing motion validated by the resultant unsteady
aerodynamics. The project will actively recruit qualified minority candidates
and leverage this activity through the Virginia Tech, ADVANCEVT program and
minority students from HBCUs and majority Hispanic serving institutions. The PIs
will continue their participation in the VT College of Engineering CEED program
for recruiting and outreach to K-12 women and minorities.