* 1510837
* UNS: Blood rheology and fluid dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Antony Beris, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 384,835.00

The goal of this proposal is to investigate the flow properties of blood. Blood
is a very complex fluid suspension of many ingredients, such as red blood cells,
white blood cells, platelets and several proteins. It is proposed to combine
experiments and theory to discover the correct model for blood that can be used
to predict fluid dynamics phenomena in cases of bleeding or aneurysms, or flow
around atherosclerotic plaques. The economic impact on the US from
cardiovascular disease is about three hundred billion dollars annually. Even a
small improvement in this area can have a very strong impact on the quality of
human life and on the National economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed here
to offer a systematic, multidisciplinary, collaborative, study of the Non-
Newtonian blood rheology that will be based on a combined experimental and
theoretical effort. From the experimental side, nonlinear and time-dependent
rheological experiments are planned on carefully collected and appropriately
physiologically characterized blood samples. The experiments, in addition to the
more traditional ones (such as Large Amplitude Oscillatory Shear, LAOS) involve
new ones (like the superposition of LAOS and steady shear) specifically tailored
to probe those blood flow characteristics that are most pertinent to arterial
pulsatile flow. By systematically varying the frequency and the amplitude of the
imposed deformations, it is proposed to collect a detailed representation for
the blood rheological response that can be used to fully characterize it. From
the theoretical side, particular emphasis will be placed on using the
experimental data to develop thermodynamically consistent models. The models are
then proposed to be used in simulating arterial blood flow behavior, in order to
investigate the impact of the Non-Newtonian blood rheology in blood flow
dynamics, especially under conditions and in situations where the thixotropic
blood flow characteristics are anticipated to play an important role, such as
flow in aneurisms and around atherosclerotic plaques. The proposed experiments
and simulations will lead to the development of demonstration showcases for K-12
students that can also spread the influence of STEM in education, especially for
minorities, through the targeted involvement of local minority institutions and
through leveraging with minority programs within the University,