* 1510157
* UNS: Selective Catalytic Conversion of Syngas-Derived Dimethyl Oxalate to Ethylene Glycol: Mechanistic Insights from In-Situ Surface Vibrational Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Christopher Williams, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 348,172.00

1510157 Williams, Christopher T

The proposed work will examine the reactions involved in producing ethylene
glycol (EG) - an important industrial chemical - from synthesis gas via
catalytic dehydrogenation reactions of dialkyl oxalate intermediates. This opens
the door to EG production from non-conventional sources such as coal, natural
gas, and biomass instead of the conventional process based on ethylene oxide
produced from petroleum resources. Although the technology has been used for
several decades, new catalyst formulations, as well as more advanced
characterization techniques suitable for analysis under reaction conditions,
present an opportunity to obtain a more detailed understanding of the catalytic
mechanism, and thereby further develop the catalyst technology. The techniques
developed as part of the project will be broadly applicable to a range of
catalytic processes - especially those carried out in liquids. The principal
investigator will also integrate international research opportunities and
research opportunities targeting underrepresented groups into the project.

The project will examine the surface chemistry involved in the hydrogenation of
various dialkyl oxalate species on Cu, Ag, Au-Cu, and Au-Ag catalysts - both
supported and unsupported - and both in the gas and liquid phases. Critical to
the project will be the implementation of a new attentuated total reflection
infrared spectrophotometer (ATR-IR) as the primary tool and through design of a
new high-pressure and high-temperature ATR-IR cell. Application of the new ATR-
IR cell, together with reaction kinetics obtained under the same conditions,
should shed new insight on the catalytic reaction mechanism and factors
affecting catalyst stability and poisoning. A unique feature of the study is
that experiments will be conducted in both gas phase and liquid phase
environments under conditions close to those utilized in industrial practice.

The fundamental nature of the project, involving relatively complex organic
chemicals and multiple reaction pathways, as well as reaction in both aqueous
and gas phase environments, makes it an important test-bed for the improved
experimental capabilities offered by the high pressure/temperature ATR-IR cell.
Information derived from the study should offer insight into a broad range of
catalytic processes ranging from electrocatalysis to photocatalysis and to
catalytic conversion of biomass intermediate products. Catalysis in liquid phase
environments will be particularly amenable to study by the tools and techniques
demonstrated in this project. The PI will also integrate several novel
educational opportunities into the proposed research project, including an
international research experience for his graduate students, and research
opportunities for underrepresented groups at both the graduate and undergraduate
levels.