* 1510485
* UNS:Collaborative Research: Atomistic Design of High-Performance Epoxidation Catalysts with Atomic Layer Deposition and Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Christoffer Turner, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 183,002.00

1511820(Lei) &amp; 1510485(Turner)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct oxidation of
propylene to propylene oxide represents huge potential for a change to much more
sustainable production of a molecule that currently has production levels of 9
billion pounds a year. Current production is inherently inefficient using vast
amounts of energy and producing significant waste. This work proposes novel
catalyst compositions and highly-engineered structures that have the potential
to promote the direct oxidation with molecular oxygen at improved selectivity
and conversion, and with less energy consumption and environmental
waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs hypothesize that the stability, selectivity,
and efficiency of propylene selective oxidation can be improved by carefully
synthesizing Pd-Au and Ag-Au bimetallic nano-catalysts. The new catalysts are
expected to benefit from the high selectivity of Au and the high activity of the
additional second metal. Au nanoclusters are decorated with surface atoms of Pd
or Ag, and the resultant particles are isolated from one another and optimized
for interaction with a titanium-silicalite support by the deposition of metal
oxide hillocks between the particles. The combination of colloidal synthesis and
atomic layer deposition (ALD) will be used to create the highly-engineered
structures. Synchrotron X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy, and
atomic-scale kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) calculations will be employed to
potentially reveal a dynamic picture of the working catalysts and precisely
identify the mechanistic role of the second metal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, these catalysts could be a a game-changer for the propylene oxide
industry. In addition the study will provide valuable understanding of the
potential role of bimetaliic catalysts of this type for other large-scale
industrial chemical reactions. The study will achieve educational outreach by
providing support to two graduate students and also undergraduate students at
two institutions within the state of Alabama. Another outreach component is
field trips by both undergraduate and graduate researchers to catalyst
manufacturing sites and commercial R&amp;D centers in the Huntsville area.