* 1510530
* UNS:New strategies for ultra-thin sub-10 nm thick zeolitic imidazolate framework membranes with tunable molecular sieving properties
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hae-Kwon Jeong, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,896.00

Jeong&lt;br/&gt;151530&lt;br/&gt;Texas Engineering Exp
Sta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Separations of desired chemicals from undesired ones
are critically important for chemical and petrochemical industries. Conventional
separation technologies, including distillation and condensation, are highly
energy intensive. Due to the limitations of the state-of-the-art membrane
materials, there are no commercially available membranes for the separation of
industrially important hydrocarbon gases. Novel molecular sieves (i.e.,
materials with well-defined molecular-scale pores and channels) have been
explored as membrane materials. The proposed work intends to develop innovative
new approaches 1) to reduce the cost of membranes by making molecular sieving
membranes very efficient and 2) to make the sieve size readily adjustable for
the separation of gas mixtures of interest. The completely new strategies
proposed here are expected to lead to a serious of molecular sieving materials
with their sieve sizes finely-tuned for the custom separations of gas mixtures
of industrial interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed effort is
to develop new approaches to fabricate ultra-thin sub-10 nanometer thick
zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF) membranes as well as to continuously tailor
their molecular sieving properties for the separations of gas mixtures of
interest. Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), a sub-class of metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs), offer unique opportunities in gas separations primarily due
to their ultra-micropores (pores smaller than 5 Ã…) and their unusual
thermal/chemical stabilities. To address the fundamental materials limitations
as well as the processing challenges mentioned above, the PI proposes to develop
new strategies that enable 1) the synthesis of ultra-thin ZIF membranes and 2)
the control of their molecular sieving properties for the custom separations of
gas mixtures of interest. The proposed strategies will be truly transformative
in that they enable the preparation of highly efficient and productive molecular
sieving membranes, potentially replacing highly energy-intensive current
separation processes, thereby significantly reducing energy consumption. The
students involved in this project will be trained in multi-disciplinary areas
ranging from material synthesis/characterization to membrane science and
technologies.