* 1510697
* SusChEM: Drop-in Hydrocarbon Fuels through Novel Integration of Biological and Catalytic Conversion of Cellulosic Biomass-Derived Sugars
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Ian Wheeldon, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 329,970.00

PI Name: Ian Wheeldon&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1510697
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant biomass is an abundant, domestic resource for the
sustainable and large-scale production of liquid transportation fuels. Such
biomass-to-fuel systems reduce dependence on fossil fuels, lower greenhouse gas
production, and improve energy security. Present processes for converting plant
biomass into fuels usually involve biological processes, such as using
microorganisms to convert the cellulosic fractions to sugars which are fermented
into bioethanol, or chemical processes, which typically convert the biomass to a
reactive gas which is then upgraded to a wide range of fuel compounds. The goal
of this project is combine the best attributes of biological and chemical
processes into a single integrated process that selectively converts biomass
sugars into liquid hydrocarbon fuels similar to gasoline. The innovative aspect
of this project is that it ties both processes together through ethyl acetate,
an intermediate compound produced by yeast which is readily separated and
catalytically converted to gasoline with high yield and purity. The fundamental
research will use genetic engineering to enable the yeast to exclusively make
ethyl acetate instead of ethanol, and then tailor the catalyst systems to make
gasoline from ethyl acetate. The research will include undergraduate student
participants from under-represented backgrounds attending local community
colleges in Riverside County, California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of the proposed research is to explore the feasibility of integrating selective
biological and catalytic conversion processes to convert plant biomass derived
sugars into liquid fuels. The overall concept is to take best advantage of the
unique features of both processes to enable selective conversion of biomass
sugars to hydrocarbons. The particular system chosen for fundamental study
focuses on the metabolic engineering of the yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus for
ethyl acetate biosynthesis, followed by the catalytic conversion of ethyl
acetate to hydrocarbons in the gasoline range. Ethyl acetate is selected as the
intermediate product to efficiently link the biological and chemical conversion
steps, since its high volatility allows for recovery as vapor product from the
fermentation broth, and is reactive towards catalytic conversion to
hydrocarbons. K. maxiumus is selected as the model organism for ethyl acetate
biosynthesis, as it is an industrial yeast strain amenable to genetic
engineering, exhibits thermal tolerance at 50 C needed for ethyl acetate vapor
recovery from the fermentation broth, and can metabolize both C5 and C6 sugars
derived from lignocellulosic biomass. The research plan has two primary
objectives. The first objective is to identify ethyl acetate biosynthesis
pathways in Kluyveromyces marxianus, and use this knowledge to maximize ethyl
acetate production through metabolic engineering. Towards this end, it is
hypothesized that ethyl acetate is synthesized by one of three pathways,
including synthesis by alcohol-Oacetyltransferase (AATase), reverse esterase
activity, or alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh) activity towards hemiacetal. Pathways
will be optimized for both C5 and C6 sugars. The second objective is to develop
and characterize a new catalytic reaction pathway for conversion of ethyl
acetate vapor to gasoline hydrocarbons, using nanoparticle based noble
metal/alumina hydrogenolysis catalysts to convert ethyl acetate to diethyl
ether, and shape-selective, solid-acid zeolite catalysts to convert diethyl
ether to hydrocarbons.