* 1510888
* UNS: Engineering of Polymer Electrolytes for Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Kenneth Lau, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2019
* USD 306,585.00

Lau, 1510888&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Looking to the future, energy storage devices
will require significant technological leaps to satisfy the increasing demands
of the energy economy. Concomitantly, enhanced energy storage solutions will
require significant scientific breakthroughs in materials and processes.
Focusing on rechargeable lithium ion batteries, miniaturization is anticipated
to be an important path forward, especially with the recent advances seen in
portable electronics, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), wireless devices,
medical implants, and sensors. This project will study new synthesis and
processing strategies for engineering small scale lithium ion batteries.
Specifically, adapting smaller microbatteries, particularly as on-board power
sources, will require a transformation from the current two-dimensional (2D)
planar thin film design to a three-dimensional (3) architecture composed of
porous nanostructured materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This battery
redesign project aims at taking advantage of the much larger active surface area
to volume and smaller charge transport distance for increasing energy and power
density is such miniaturized devices. In addition, materials can display new
phenomena at the nanoscale, such as faster electrode processes and lesser
electrode strain, compared to bulk behavior. This project aims at increasing
energy and power density by utilizing the much larger active surface area to
volume and smaller ion transport distance in this miniaturization approach. But,
there exist significant knowledge gaps related to finding appropriate all solid
state nanoscale electrolytes, viable nanoscale synthesis and processing
pathways, and nanoscale ion conduction phenomena amenable to a 3D nano
structured design. Thus, the overall objective of this application is to bridge
these knowledge gaps to deliver new nanoscale materials, nanoscale synthesis and
processing methodologies, and to study nanoscale behavior in such lithium ion
batteries. Specifically, the PI has chosen to study polyethylene oxide (PEO)
polymers as potential all solid state polymer electrolytes that will be
synthesized and conformally coated on the surfaces within mesoporous aperiodic
3D nanostructures. He will apply a liquid-free synthesis and deposition
technique developed in his lab that enables ring opening cationic polymerization
of ethylene oxide ring monomers in a chemical vapor deposition environment. The
specific research aims are to: (1) define the processing space to create
conformal coatings of PEO polymers inside 3D porous nanostructured materials;
(2) understand the ion conduction behavior of PEO polymers within 3D
nanoconfined domains; and (3) obtain the structure-property-processing
relationships to create 3D nanostructured lithium ion batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts from this work are expected to extend
beyond energy storage into the fields of sensors, electrochromics, and
biomedicine. Integrated with the research program is an educational thrust that
aims to train graduate and undergraduate students as well as engage scientists
in nanoscience and nanotechnology related to energy storage. Additionally, high
school students will be recruited to participate in independent research through
established relationships with area high schools. Minority, underprivileged and
underrepresented students will be actively recruited. Outreach to Philadelphia
high schools will be made to enhance student awareness and action in energy
technologies and social responsibility. Outreach to middle school students
through non-profit organizations will be made to motivate science learning.