* 1510703
* Collaborative EAGER Proposal: The Dead Zones of Protoplanetary Disks are Not Dead - How Turbulence Transports Angular Momentum and Forms Planetesimals
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Philip Marcus, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 02/28/2017
* USD 261,244.00

This EAGER award funds a collaborative study to study the turbulence of gas and
dust in the material that will form planets around stars. The mechanism to be
studied could be important in forming the small rocky bodies that are the cores
of future planets, and whose process of formation is poorly understood. This
study has potential impact in understanding the formation of our own Solar
System and of the planets around other stars. The research will create a team
consisting of undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars.
The collaborative nature of our research will synergistically provide
opportunities for students at San Francisco State University, a minority-serving
non-PHD institution, to work with students and faculty at University of
California at Berkeley. The investigators will also train and mentor a
postdoctoral researcher.

To accomplish their science goals, the team will compute angular momentum
transport in a protoplanetary disk (PPD) dead zone filled with large-amplitude
turbulence, compute the rate at which dust and rocks accumulate and agglomerate
in a turbulent PPD, and compute mixing in a PPD. In particular, they will
determine if the ingredients from which chondrules form become sufficiently
mixed that their composition agrees with observations. They will also develop
the capability to carry out the above-listed calculation of momentum transport
efficiently by extending their current spectral code, which works with anelastic
flows, to one that works with fully-compressible flows with Mach numbers less
than 3 (as in dead zones). The team will develop the capability to carry out the
above-listed calculations of planetesimal and chondrule formation efficiently by
replacing their "particle-tracking" code with one that models the rocks and dust
as different phases of the fluid flow.