* 1510709
* UNS: Extension of Lean Flammability Limit  by Plasma Enhancement in Stratified Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Jyh-Yuan Chen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1510709 (Chen)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low temperature, lean combustion enables low
emission levels and high efficiencies of combustion devices such automobiles and
jet engines. The proposed study investigates the effect of electrical field on
the fuel-lean combustion and seeks to extend the limit where extra-low
temperature combustion is viable. It also integrates the research activities
with the education programs of undergraduate and graduate students, aiming to
provide a fundamental understanding of promising technologies to the next
generation of engineers and scientists in the field of combustion
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms of flame support under stratified
conditions are investigated with a combined numerical simulations and
experimental approach, on the effect of an external electric field on the lean
flammability limit and flame speed of a stratified methane flame. The goals are
to investigate to what extent stable combustion can be maintained in practical
devices while sustaining ultra-lean conditions and, specifically, to elucidate
the relative contributions of thermal and chemical effects associated with
transport in the vicinity of the flame. The experimental component will be used
for validation of the models used in the simulations and to confirm the efficacy
of the injection and ignition strategies. The new knowledge gained will form the
basis for further gains in engine efficiency.