* 1510003
* UNS:Novel biomaterials with light-controlled CO release for modulation of endothelial cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Yi Liao, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 349,999.00

1510003 &lt;br/&gt;Bashur, Christopher A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
objective of this award is to conduct fundamental research into new tissue
engineered scaffolds that that could improve graft viability in patients with
peripheral artery disease. More than 30% of these patients do not have viable
veins that can be used for graft surgeries. The controlled delivery of
carbonmonoxide (CO) from a fibrous scaffold in this award represents a unique
tissue engineering approach for treating peripheral artery disease. This award
supports both the initial steps in generating the vascular graft and the basic
science work to better understand the cells response to the scaffold. In
addition, this research will be integrated with training of undergraduate and
graduate students, including those from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of the proposed research is to determine
tissue engineered scaffold compositions that promote endothelial cell
proliferation in cell culture. One transformative feature of the proposed
scaffold is the incorporation of unique photoactivated CO releasing molecules
(photoCORM). This strategy provides a fibrous scaffold with the ability to
control delivery of a naturally occurring biological signaling molecule such as
carbon monoxide to the surrounding cells. The specific tasks include: (a)
determining electrospun scaffold compositions that support this photoCORM
technology, (b) investigating how localized CO dose magnitude and timing impacts
endothelial cell function, and (c) designing and synthesizing novel photoCORMs
for more effective CO delivery. The endothelial cells will be cultured both by
themselves and in co-culture, which is more representative of the environment in
the body. The applications of this fundamental research include treatment for
peripheral artery disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology
and Biochemical Engineering Program of CBET is co-funded by the Biomaterials
Program of the Division of Materials Research.