* 1510072
* SusChEM Collaborative Research:  Biocomposite Biocatalysts formed by Desiccation of Living Cells on Porous Substrates for Recycling Gaseous Carbon to Fuels and Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Orlin Velev, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 350,000.00

1510072 &lt;br/&gt;Flickinger, Michael C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algae trap and
recycle enormous quantities of greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as carbon dioxide
each year. This project will develop methods to fabricate biocomposite materials
containing highly concentrated non-growing cyanobacteria, or algae, concentrated
on or within paper or fabricated as multi-layered materials and hydrated through
channels. These artificial leaf-like biocomposite materials could be used to
harvest sunlight and recycle GHG carbon into fuels and chemicals. This project
will engineer algae to tolerate drying so that desiccated biocomposites can be
stored and shipped without loss of reactivity and hydrated at the site of use.
Using non-growing dry-stabilized cyanobacteria or algae in biocomposite
materials to trap solar energy will require significantly less water and is more
efficient in trapping GHGs than using growing algae suspended in
photobioreactors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will reveal molecular
mechanisms for preserving the viability and reactivity during controlled drying
of cyanobacteria and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Methods will be developed to
sustain the photoreactivity of non-growing algae, enhance CO2 absorption and
significantly extend their catalytic life embedded within composite materials
when rehydrated. This will be investigated by approaches to (i) optimize
biocomposite nanoporous microstructure, including providing nutrients and
recovering gases by engineered microchannels, (ii) optimize biopreservation
using osmoprotectant carbohydrate glasses, control desiccation rate and
determine critical residual bound and free water surrounding and within the
cells monitored by Raman microspectroscopy plus desiccation stress induced
reporters, and (iii) apply synthetic biology to desiccation-sensitive algae to
engineer the trehalose transport system from Polyplodium vanderplanki into C.
reinhardtii. This has been demonstrated using the CHO TRET1 cell line to enable
trehalose transport into CHO cells to enhance dry stabilization. The team of
investigators include a microbial biotechnologist expert in biocomposites, a
soft matter expert who pioneered biocolloidal live cell assembly and a
mechanical engineer with expertise in the anhydrobiology engineering of
nucleated cells and controlled drying rate monitored by Raman microspectroscopy.
Biocomposite materials containing microchannels and layers of synergistic dry
stabilized live cells could provide a new way for carbon recycling. This project
will provide cross-disciplinary STEM education for engineers, who will work in a
multidisciplinary project spanning chemical engineering, nanoscience, mechanical
engineering, microfluidics, synthetic biology, anhydrobiology and reaction
kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.