* 1510738
* EAPSI: Examining Multilingual Learning in Science Classrooms
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jason Wu, Wu                      Jason          S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Minority students who are bilingual and learning English remain far behind in
science achievement. This threatens the prospect of providing equitable science
education and will potentially exclude large numbers of students from
contributing to scientific and technological development in the United States.
Many questions remain as to how students' use of their native language
influences their learning of science. This project will examine how students use
their native and second languages to learn science in multilingual classrooms in
Singapore. It will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Kok Sing Tang at the
National Institute of Education. The linguistic diversity of Singapore and the
expertise that Dr. Tang provide an ideal opportunity for collaboration and
comparative study. It is hoped this project will contribute to efforts to
improve science education for bilingual students in the United States.

The project will employ a qualitative approach focusing on the analysis of
student discourse. Data collection will include classroom observation, recording
and analysis of student discourse, and focus group interviews with students and
teachers. Classrooms and students will be selected using strategic sampling to
provide a general representation of multilingual classrooms in Singapore. Data
will be analyzed according to standard qualitative methods, including iterative
coding, triangulation, and member checking to identify important themes (Boeije,
2010). It is hoped that the data gleaned from this project will help inform
research in cross-language transfer and concept acquisition in science
education. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Singapore.