* 1510919
* UNS: A Collaborative Approach to Exploring Control Strategies Based on Optimally-Growing Disturbances for Complex Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Farrukh Alvi, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 323,845.00

Air transportation is an area where minimization of its environmental impact,
including engine efficiency and reduction of jet engine noise emissions, would
enable growth. This proposal is aimed at investigating, and eventually
controlling, jet noise in a nozzle using a suite of computational and
experimental techniques. The area of research is in transportation, an area of
National interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to research the
relevant fundamental physics of jet flow and then develop appropriate active
control methods for jet noise reduction. The co-PIs propose to employ
dual/correlated actuators for flow control. The first set will be located
upstream of the nozzle exit where the actuator operating parameters will be
guided by optimal perturbation theory predictions and will introduce
disturbances in the boundary layer tailored to be preferentially amplified,
generating organized structures. It is anticipated that the optimally excited
coherent structures will be highly energetic at the expense of other instability
modes; they will thus constitute a well-defined target for the second actuator
set (not normally the case for broadband turbulence in jet shear layers). The
second actuator set, near the highly receptive nozzle exit, will further
manipulate the organized structures, in a manner correlated to the first
actuator's action, to achieve the control objective. This work utilizes actuator
designs developed by the co-PIs that produce the disturbances dictated by
optimal perturbation theory in an effective manner. This study will also produce
fundamental knowledge about compressible flows that is broadly applicable and
develop analysis tools and control methods. Successful completion of the
proposed research can have an impact on related problems in aerospace, energy,
automotive and other applications where flow/noise control is important. The co-
PIs propose to leverage their activities with K-12 outreach activities of the
Florida Center for Advanced Aero-Propulsion (FCAAP), an FSU led multi-
university, statewide Center of Excellence. The PIs are members of the College
of Engineering jointly run by the Florida A&amp;M University (an HBCU) and FSU,
where the College has consistently been ranked as a top educator of African
American engineers. Students engaged in this research and its outcomes will be
from a culturally diverse student population. In addition, incorporation of
research into teaching graduate courses is proposed.