* 1510900
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Multiple-Scale Investigation of Chemical Looping with Oxygen Carrier  Uncoupling
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2020
* Phillip Westmoreland, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2020
* USD 369,140.00

Collaborative Proposals

#1511818 / P.I.: Tian, Hanjiang #1510900 / P.I.: Li, Fanxing

This research is expected to provide fundamental knowledge and scientific
foundation for addressing CO2 capture and sequestration (CCS) from coal
combustion, one of the most crucial areas of environmental sustainability. Among
various CCS technologies, CLOU, a CLC scheme optimized for solid-fuel combustion
(e.g., coal), represents one of the most promising options. Enabled by metal-
oxide-based oxygen carriers capable of oxygen release and uptake under varying
oxygen partial pressures, CLOU indirectly converts coal into separate streams of
sequestration-ready CO2- and N2-rich flue gas via cyclic reactions.
Consequently, the energy penalty associated with CO2 separation is inherently
avoided. Compared to oxy-fuel combustion, the energy-intensive cryogenic oxygen
separation is replaced by facile oxygen transfer enabled by the oxygen carrier,
leading to significant improvement of carbon-capture efficiency. To date, most
research in this area follows a trial-and-error approach due to lack of
scientific understanding on the mechanism of coal-oxygen carrier interaction.
Such an inefficient approach not only introduces potential uncertainties in
technology and economics, but it also limits the progress of the development and
implementation of CLC. The research is driven by the urgent needs for developing
new scientific understanding and innovative tools and methodologies to
investigate coal-oxygen carrier interaction and kinetics, oxygen-carrier
optimization, and reactor and process simulations. The research will establish a
solid theoretical groundwork for CLOU development from atomic level to reactor
and process scales. These fundamental studies also are expected to lead to
exciting discovery of novel catalytic-system and reactor configurations
benefiting other research areas such as novel schemes for oxygen production,
biomass combustion, coal/biomass gasification, and SOx/NOx emission control.
Chemical Looping Combustion with Oxygen Carrier Uncoupling, a.k.a. CLOU,
represents a unique combustion scheme that is directly related yet notably
different from conventional combustion processes. It allows efficient fossil
fuel combustion with minimal energy penalty for CO2 separation. Initiated by six
leading U.S./Chinese research groups in the areas of both conventional and
Chemical Looping Combustion (CLC), this multidisciplinary team brings together
top chemical engineers, thermal engineers, mechanical engineers, and catalysis
scientists to answer critical, interrelated scientific questions in combustion
kinetics, surface reactions, oxygen-carrier development, thermal engineering,
and reactor/process modeling, spanning from atomic level to reactor and process
scales. Fundamental findings obtained from the proposed research are expected to
significantly accelerate the development and deployment of CLOU for efficient
coal combustion with integrated CO2 capture. The fundamental research focuses on
four aspects: 1) lattice oxygen diffusion, surface reaction, and gas-phase
combustion kinetics in a metal-oxide-assisted char/volatile oxidation scheme; 2)
oxygen-carrier interactions with coal ash and impurities; 3) oxygen-carrier
stability and performance evaluation in circulating fluidized bed CLC reactors,
and 4) reactor and process modeling.

These collaborative grants are co-funded by the Global Venture Fund (GVF) of
NSF's International Science and Engineering section (ISE) and the CBET/ENG
Combustion and Fire and Environmental Sustainability programs.