* 1510768
* UNS:Collaborative Research: Transport and Chemotaxis of Swimming Cells in Porous Media Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joern Dunkel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2018
* USD 281,430.00

CBET 1510768 / 1511340&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Dunkel, Joern / Guasto,
Jeffrey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine the
physical mechanisms that govern transport and chemotaxis of swimming cells in
porous media. Many kinds of cells are capable of generating their own propulsion
in liquids. In their natural habitats and in engineered systems, swimming cells
have to navigate through complex microstructures in response to various chemical
signals from food sources and other organisms. The investigators will use a
combination of theory, numerical simulation, and experiments to examine the
relative importance of fluid flows, boundary structures and chemical stimuli on
the locomotion of individual cells and collections of cells. The results will be
applicable to ecological processes and diverse technologies, including
bioreactors, bioremediation, and preservation of clean water. Local high-school
students will be recruited to participate in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Swimming cells and synthetic self-propelled
particles comprise an emerging class of active suspensions, whose transport
properties can differ significantly from those of passive scalars and
particulate flows. The effects of suspension microstructure and flow on cell
transport in porous media will be investigated for dilute and dense suspensions
of various cells that span canonical swimming styles and body shapes.
Microfluidic devices will be designed to create well-controlled environments
that simulate natural flow conditions and chemical gradients in a porous medium.
High-speed video microscopy of microbial suspensions will provide a statistical
characterization of large cell ensembles as well as a mechanistic cell-scale
view of the flagellar and hydrodynamic interactions mediating large-scale
behaviors. The effects of porous media structure on the transport coefficients
of chemotaxing cells in chemical gradients will also be examined. Continuum and
particle-based models will be implemented numerically and results will be
systematically validated against experiments to establish a quantitative,
predictive framework for active cell transport in porous media flows.