* 1510772
* UNS: A Fundamental Study of Reversible and Giant Surface Activity on Soft Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Michael Dickey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2020
* USD 380,065.00

1510772 - Dickey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental research
on a new class of surfactants that can be controlled electrically to manipulate
the shape and flow of liquid metals. These liquid metals are based on alloys of
gallium and provide a low-toxicity alternative to mercury, which is a common
liquid metal that has been limited historically by its toxicity. These metals
are liquids like water, yet have electrical properties similar to metals. This
combination of properties could enable electronic devices that are soft,
stretchable, or shape-reconfigurable. The proposed work focuses on a new method
to control the shape of liquid metals by utilizing electrical signals to control
the surface properties of the metal and thereby manipulate the liquid metal at
small length scales. The ability to control the shape or flow of metals using
low voltages may enable new types of switches, antennas, wires, and
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals focus on understanding
this new method to control the interfacial tension of liquid metal via
electrochemical deposition (or removal) of an ultra-thin oxide layer on its
surface. Unlike conventional surfactants (e.g., soaps or detergents), this
approach can tune the interfacial tension of liquid metal significantly (from
~500 mN/m to near zero), rapidly, and reversibly using only modest voltages (~1
V). The proposed work seeks to understand this complex interfacial system by
characterizing the role of the surface oxide on interfacial tension through
three tasks. These studies will provide new fundamental understanding of soft
material interfaces and in turn, help extend this phenomenon to other materials
that form surface oxides as well as enable entirely new micro-scale phenomena
involving shape reconfigurable metals using low voltages. The work will also
establish the importance of surface oxides as a new class of fluid surfactants,
which bring about some of the largest changes in surface tension ever
reported.&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce new techniques to control the shape
of liquid metals and thereby enable new types of reconfigurable optics,
microfluidics, and electronics. It will also lay the foundation for new,
innovative opportunities for the use of liquid metals that go beyond toxic
mercury. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be integrated with an outreach
module called "The Science of the Terminator" that describes liquid metals
within the context of the popular motion picture. A partnership with the
Engineering Place at NC State will ensure that the presentations are
appropriately targeted and widely disseminated. The project will integrate
undergraduate, high school, and exchange students on research projects and will
continue to do so with this project by using the visually appealing nature of
this project to attract students.