* 1510121
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research:  Hybrid perovskite inspired pathways towards green and stable ionic PV absorbers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Hao Zeng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2019
* USD 157,418.00

PI: Shengbai Zhang / Hao Zeng Proposal Number: 1510948 / 1510121

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells for producing electricity require materials that absorb the
sun's energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process called
photovoltaics. Recently, materials based on inorganic-organic halide perovskite
materials have achieved promising solar energy power conversion efficiency, and
can be made from earth-abundant elements using low-cost, solution based
processing methods. However, these perovskite materials contain lead, which is
toxic, and degrade in the presence of moisture, which prevents their commercial
use. To address these limitations, this project will develop and study the
performance of a new class of perovskite materials which do not contain lead and
are stable in moisture. This project will also provide educational and outreach
opportunities, including the development of a student-designed nanotechnology
display as part of the permanent Physics and Art exhibit at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, as well as development of various hands-on solar cell
kits for K-12 students in the Buffalo area public schools.

Photovoltaic (PV) materials based on inorganic-organic halide perovskites have
achieved power conversion efficiencies of nearly 18%, which are now comparable
to CIGS and CdTe thing film solar PV materials. However, current inorganic-
organic halide perovskite materials contain lead and are unstable in moisture.
The overall goal of this research is to design and synthesize new ionic
photovoltaic absorber materials based on non-halide perovskites that eliminate
the use of lead and are stable in moisture. The proposed research has two
objectives. The first objective is to understand the physics and chemistry of
organic-inorganic halide perovskite materials that determine their power
conversion efficiency and photo-induced degradation in water. Based on the
fundamental understanding obtained under the first objective, the second
objective is to design, synthesize, and characterize the photophysics of new
ionic PV absorbers based on the non-halide chalcogenide perovskites which do not
contain lead, as well as molecularly doped CuxS compounds proposed by a
materials-by-design approach.