* 1510461
* UNS:  Dynamics of Microbial Agents in Sewer Systems and Wet Weather Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2021
* NICOLE FAHRENFELD, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/28/2021
* USD 369,414.00

1510461&lt;br/&gt;Fahrenfeld&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since wastewater treatment
systems are designed to inactivate infectious agents, the Center for Disease
Control (CDC) allows urine and fecal matter from patients with infectious
diseases to enter sanitary sewers. However, sewer overflows during wet weather
flow are a widespread issue in the US. Sewer solids are a major contributor to
pollution during urban wet weather flows. Therefore, sewers are not merely a
conduit for wastewater, but rather, complex bioreactors: microorganisms can
decay, grow, and have their transport attenuated during conveyance. Surprisingly
little is known about the biological processes which occur the sewer deposits
and their effect on the fate of microbial agents (i.e., pathogens and antibiotic
resistant bacteria) and that is the objective of this proposed project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To perform Quantitative Microbial Risk Assessment for
overflow events, optimize sewer maintenance plans, and design wet weather flow
treatment, it is necessary to understand the processes affecting the survival of
microbial agents (here defined as pathogens and antibiotic resistant bacteria)
in sewer solids and biofilms. This is especially true in the case of sewer
overflows, but is also important in order to use sewer samples for tracking the
incidence of human disease. Sewer surveillance is a useful tool for epidemiology
that would benefit from improved understanding of the fate of microbial agents
during conveyance in sewer systems. A field survey will be performed to
determine the biochemical factors driving the microbial quality of sewer
deposits and the relative loading of microbial agents in wastewater and sewer
deposits. Next, a controlled simulated sewer experiment will be performed to
determine the fate of microbial agents in sewer deposits to provide kinetic data
in sewer sediments and biofilm. Finally, a combined sewer overflow (CSO) event
will be sampled to characterize the flux of the microbial agents during wet
weather flow events. This field study will use the microbial signatures of sewer
sediments developed to differentiate between the flux of microbial agents from
sewer solids and wastewater. High-throughput, viability-based molecular assays
will be applied in this study and allow for sensitive detection of pathogens and
the determination of the dynamics of the viable and non-viable antibiotic
resistance gene loads. This understanding is essential for determining the risk
posed by antibiotic resistant genes in sewer sediments upon release in the
environment. Overall, the proposed project will provide critical insight into
the fate of microbial agents in sewers and during wet weather flow. The research
approach extends biomolecular analytical methods for understanding the fate of
microbial agents in sewer deposits. The quantitative data gathered on the
environmental factors driving the proliferation of pathogen and antibiotic
resistance in sewers will inform quantitative microbial risk assessment, improve
models of wet weather pollution events, and aid in the development of mitigation
strategies. Of particular interest is the potential application of the knowledge
gained here on in-sewer biological processes for improved implementation of
sewer surveillance for tracking infectious disease. Sewer epidemiological
methods are currently limited by our lack of understanding of critical
environmental factors and biochemical processes driving the fate of microbial
agents in sewers. Therefore, this work has the potential to transform not only
our ability to protect public health during wet weather flow, but also our
ability to perform public health surveillance in the sewer matrix. The project
targets: (1) recruiting and retaining undergraduate women students in
engineering; and, (2) improving scientific literacy. Educational materials and
learning modules will be developed and presented biannually in STEM outreach to
Girl Scouts (grades 6-12) and at Rutgers Day. A project website will be created
to improve public scientific literacy and broaden public knowledge of CSO
issues.