* 1510925
* UNS:  Developing Cross-Assembly Phage As A Marker of Human Fecal Pollution in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Kyle Bibby, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/28/2018
* USD 327,237.00

1510925&lt;br/&gt;Bibby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than four decades after the
Clean Water Act, approximately 40% of our Nation's waterways still do not meet
the goal of "fishable and swimmable." A significant challenge in meeting this
goal is identifying sources of pollution, and specifically quantifying human
fecal pollution. Recently, a highly abundant bacteriophage (a bacterial virus),
named Cross-Assembly Phage, was identified in the human gut by metagenomics data
mining. This bacteriophage is more abundant than all other known bacteriophages
in the human gut combined, and appears to be human specific. This project will
demonstrate the utility of the Cross-Assembly Phage assay through a
demonstration study in the Allegheny River, including correlation with other
fecal source tracking markers and viral pathogens; and investigate the global
abundance and ubiquity of Cross-Assembly Phage in sewage with the assistance of
international collaborators. Additionally, this project will involve the
Pittsburgh Water Microbiome project as an educational and outreach task. In this
project, middle-school student citizen-scientists will sample water, including
water from Pittsburgh's three rivers, and the microbial ecology of the water
samples will be analyzed by engineering undergraduate students. This effort will
educate both citizen-scientists and undergraduate engineering students about
microbiology and water quality. The Carnegie Science Center has committed to
include an interactive kiosk on the project in an upcoming
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project represents a potentially
transformative step forward in pollution source tracking, through the
development of a human-specific, abundant viral marker of human fecal pollution
in the environment. In addition to the water quality field, the proposed
research will have significant impact on other fields, including food safety and
human microbiome research. The PI is well qualified to conduct the proposed
research, with significant experience in environmental virology, as well as an
initial publication investigating the potential of Cross-Assembly Phage as a
pollution source tracking marker. Additionally, the project has committed
collaborators to assist with distinct project tasks, namely specificity testing
for the qPCR assay and international sample collection. The project team has
access to all necessary resources to complete the proposed research. Both the
technical and educational aspects of the proposed work have significant benefits
to society. Pollution impacts have rendered many of the nation's waterways not
"fishable or swimmable"; developing an improved marker of human fecal pollution
in Cross-Assembly Phage will enable more accurate regulation and beach closures,
as well as more economical investments to control sources of pollution. The
results from this project will be disseminated both in the peer-reviewed
literature and conference proceedings as well as via outreach.