* 1510333
* UNS: The Effect of Flow-Induced Concentration Inhomogeneities on the Flow of Polymer Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 420,014.00

1510333(Leal)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been found that during the processing
of complex fluids, such as polymer and surfactant solutions, liquid crystals,
etc., large molecules in the solution can migrate to more concentrated areas.
The goal of the proposed research is to understand this phenomenon, known as
shear-induced banding, for the case of polymers. Discovering the fundamental
reasons for this phenomenon has significant technological implications in
processing and manufacturing of complex fluids that are common in the
petrochemical, consumer products and the food industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a macromolecular suspension (e.g., surfactants,
polymers, and possibly proteins) is sheared, there is what is known as stress-
induced migration of the macromolecules or micelles toward regions of higher
concentration of the solution, via the so-called Helfand Fredrickson (HF)
mechanism. In this work, the co-PIs propose to explore whether this mechanism
can produce macroscopic concentration gradients in polymer solutions - a case
where this phenomenon is somewhat controversial. The co-PIs, through prior
theoretical work, have suggested that the coupling between the polymer stress
and concentration in entangled solutions produces a linear instability for
simple shear flow, and this instability leads to shear banding. In this
proposal, they propose a coordinated experimental and computational approach to
investigate this problem, and then to generalize the results to other flows: (a)
pressure driven flow in a tube which exhibits a "spurt" instability, and (b)
flow in 2- and 4-roll milling flows, i.e., testing their models under different
stress patterns and even extensional flows. The proposed approach will involve
both careful experiments (using rheo-NMR and neutron scattering) and
computations. Outreach and dissemination of research is planned, involving
graduate students in research. In addition, results will be disseminated to the
industry.