* 1510790
* UNS:High-performance membranes for engineered osmosis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Apparao Rao, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 359,066.00

1510790 Clemson Husson

One future possible source of energy is the energy released when low-salinity
waters mix with high-salinity waters, such as when rivers reach the ocean. This
"gradient energy" can be harvested through a process called pressure retarded
osmosis (PRO). The PRO process involves water transport from a low-salinity
source through a semipermeable membrane to a high-salinity draw solution. The
objective of this multidisciplinary research and education program is to develop
and study advanced thin-film composite (TFC) membranes that are designed for
PRO. The proposed research is transformational because it will deliver TFC PRO
membranes with high water flux, low reverse salt flux, high apparent power
density, and an overall structure that can withstand mechanical stresses
generated during operation under high osmotic pressures. These performance and
structural characteristics will be achieved by incorporating unique, previously
untested nanomaterials into the membrane structure.

Studies will test the hypothesis that incorporation of specific nanomaterials
directly into the thin film active layer and as a separate, ultrathin supporting
layer will yield a new class of robust PRO membranes with unmatched performance
characteristics. The research will provide deep understanding of how chemical
functionalization of the membranes and nanomaterial additives impacts their
mechanical properties and performance. Investigations will examine the roles of
loading and degree of functionalization of nanomaterials on membrane compressive
modulus and strength. Performance measurements will use standardized protocols
and models to determine water and salt permeability coefficients, structural
parameters, and apparent power densities. With this knowledge, the team will be
able to design TFC PRO membranes with the desired performance.

The project will integrate education and research aimed at improving public
science literacy among individuals living in Upstate South Carolina and Western
North Carolina by using entertainment media education and creating social media
forums that facilitate discussion of science news. Partnership with a local
television program that serves over 800,000 households in the nation?s 36th
largest market will ensure that on-air science demonstrations and web-based
science videos reach a large and highly diverse audience. It is expected that
television promotion of the demonstrations and videos to local school districts
will benefit students in the viewing area by illustrating the relevance of
science and supporting science learning.