* 1510131
* UNS:  Organohalide Respiration: Improving our Understanding for Predictable Biostimulation and Bioaugmentation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Paige Novak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 177,434.00

1510131&lt;br/&gt;Novak, Paige J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Organohalide
Respiration: Improving our Understanding for Predictable Biostimulation and
Bioaugmentation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next 30 years, the EPA has
estimated that it will cost $250 billion to remediate approximately 350,000
contaminated sites in the US, many of which are contaminated with chlorinated
pollutants. In contaminated environments bacteria of a specific kind have been
identified that treat chlorinated pollutants, producing less- or non-toxic
compounds as products. This proposed project will examine the various aspects of
these bacteria to effectively treat these compounds in the ground, therefore
lowering the cost of treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
laboratory-based experiments will be performed to determine, (1) how the
organohalide respiring community and genes that code for the dechlorinating
activity (rdh genes) change when enriched with chlorinated natural organic
matter, (2) how the concentration of chloride, chlorinated natural organic
matter, or chlorinated pollutants affect the numbers of organohalide respiring
organisms present and the degradation rate of chlorinated natural organic
matter, and finally, (3) the effectiveness of chlorinated natural organic matter
as a primer for the degradation of chlorinated pollutants. This research will
further understanding of organohalide respiration by investigating the rdh genes
present during the dechlorination of chlorinated natural organic matter. In
addition, by determining whether or not chlorinated natural organic matter can
be co-degraded with a chlorinated pollutant (a polychlorinated biphenyl
congener) and which rdh genes are present when this occurs, the relationship
between the respiration of natural compounds versus pollutants will be
established. This research has critical implications for the remediation field,
ecology, and geochemical cycling by (1)providing the discovery of a pathway for
the cycling of natural organic chlorine, (2) opening an avenue for further
research on the evolution and regulation of rdhs, (3) pointing to a source of
organisms for bioaugmentation, and a source of natural compounds for
biostimulation, and (4) facilitating the development of a tool to determine the
organohalide respiration potential of a soil via the mapping of the rdh genes
present. The students involved in this project will be trained in a variety of
laboratory methods, and the experimental and critical thinking skills developed
during this study will complement their current curriculum and future careers as
engineers/scientists.