* 1510085
* UNS: Mechanical/Chemical Failure of Solid Electrolyte Interphase in Lithium-ion Batteries: Understanding Its Mechanisms and Suppressing Its Onset
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* XINHUA Liang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Jonghyun Park &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1510085&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium ion batteries support the development of
sustainable energy systems by storing electricity generated by renewable
resources such as wind and solar energy, or by powering zero-emission electric
vehicles charged by electricity from renewable resources. However, current
rechargeable lithium ion batteries can hold only about 10% of their theoretical
energy content, and new concepts are needed to improve energy storage capacity
and power discharge rate. The addition of the metal germanium to lithium ion
battery electrodes offers the potential to improve both storage capacity and
power. However, the germanium swells significantly upon charging and
discharging, which cracks the battery and renders it useless. The goals of this
project are to determine the mechanisms of the failure process, and then to use
this fundamental understanding to develop coating materials and processes for
the germanium particles that will control the swelling behavior. The educational
activities associated with this project include efforts to broaden participation
by involving undergraduates from nearly Lincoln University of Missouri in the
proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of geranium (Ge) metal in the
solid interface layer of the anode of lithium ion batteries offers the potential
for high theoretical electrochemical energy storage capacity and power discharge
rate. However, upon repeated charge/discharge cycles, the solid electrolyte
interface layer of the anode breaks down. The damage to the solid electrolyte
layer is due to the mechanical volume change in Ge metal during lithium-ion
insertion (charging) and extraction (discharge), which causes cracks and
pulverization of this layer that lead to loss of electrode contact and
dissolution of the solid electrolyte layer into the electrolyte. The goals of
the research are to characterize the mechanisms of failure in the Ge anode, and
then use this fundamental understanding to develop fabrication strategies for
suppressing these damage processes by controlling internal structure of the
solid electrolyte layer containing Ge nanoparticles, as well as its interface
with active materials. The mechanisms of failure will be elucidated by
characterizing mechanical strength and chemical dissolution rate of the solid
interface layer components. The internal structure of the solid interface layer
will be controlled by using Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) to coat additive
materials, for example metal oxides, onto Ge nanoparticles in the attempt to
reduce stress upon lithium ion insertion and extraction. A multiscale model will
be developed that couples the nanoparticle level behavior in the solid interface
layer to electrochemical cell operation to predict the conditions that trigger
solid interface layer failure and its subsequent effect on battery performance.
This model will then be used to identify strategies to optimize the ALD
materials and process for improved mechanical stability and battery performance.
To connect the research to education, the PI will introduce energy materials and
battery design concepts in a capstone mechanical engineering capstone design
course, and will give demonstrations on lithium-ion battery coin cell assembly
for undergraduate and K-12 students at the Missouri University of Science and
Technology.