* 1510550
* UNS: Autoignition of Liquid Hydrocarbon Droplets in Lean, High Pressure Natural Gas Mixtures Using a Rapid Compression Machine
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Anthony Marchese, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1510550 - Marchese&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how the
Diesel fuel droplet can be ignited under conditions representative of those
inside the engine. Because of the very lean combustion conditions, fuel costs
and pollutant formation can be reduced from those of traditional diesel or spark
ignited engines. The research will involve graduate students, thus preparing
them for a research or engineering career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental
measurements and chemical kinetic studies are proposed on diesel droplet
ignition/combustion in premixed methane-air mixture using a rapid compression
machine (RCM) at conditions representative of those of engines, i.e., high
pressures and high temperatures. The result will have implication for RCCI
(reactivity controlled compression ignition) combustion in that fuel costs and
pollutant formation can be reduced from those of traditional diesel or spark
ignited engines. The RCCI concept involves combustion of two fuels in each
engine cycle, in which one fuel is more difficult to ignite than the other. The
true dual fuel combustion where the ambient is a lean mixture of fuel-air will
be studied for the first time. The proposed study simplifies several of the
steps in RCCI combustion to focus attention on the vaporization and ignition of
the more easily ignited component, n-heptane in this proposed study, and its
subsequent ability to ignite the main fuel (natural gas, which is relatively
cheap, and thus the potential to reduce fuel costs). The investigation will
yield much needed RCCI combustion data to help advance the industry.