* 1510254
* Spaces of geometric structures via geometric transitions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Jeffrey Danciger, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2020
* USD 169,146.00

A geometric manifold is an abstract mathematical object designed to model the
space we live in. The concept also encompasses the notion of a space-time in the
theory of relativity, as well as phase spaces, configuration spaces, and other
useful structures in physics. While empirical physics is dedicated to measuring
the precise features (e.g. shape, size, etc.) of our universe, the question of
what possible features could the universe have, subject to certain laws, is a
mathematical one. The data comprising the answer to such a question is called a
moduli space; it is a topological space whose points are all possible geometric
manifolds of a certain type and whose topology organizes those geometric
manifolds into families whose features vary continuously. This project addresses
important questions about many different classes of low-dimensional geometric
manifolds and their moduli. The PI will study these questions by further
developing and applying an emerging new mathematical framework which describes
interaction between moduli spaces of different types of geometric manifolds
through a mechanism called geometric transition. The research to be conducted in
this project weaves together ideas from a wide cross-section of mathematics and
physics, including geometry, topology, group theory, dynamics, and relativity.
Progress on these problems will be of significance to many researchers across
these disciplines and, more broadly, will contribute to the growing base of
foundational knowledge on which many innovations in science and engineering are
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent progress by the PI and collaborators, in the
setting of complete affine Lorentzian three-manifolds called Margulis
spacetimes, suggests a rubric to approach difficult questions in higher
dimensional affine geometry. By further developing and generalizing the
geometric transition technology used to study Margulis spacetimes as limits of
curved spacetimes, the PI will address important questions in higher dimensional
affine geometry surrounding the Auslander Conjecture. A second main theme is the
study of the relationship between hyperbolic and anti de Sitter (AdS) geometry
in dimension three. Work of the PI on the hyperbolic-AdS transition establishes
an explicit and natural connection between the two geometries with the potential
to expedite progress in the study of geometric structures in both settings. In
particular, recent joint work gives new evidence for the bending measure
conjecture for convex AdS spacetimes, a counterpart to Thurston's conjecture
characterizing convex hyperbolic three-manifolds in terms of bending data on the
convex core. The PI will work toward the resolution of these conjectures by
further examining the interaction between convex structures in both settings.
Additionally, the PI will begin a new project to develop applications of
geometric transitions in the setting of representation theory of hyperbolic
groups into higher rank Lie groups, a growing subject known as higher
Teichm√ºller theory.