* 1510099
* UNS: Design of Self-Assembling Peptides and their Conjugates as Amyloid Inhibitors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Jie Zheng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 315,124.00

PI: Zheng, Jie &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1510099&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
aging population, Alzheimer's (AD) and other age-related neurodegenerative
diseases will continue to impact more lives with no cure available. Aggregation
of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptides is thought to contribute to dysfunction and
loss of nerve cells in AD, so inhibition of Abeta aggregation holds considerable
promise for the development of new therapies for AD. However, the existing
inhibitors are not potent enough to be used as effective treatments. This
project aims to develop a new class of peptide-nanoparticle inhibitors of
improved biocompatibility, enzymatic resistance, and delivery properties against
Abeta aggregation and toxicity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
research are to (i) develop a new class of beta-sheet-forming self-assembling
peptides (SAPs) and SAP-nanoparticle conjugates as amyloid-beta (Abeta)
inhibitors with improved inhibitory ability, enzymatic degradation, and blood-
brain barrier (BBB) permeability; and (ii) establish practical design principles
that can consistently explain the sequence/structural dependence of functional
interactions between SAP derivatives and Abeta peptides on amyloid aggregation,
toxicity, and inhibition. To achieve these goals, de novo computation-aided
design tools will be first developed to screen and identify SAPs from a large
pool of peptide library, followed by experimental determination of the role of
SAPs in Abeta inhibition and Abeta-induced cell toxicity. Then, SAP-nanoparticle
conjugates will be developed to solve the issues of toxicity, degradation, and
BBB permeation of SAPs by mutually controlling interfacial properties of both
nanoparticles and conjugated peptides. Finally, a multiscale computational
platform will be developed to integrate experimental and computational data to
establish the sequence/structure-dependent relationship among aggregation
property, membrane permeability, and cell toxicity of SAPs, and finally help to
determine a set of rules for iterative design of SAP-derived inhibitors with
tunable sequence and structural properties. The peptide inhibitors could be
potentially useful for other neurodegenerative diseases, and peptide materials
can also represent new protein-based self-assembled nano-/bio-materials for
other biomedical applications. The interdisciplinary nature of the project
provides a unique opportunity to train and educate all-level students to learn
the concepts and tools in structural biology, bioinformatics, and engineering
design. The knowledge derived from the proposal will be disseminated through
undergraduate/graduate courses, high-impact journals, conference presentations,
summer workshops/internships, and other outreach activities.