* 1510154
* UNS: Resolving the Dynamics of Particles in Turbulent Wall-Bounded Flow: DNS and Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Ellen Longmire, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2019
* USD 392,853.00

CBET - 1510154&lt;br/&gt;PI: Longmire, Ellen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent
flows containing discrete particles occur in many environmental and industrial
processes related to climate prediction, energy production, and environmental
conservation. In environmental flows, particles may be natural (plankton,
spores, sediment, or dust) or pollutants (plastics, exhaust or fallout
precipitates). These flows are difficult to understand and predict due to the
wide range of turbulence scales in the fluid as well as the complex physical
interactions that occur on the scale of the particle diameter. The goal of the
proposed research is to advance experimental and numerical simulation
capabilities to resolve particle/turbulence, particle/particle, and
particle/wall interactions in turbulent flows near solid surfaces where these
interactions often determine particle deposition and resuspension rates, mixing,
and transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementary experiments and direct
numerical simulations will investigate particles released into liquid turbulent
boundary layer flows in a controlled fashion. Single moving particles and pairs
of colliding particles will be considered where the particle diameter exceeds
the smallest turbulence scales and where the particle Reynolds number is
significant. Experiments will employ three-dimensional tracking of discrete
particles combined with time-resolved tomographic particle imaging velocimetry
to quantify translation and rotation, slip velocities, and spatial velocity
gradients experienced by individual and colliding particles. A novel
conservative overset grid method for unstructured grids will be developed and
applied to simulate and fully resolve flow and stresses on moving particles in
turbulent flow matching the experimental conditions. The results will be applied
to assess existing particle/force coupling models and to suggest model
improvements. The project will involve graduate and undergraduate researchers.
The project team will work with teachers and students at a local elementary
school to spark interest in science and engineering and to develop hands on
physics and engineering activities that can be incorporated into the required
science curriculum.