* 1510255
* UNS: The role of bacteriophages in wetland functionality and sustainability by affecting bacterial community
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2021
* USD 400,060.00

1510255 (Goel). Wetlands provide environmental sustainability by removing
contaminants and supporting different habitats. However, the proper functioning
of wetland ecosystems relies on the functioning of microbial communities living
in these ecosystems. Several factors can affect the microbial community
composition in wetlands. One such factor is bacteriophages, the viruses that
infect bacteria only. Almost nothing is known about the bacteria-phage
interactions in wetlands, although phages are known to affect bacterial
populations in marine environments by killing bacteria, mediating gene
transfers, and changing nitrogen and carbon cycles. This research, which is a
collaborative effort between an environmental engineer (Dr. Ramesh Goel) and a
phage expert (Dr. Sherwood Casjens), will investigate this relatively unexplored
area. This project is intended to determine whether bacteriophages play
significant roles in controlling bacterial populations in wetlands and thus in
controlling wetland microbial processes, and, in turn, critically important
wetland ecological functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the objectives
are to understand bacteriophages (quantity and diversity) in the Great Salt Lake
wetlands as a model ecosystem, and to understand, using genomics and
experiments, whether bacteriophages are affecting the bacterial community
structure in wetlands. Preliminary results show that the wetland bacterial
community, especially in sediments, is affected by bacteriophages, thus
questioning the long term sustainability of wetland functioning for contaminant
removal. The experimental approach in this project will evaluate the role of
bacteriophage life-cycles in affecting wetland bacterial communities. A phage
metagenomic approach will shed light on whether phages in wetland sediments are
participating in gene transfers through their well-known lysogenic infection
cycle. Fundamental knowledge gained in this research is anticipated to be
applicable in other natural (i.e., contaminated subsurface and river sediments)
and engineered systems (i.e., biofilms in drinking water distribution systems).
Results will be disseminated not only through peer reviewed publications but
also community workshops for local wetland managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the MCB Division of the BIO Directorate and the CBET/ENG
Environmental Sustainability program under BIOMAPS.