* 1510764
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Fate and Control of Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material (NORM) Produced by Unconventional Gas Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Radisav Vidic, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 270,179.00

1510764(Vidic)/1509086(Flora)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent breakthroughs in
directional well drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and reservoir stimulation have
enabled economical production of oil and natural gas from low-permeability shale
formations. Combined with favorable oil and gas prices, these technological
developments encouraged a vigorous pursuit of energy independence by the US. It
is expected that the extraction of natural gas will increase by more than 100%
in the next 15 years. One of the key environmental concerns is the accumulation
of naturally occurring radioactive material during wastewater reuse and the lack
of ultimate solutions that would address this problem once the wastewater reuse
is no longer feasible. This study is designed to provide comprehensive
understanding of the fate of naturally occurring radioactive material brought to
the surface from deep geologic formations during storage and recycling of
produced water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on fundamental
experimental and modeling research necessary to advance understanding of the
fate of naturally occurring radioactive material in deep geologic formations
while maintaining its relevance to transformative engineering solutions in the
control of naturally occurring radioactive material for successful water
management strategy in oil and gas industry. Fundamental understanding of rock-
water interaction that will be developed in this study will facilitate
development of technical solutions to enable control of naturally occurring
radioactive material in produced water. The combined experimental and modeling
expertise of this research group will ensure deep understanding of key factors
governing the fate of naturally occurring radioactive material in water
treatment processes that use chemical precipitation and will have far-reaching
consequences for oil and gas industry by facilitating science based solutions to
address key environmental concerns that have led to significant public
opposition in many parts of the world. The proposed study will attain
fundamental scientific understanding of the phenomena that are relevant to other
industries besides oil and gas (e.g., mining, nuclear) and will ensure more
sustainable water management strategies by those industries. Water management
solutions developed in this study will also provide impetus for the development
of new solutions in other industries that are facing challenges with the control
of radioactive elements. Educational impact will be accomplished through
training students in rich, multidisciplinary environment to develop problem-
solving skills that are transferable to any field. This project will be
showcased at regional high schools though exciting and interactive hand-on
experience that sparks interest in advancements in S.T.E.M. disciplines.
Findings of this study have implications for world energy supply, while better
understanding of fundamental processes will spur development of new technologies
for water treatment.