* 1510855
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Wall Shear Stress Sensor for Engineering Fluid Dynamics in Biomedical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Henry Sodano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 185,000.00

Proposals: 1512553 / 1512553&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Frakes, David / Sodana,
Henry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program is likely to provide
fundamental knowledge, useful research techniques in the biomedical field
related to cerebral aneurysms and similar related pathology. The program focuses
on the development and application of wall shear stress sensors to improve
fundamental understanding of cerebral aneurysm fluid dynamics, create a
prototype for addressing similarly posed problems, and underpin long-term
advancement of fluid dynamic engineering in the context of human health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerebral aneurysms affect over 5% of the
population, which translates to more than 17 million people in the United
States. They cause 10% of strokes and have a mortality rate of 65% after
rupture. Although there is direct clinical evidence linking post-treatment
hemodynamics to outcomes, the specific hemodynamics that underpin treatment
success are not clear. This gap in understanding prevents the design and
execution of more successful treatments. To improve solutions for this problem,
and the broader class of problems it exemplifies, the proposed research program
will advance sensing of biomedical systems through: create physical models of
cerebral aneurysms for fluid dynamic experiments, develop nanostructured sensors
for measuring wall shear stress directly, characterize and analyze the novel
shear stress sensors under well-controlled conditions, and characterize the
sensors by using them in the aneurysm models for understanding aneurysmal flows.
Intellectual merits of the research program are: novel nanostructured sensors
for measuring wall shear stress directly, a physical, computational, and fluid
dynamic cerebral aneurysm library, and advance current knowledge of fluid
dynamics in biomedical systems. Broader impacts of the research program include:
enhanced infrastructure for research and education in the forms of novel sensors
and a broadly disseminated cerebral aneurysm library (including both physical
and computational models and fluid dynamic data), undergraduate research
projects and undergraduate/graduate classroom case studies, newly generated
partnerships with research and industry professionals, and impacts on society
including reduced healthcare costs and improved quality and duration of human
life. The primary educational goals of this program are to increase exposure to
crucial but unavailable engineering technologies and to broaden participation in
engineering. Toward those goals, the education program will engage students
through multimedia curricula based the core technologies that drive the research
program, thereby integrating the proposed research directly with education.
Cerebral aneurysms affect both Hispanics and women disproportionately. This fact
will be leveraged to recruit research and education program participants from
groups that are underrepresented in science and engineering. The programs will
benefit multiple groups (researchers, patients, students, underrepresented
groups) and institutions (academia, industry, healthcare, education) both
locally and globally.