* 1510561
* UNS: Integrating 3D Bioprinting and Biologically Inspired Nanomaterials for Cartilage Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Joseph O'Brien, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 440,899.00

PI: Zhang, Lijie Grace&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1510561&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Articular cartilage is a tissue notoriously hard to
regenerate due to its extremely poor regenerative properties. Even small
cartilage defects are permanent and difficult to heal. No currently available
treatment provides a perfect solution. As an emerging 3D tissue manufacturing
technique, 3D bioprinting offers great precision and control of the geometry of
complex tissue scaffolds. If successful, this project has the potential to be
impactful to the field of cartilage tissue engineering, leading to significantly
improved human health. Moreover, the resultant 3D bioprinting design principles,
stem cell regulation mechanisms and nanomaterials can serve as a translational
foundation for other tissue/organ regeneration. This award is being made jointly
by two Programs: (1) Biomedical Engineering, (2) Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering, both in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems Division in the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
nanometer dimension of human cartilage extracellular matrix, nanomaterials with
biomimetic features and excellent physiochemical properties are promising in
cartilage regeneration. The objective of this project is to create a novel 3D
nano, micro, and chemical cartilage construct via 3D bioprinting and
biologically inspired nanomaterials and to investigate their effects on
promoting human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) growth and chondrogenic
differentiation in vitro. Toward this objective, the proposed approach is to
design two biologically inspired nanomaterials with a nanostructure and
sustained growth factor delivery. A 3D bioprinted cartilage construct containing
the two innovative nanomaterials will then be fabricated and MSC functions will
be evaluated in vitro. Through this study, the investigators expect to create
new 3D bioprinted nano cartilage constructs and explore a spatiotemporally
bioactive factor environment for stimulated MSC chondrogenic differentiation and
cartilage regeneration in situ. The use of cutting-edge 3D bioprinting is
expected to invoke extensive interest among students and the general public. A
series of plans to integrate research activities with the education of a broad
and diverse audience, including high school students, undergraduate students,
graduate students, and medical residents, will be presented. The proposed
efforts will contribute to a significant educational effect on different levels
of students and inspire them to explore exciting new pathways in these
multidisciplinary fields.