* 1510314
* UNS: Enhancing Undergraduate Engineering Education through Meaningful Assistive Device Design
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Kimberly Bigelow, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 77,272.00

1510314(Bigelow)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides first-year and senior
engineering students meaningful design experiences that will directly improve
independence and quality of life for individuals with disabilities. Teams will
design assistive devices that address everyday needs. These design experiences
will be driven by needs identified by the occupational therapy staff at
Kettering Health Network's NeuroRehab and Balance Center, an outpatient
rehabilitation center that treats individuals with neurological disorders. Fully
functional prototypes will be designed and tested to ensure usefulness. These
designs may evolve to impact even more potential users as students are taught
how to determine when universal design approaches versus individualized
orphan/assistive device design approaches are appropriate. Throughout the
project first-year and senior students will be brought together for shared
learning and supporting activities, enabling opportunities for mentoring and
community building. The grant efforts also include the development of curriculum
modules that will help students understand how to make engineering design
decisions based on disability-related considerations, as well as the advantages
of designing in a team where diversity of thought and experience is present. The
outcomes of this grant will be disseminated broadly through professional society
workshops and publications so that other instructors nationwide can adopt
similar educational approaches that incorporate a focus on assistive device
designs. The students engaged in these efforts will also assist in designing
hands-on assistive device design challenges that will be used to inspire K-12
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant leverages an existing and successful
partnership between the University of Dayton (UD) and Kettering Health Network
(KHN) to enhance undergraduate design education at both the first-year and
senior capstone level. In this three year project, students will work in small
teams in established UD courses to design assistive devices that meet the needs
of local individuals affected by neurological disease. Occupational therapists
from KHN's NeuroRehab and Balance Center will identify these needs and serve as
sponsors of the project, overseeing student teams. The objectives of this grant
are to: 1) Provide meaningful, real-world engineering problems in a project-
based learning environment that allow participating students to gain a greater
understanding of: the engineering design and innovation process as a framework
for systematically approaching engineering design problems; the importance of
purposeful and regular interactions between designer, client (sponsor), and user
moving from identified need to functional, tested prototype; how to make
engineering design decisions based on disability-related considerations; and the
advantages of designing in a team where diversity of thought and experience is
present. 2) Develop and disseminate undergraduate educational materials and
other curricular elements to train students to: understand and appreciate
disability as a continuum of functional loss; determine when to utilize
universal design approaches vs. assistive device/orphan technology approaches;
develop and ask clarifying questions to assess patient need and functional
abilities; make engineering design decisions based on disability-related
considerations; and consider issues of manufacturing and marketing in advancing
assistive device designs. 3) Improve quality of life for at least 9 patients
with neurologic disease and disability annually, for each of the 3 years,
through the development of clinician-driven assistive device design. This grant
builds off demonstrated strengths and prior successes to enhance undergraduate
engineering education, while directly improving the lives of individuals with
neurological diseases. It has long been proposed that rehabilitative-type
engineering design projects appeal to students traditionally underrepresented in
engineering. This project will offer the unique opportunity to explore this,
longitudinally, in an existing all-female Engineering Innovation class. It is
envisioned that seeing how engineering can improve an individual's life through
project-based learning will be a transformative engineering design experience
that increases the likelihood of persistence in the field, especially for
underrepresented minorities. Findings of this work and developed curricular
resources will be disseminated broadly to provide others a framework for similar
partnerships that bring real-world needs to engineering courses. Additionally,
an educational outreach component will engage college students to inspire area
K-12 students.