* 1510293
* UNS: Surfactant Induced Post-Deposition Dispersal of Solid Particles at Liquid/Air Interfaces with Application to Pulmonary Drug Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Todd Przybycien, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2019
* USD 352,700.00

CBET - 1510293&lt;br/&gt;PI: Garoff, Stephen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many drugs to
treat respiratory disorders are formulated as dry powders and delivered directly
into the lungs by inhalation. One of the challenges in inhalation therapy is
guaranteeing the precise dose is delivered uniformly throughout the lungs. The
drug particles may preferentially deposit in some locations in certain airways
and not reach other locations or airways, especially in cases of obstructive
disease. This project will explore ways to promote dispersal of drug particles
after they have been deposited onto the liquid lining of airway surfaces. The
strategy is to use surfactants, delivered as particles, with the drug particles
to establish spatial variations of surface tension in the liquid along airway
surfaces. Variations in surface tension induce flows called Marangoni flows that
can entrain the drug particles and move them along airway surfaces. The project
comprises a series of experiments to understand the dynamics of particle motion
along the liquid surface and to determine how material properties influence the
final extent of drug dispersal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore
factors that determine the extent of dispersal of inhaled drug particles,
including properties of the surfactant, such as surface tension reduction,
solubility and kinetics of dissolution as well as wettability of the surfactant
particles and size of the particles. Similar properties for the drug particles
will affect the motion of the particles entrained in the Marangoni flow.
Collective effects related to how the deposition pattern of large numbers of co-
mingled surfactant and drug model particles controls large scale powder
dispersal will be determined, and a multi-variate analysis will be performed to
determine the primary factors that control the extent of post-deposition
dispersal. As an alternative to co-administering two kinds of particles, a
composite particle that contains both the drug and a surfactant to induce the
Marangoni flow will be examined.