* 1510481
* UNS: Fundamental studies of charge transfer states at organic donor-acceptor interfaces for photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Alberto Salleo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2018
* USD 312,204.00

PI: Alberto Salleo&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1510481&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells that use organic conducting polymers to convert light to
electricity - organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices - offer a potentially low-cost
route for renewable electricity production. However, in order to achieve parity
with other solar photovoltaic technologies, organic solar cells must increase
their power conversion efficiency past the current 10.5% world record. A
principal reason for this low power output is that the electric charge transfer
between the organic polymer that converts the sun's photons into electrons, and
the nanostructured carbon which accepts the generated electron, does not work
efficiently at the interface of these two materials. This proposed research will
develop a fundamental scientific understanding of this process at the molecular
level through advanced spectroscopic analysis techniques. The proposed
educational activities include development of online videos for material science
courses, and an undergraduate student project to use the spectroscopic methods
developed in the research to characterize artifacts at the Cantor Arts Center at
Stanford University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
develop a fundamental understanding of the structure-property relationships for
the donor-acceptor interface in organic polymer based photovoltaic (OPV) devices
at the molecular level. The fundamental photocurrent generation mechanism in OPV
involves splitting a tightly-bound electron-hole pair. Prior to the formation of
separated charges, the electron transfer from the light absorbing polymer donor
molecule to the electron acceptor molecule, typically fullerene or similar
nanostructured carbon, generates a charge transfer state, where the electron and
hole are formally on two different molecules and yet are still able to interact
across the donor-acceptor interface. The solar energy conversion efficiency of
OPV is due to low voltage generation, which is directly linked to energy of the
charge transfer state, and it is hypothesized the disorder of the charge
transfer state may be a causal factor. To better understand this process, model
materials will be used to measure systematically how molecular orientation
affects the energy of the charge transfer state. Towards this end, Fourier
transform photocurrent spectroscopy will measure generated photocurrent, and a
nanoscale electroluminescence technique will be developed to map the charge
transfer state spatially and correlate it to well-known donor-acceptor interface
configurations. Dilute ternary blends, where two mutually miscible fullerenes
are blended with a low concentration of a donor polymer, will serve as model
materials to investigate how compositional and structural disorder affects the
energy of the charge transfer state. Complementary studies using donors with
different degrees of aggregation will provide information on the dependence of
this process on polymer aggregation and crystallinity. Overall, these studies
will establish the structure-property relationships of the donor-acceptor
interface and suggest new approaches for materials and interface design to
increase voltage and power conversion efficiency of OPV devices. This
fundamental knowledge may also provide insights on how to refine theoretical
tools used to predict the performance and properties of organic polymer based
optoelectronic materials. Research on OPV devices will be used to develop online
video materials for an organic semiconductors course at Stanford University. The
project will also involve undergraduate students to work with the Cantor Arts
Center at Stanford University to spectroscopically characterize artifacts using
the techniques developed in the proposed research.