* 1510021
* Modelling the Impact of Stellar Feedback on Astrochemistry in Molecular Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Stella Offner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,901.00

Stars form within regions of cold, dense molecular gas. Many outstanding
problems in star formation, including the origin of star masses and the rate of
star formation, rely on first, accurately determining how much molecular gas
there is and, second, how energetic that gas is. However, there is no single
perfect tracer for all gas densities and temperatures. The most abundant
molecule within molecular clouds, molecular hydrogen (H2), is virtually
invisible. Consequently, obtaining fundamental information requires
understanding the relation between H2 and the emission of other less abundant
species, which are all complex functions of the local environment. This research
will provide a basis for understanding chemical distributions in different star-
forming environments and will focus on the relationship between H2 and easily
observable molecules, such as carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen cyanide (HCN).

The goal of this research project is to investigate the evolution of chemical
abundances and line emission in star-forming molecular clouds as a function of
star formation activity. The investigator will perform numerical simulations of
turbulent, star-forming clouds that include magneto-hydrodynamics, radiative
transfer, gravity and feedback from stars. This project will use full chemical
networks coupled with multi-physics molecular cloud simulations to study the
relationship between observations and underlying physical quantities. The
investigator will quantitatively explore three fundamental questions: How does
the relation between atomic carbon, CO, and HCN emission and H2 density evolve
as a function of star formation activity? How well do tracers, such as CO and
HCN, probe the gas energetics and correlate with total star formation? What is
the impact of kinematic feedback due to proto-stellar outflows on
astrochemistry?

This work has implications for estimating the total molecular gas mass, star
formation efficiency, and the correspondence between molecular cloud properties
(temperature, mass, velocity dispersion) and the star formation rate. They plan
to archive and share the abundance and emission maps with the astronomy
community through the website "Dataverse". This will allow comparison with
observations, including Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) data, for a wide
range of species, cloud conditions, and physical scales. New numerical methods
developed under the auspices of this funding will also be publicly released.