* 1510109
* IHES summer school on Moduli Problems in Symplectic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Michael Hutchings, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/29/2016
* USD 26,736.00

The conference entitled "Summer School on Moduli Problems in Symplectic
Geometry" will take place at the IHES (Institute des Hautes Etudes
Scientifiques) in Bures-sur-Yvette, France from July 6-17, 2015. The conference
website is located at
https://indico.math.cnrs.fr/conferenceDisplay.py?confId=585. This conference
will provide PhD students, postdocs, and young researchers with an overview of
the most recent technology in symplectic geometry, as well as faciliate
collaborations to further develop this technology. This grant will provide
travel funding for young US researchers lacking other federal support, with an
emphasis on members of underrepresented groups, to attend this conference. This
will enable the next generation of US researchers to keep up with the latest
developments and stay at the forefront of symplectic
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic geometry has made enormous advances
since the introduction of (pseudo)holomorphic curves by Gromov in 1985. However
in order to use holomorphic curves in symplectic geometry, a substantial amount
of analysis is needed to regularize the moduli spaces of holomorphic curves. In
the 80's and 90's these moduli spaces were regularized using geometric
perturbation techniques. However since then, symplectic geometry has moved
beyond the scope of problems to which geometric perturbation techniques are
applicable, leaving a serious gap in the foundations of the subject. Perhaps the
most successful and promising technology for filling this gap is the polyfold
theory of Hofer, Wysocki and Zehnder. The conference has two main goals. The
first goal is to educate a large audience in polyfold theory, in order to enable
more researchers to begin developing and using these new techniques. The second
goal is to connect the abstract perturbations of polyfolds to the classical
geometric perturbations in order to facilitate computations of invariants.