* 1510296
* Approximation and Orthogonality in Sobolev Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Yuan Xu, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2018
* USD 157,951.00

This research project is concerned with the study of approximations of functions
of several variables by families of simpler, polynomial functions (and related
questions) in the setting of Sobolev spaces, which are abstract mathematical
function spaces originally developed to study problems in mathematical physics
and which are utilized today in a number of scientific computing settings. A
truly complex system or problem is often intractable, and we often need to find
an approximation that is more manageable. Approximation methods on domains in
higher dimensional spaces are good examples of this principle, and they are
crucial in many problems in applied mathematics. In contrast to one dimension,
many challenging problems in higher dimensions that are of fundamental
importance are not resolved. The Principal Investigator will study several
problems on approximation and orthogonality in Sobolev spaces that rely on new
connections and ideas revealed only recently. The project aims at both
theoretical understanding and construction of new approximation methods, and the
work has the potential to impact scientific computing, numerical analysis,
statistics, and geoscience.

The Principal Investigator will study approximation and orthogonality in Sobolev
spaces on regular domains, such as cubes, balls, spheres, and simplexes. The
project combines several research topics: approximation theory, Fourier
analysis, numerical analysis, and orthogonal polynomials. One of the main
problems originates from the area of spectral methods for the numerical solution
of partial differential equations. Through recent work of the Principal
Investigator and collaborators, it has become increasingly clear that
understanding orthogonality in Sobolev spaces is crucial for approximation and
computation in Sobolev spaces. This research will be based on recent progress in
characterization of best approximation by polynomials on the unit sphere and on
the unit ball, in Sobolev orthogonal polynomials, and in spectral approximation.
The project is expected to lead to new scientific computational methods and new
algorithms.