* 1510674
* UNS: Developing Serial Optical Coherence Scanning to Reveal White Matter Changes in SCA1
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Harry Orr, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

PI: Akkin, Taner &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1510674&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop an optical imaging technique to study
the anatomical changes associated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1),
which is a fatal inherited neurodegenerative disease. Development of the optical
technique will enable a comprehensive three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of
the brain and cerebellum, and support quantitative assessments on white matter
content and organization. The obtained information may result in the
identification of specific markers of the disease and support development of
therapeutics in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Serial optical coherence
scanning (SOCS) integrates a tissue slicer and a multi-contrast optical
coherence tomography for large scale brain imaging at high resolution. It
distinguishes white matter and gray matter, and visualizes nerve fiber tracts
that are as small as a few tens of micrometers. The retardance contrast due to
axonal birefringence highlights the nerve fibers, while the axis orientation
contrast indicates their orientation in the plane. In addition, the Purkinje
cells and microstructures in gray matter can be visualized by incorporating a
microscope objective. The development of SOCS will include a calibration path
for obtaining the absolute axis orientation of nerve fibers in the xy plane, and
imaging at multiple illumination angles to extract the inclination angle of the
fibers with respect to the z-axis. This would represent the fiber orientation in
3D. It will also allow for calculation of the true birefringence. SOCS will be
used on three different SCA1 mice models. The investigators hypothesize that as
disease progresses towards death of Purkinje cells in nonlethal (ATXN1-82Q) and
lethal (SCA1-154Q/2Q) forms, it will manifest in the local and global
characteristics of the white matter, which is the axonal and probably the
disease carrying pathway to the brainstem and other brain regions. Neither the
Purkinje cell death, nor the premature death of the animal occurs for
ATXN1-30QD776 mice, which will serve as the control group. Comparative studies
will result in better understanding of the SCA1. The project also aims to
integrate the research effort with the educational activities that involve
general public and students. An exhibit at the Science Museum of Minnesota will
be developed for broad dissemination of knowledge to enhance understanding of
biomedical optics and the optical imaging technology that allows for high
resolution visualizations of the brain. The content will be incorporated in a
biomedical optics course taken by both undergraduate and graduate students.