* 1510479
* RUI:  Spatially and Compositionally Gradient Scaffolds for Anterior Cruciate Ligament
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Derrick Dean, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 539,894.00

PI: Dean, Derrick R.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1510479&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
human anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is ruptured over 200,000 times per year
(or an incidence of 1 in 3000) in the United States, resulting in over $1
billion of medical expenses. The gold standard for surgical repair is the
patellar tendon autograft, but this treatment is far from optimal due to lengthy
recovery time, potential for developing arthritis, associated donor site
morbidity, and degenerative joint disease. These limitations have prompted the
need for a tissue engineered solution. This study proposes to use a
multidisciplinary approach to provide a fundamental understanding of the design
and fabrication of a scaffold (a temporary structure made of a biodegradable
polymer that facilitates the growth of cells and tissue) that mimics and
facilitates the development of the four tissue types found in the ACL structure.
Students will be involved in the research, and several courses will benefit from
the knowledge generated by this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is ruptured over 200,000 times per year (or an
incidence of 1 in 3000) in the United States, resulting in over $1 billion of
medical expenses. The conventional surgical repair involves autografting the
patellar tendon autograft, however shortcomings of this approach include long
recovery time, potential for developing arthritis, associated donor site
morbidity, and degenerative joint disease. These limitations underscore the need
for a tissue engineered solution. This study proposes to use a multidisciplinary
approach which provides a fundamental understanding of the evolution of a
hierarchical, spatially organized 2-dimensional biomimetic scaffold designed to
facilitate the development of the four tissue types found in a ligament-to-bone
interface. The objectives of this study are: To utilize inkjet printing to
prepare hierarchical, spatially organized structures that can be used for bone-
ligament interfaces; to characterize the morphology, composition, mechanical
behavior and immunochemistry across the bone-to-ligament interface; and to
understand the material-cell interactions across the gradient structure. The
fundamental knowledge gained from this study will significantly impact the
engineering of bone-ligament interfaces and other applications where gradient
structures are present. Program resources will be leveraged with the existing
REU program at Alabama State University and the NSF/Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation program (LSAMP), to maximize the involvement of
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups. Several courses will
benefit from knowledge generated from the research, and students involved will
have opportunities to present their research at national and regional
conferences.