* 1510442
* UNS:Collaborative research: Resolving changes in microscopic properties as a result of hybrid polymer-ZIF membrane formation to enable rational design of such membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Ryan Lively, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 230,000.00

1510442/1510411 Lively/Vasenkov

Approximately 15% of domestic energy in the United States is consumed in
separation processes. Composite membrane separators comprised of particles of
advanced molecular sieve material embedded into a polymer film are a promising
class of membranes with the potential to make meaningful impact on the energy
efficiency of separation processes. The proposed research will establish
experimental framework that allows resolving microscopic transport, sorption and
structural properties of such composite membranes and finding relationships
between these properties and the corresponding macroscopic properties relevant
for applications in separations. The fundamental understanding of the
microscopic properties of the composite membranes will lay the foundation for
rationally designed composite membranes optimized for gas separations and
pervaporation.

Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), a class of metal-organic frameworks
(MOFs) that have zeolite-like structures, can be embedded into a glassy polymer
matrix to form a mixed matrix membrane (MMM). Such membranes capture both the
molecular sieving properties of the ZIF and the ease of processing associated
with polymers. The main goal of this work is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the relationship between the transport, sorption and structural
properties of the MMM constituents and those of the corresponding neat
materials. The PIs propose to use a synergetic strategy based on the application
of several state-of-the-art and even unique NMR and sorption characterization
techniques to achieve such resolution. The potentially transformative outcome of
the proposed work is to enable the design of ZIF-polymer MMMs based on the
understanding of changes of the transport, sorption and structural properties of
the MMM constituents in comparison to those of the neat materials.

The primary focus of the educational and outreach project plan is to establish a
new inter-campus research mentoring program for K-12 and undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups. This program will offer students participation in
well-defined engineering projects, development of engaging animations and
educational demonstrations related to membrane separations, presentation of
these animations and demonstrations to younger students and participation in a
student exchange between the UF and Georgia Tech groups.