* 1510922
* Engineering experiences: Research on student competency, motivation and persistence in STEM for underserved youth
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Tamara Sumner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2019
* USD 286,117.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that develop students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by providing engineering
experiences in atmospheric and related sciences to 112 middle school students.
The collaborative project is dedicated to helping low-income youth achieve a
brighter future through long-term, comprehensive educational enrichment
activities. It will develop and study Engineering Experiences, in an out-of-
school-time (OST) setting that combines project-based learning in STEM with
engineering experiences and ongoing mentoring to prepare students for success in
high school STEM courses and the future STEM workforce. The project builds on
previously funded projects about nanotechnology experiences for high school
students and adapts cyberlearning tools for Engineering Experiences. Middle
school students will use engineering design principles on activities and
projects involving wind power, aircraft design, atmospheric sensors, solar
energy, and testing dropsonde models in a wind tunnel as part of an afterschool
program.

Guided by the US Department of Education's out-of-school-time framework, the
project will use survey, interview, and classroom observation data to capture
the degree and under what conditions the interplay of individual and social
processes contributes to knowledge construction that leads to student
competency, motivation, and persistence in STEM. If data show that certain types
of engineering experiences do positively influence low socioeconomic status
(SES) and underserved students? competency, motivation, and persistence in STEM,
then outcomes will be disseminated to other communities to help increase
opportunities for more low SES students to engage in project-based engineering
experiences.