* 1510410
* iDigFossils: Engaging K-12 Students in Integrated STEM via 3D Digitization, Printing and Exploration of Fossils
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,194,054.00

This project will design and test a model for student engagement using
paleontology as the disciplinary focus. Paleontology, or the scientific study of
fossils, is a broad, interdisciplinary field that spans biology and geology.
Current paleontological research harnesses the resources provided by advanced
technologies and modern statistics. The project will design, implement, and
study a paleontology-focused and Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)
aligned curriculum that infuses cutting-edge 3-D scanning and printing
technologies in grades 6-12 Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM). Authentic paleontological data, model-based reasoning, and socio-
scientific problem solving will provide rich experiences integrating STEM
disciplines in grades 6-12 and contribute to cultivating students' interest and
identity in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design and implement a
3D technology-enhanced curriculum that infuses paleontology in K-12 as a truly
integrated STEM science. The curriculum will enable students to use 3-D
printing, computational modeling and other new technologies that will engage
them in developing 21st century skills and introduce them to STEM careers. The
project will introduce optimized research software for fossil interpretation and
create apps for computational modeling using an existing, open source statistics
environment. The project will research effective conditions for scaffolding
integrated STEM learning and the impact of the project on cultivating K-12
student interest and identity in STEM and related careers. Project research and
resources will be widely disseminated to researchers, students, teachers, and
informal educators. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program that supports projects
that build understandings of best practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to engaging students in learning and developing interest
in STEM, information and communications technology (ICT), computer science, and
related STEM content and careers.