* 1510698
* UNS:  Oligomers Derived from Emerging Nitroaromatic Pollutants in Anaerobic Environments: Mechanisms, Fate and Toxicity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Leif Abrell, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

1510698&lt;br/&gt;Field&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous organic compounds that are
used as explosives, pesticides, and pharmaceuticals involve the use of nitrogen
substitute aromatic compounds. These compounds can enter into aquatic
environments after use in agriculture and firing ranges or from industrial and
household discharges. It is known that these compounds may form polymers in
waters reactive in the presence of oxygen. The current paradigm is that the
polymerization of these compounds only occurs under conditions with oxygen
dissolved in the aqueous waters. However, preliminary evidence has shown
coupling reactions can also occur in the absence of oxygen which may have
important implications to their toxicity in ground waters and other waters with
low oxygen concentrations. The main focus of this project is to provide a
mechanistic basis for the anaerobic coupling reactions between reactive
intermediates derived from the microbial reduction of nitroaromatic pollutants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In anaerobic environments, the nitroaromatic compounds
will undergo reductive (bio)transformation to aromatic amines via nitroso- and
hydroxylamine-intermediates. The research will explore whether certain taxonomic
groups of anaerobic microorganisms with nitroreductase genes become enriched as
a consequence of the bioreduction of nitroaromatic compounds. Next the project
will test three hypothesized mechanisms of coupling. The first two involve
nucleophilic attacks on nitrosobenzene intermediates by either aromatic
hydroxylamines or amines, forming azoxy (Ar-N+(O-)=N-Ar) or azo bonds
(Ar-N=N-Ar), respectively. The third hypothesis is the coupling of radicals
formed from the oxidation of aromatic amines by metals. The extent of the
coupling reactions is expected to depend on the nitroaromatic structure.
Coupling of compounds with just one nitro group may be limited to dimers;
whereas, structures with multiple nitro groups can continue coupling to form
large polymers. Extensive coupling reactions are also expected with a continuous
supply of nitroaromatic pollutants which would allow for a continuous production
of reactive intermediates. Isotopically labeled model compounds (15N, 13C and
14C) will be used to help elucidate the structure of humic-like substances
formed in the absence of O2. Preliminary data indicate that dimers have an
increased toxicity compared to the original nitroaromatic compounds justifying a
detailed evaluation of their microbial and aquatic toxicity in this project. The
project will have impacts on risk assessment, green synthesis, high school STEM
education, inclusion of minorities in the scientific and educational
enterprises, and the long term goals of the research group. Azo dyes lend
themselves nicely to STEM projects because concentration is visually observable.