* 1510810
* UNS:Collaborative Research: Investigating Interfacial Sites in Metal/TiO2 Photocatalysts with in situ Spectroscopy and Computational Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Gonghu Li, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2018
* USD 232,995.00

1510810(Li) &amp; 1511672 (Deskins)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
research is focused on fundamental studies of photocatalysts based on
metal/titania nanocomposites. Titania photocatalysts have been extensively
studied in water/air purification and solar fuel generation. Depositing metal
nanoparticles on titania surfaces can greatly improve the utilization of
photonic energy in carrying out targeted surface reactions. However, little is
known about the exact structure and function of catalytic sites in the
interfacial region between the metal and titania phases. This research will
potentially lead to better design of innovative semiconductor photocatalysts
based on earth-abundant elements for efficient solar energy conversion. The
project will also support educational activities to broadly and effectively
disseminate sustainability concepts to the public, and provide opportunities for
full participation of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aim of this project is to investigate how
interfacial, low coordination metal sites alter (i) product selectivity of
copper/titania and (ii) reactivity of tin/titania nanocomposites in
photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide into fuels. Metal/titania
nanocomposites containing interfaces between individual components have
demonstrated enhanced reactivity in solar photocatalysis. Knowledge regarding
interfacial sites is important for photocatalysis research, but understanding is
currently limited and without strong theoretical basis. In this project,
rationally designed interfacial sites will be synthesized using inorganic and
organometallic precursors, extensively characterized with a combination of
techniques, and evaluated in photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction. The
structure and function of the synthesized interfacial sites will be investigated
using in situ spectroscopic techniques (FTIR and EPR) and computational modeling
(density functional theory). Through the proposed research, the PIs hope to
establish structure-function relationships for interfacial sites that are also
applicable to many other (photo)catalytic systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
technology investigated potentially is very important to the understanding and
commercial application of photocatalysis. Especially important is the link
between theory and experiment which has the potential to advance technology
beyond the specific example of carbon dioxide reduction explored in the proposed
work. The PIs propose to integrate their research with education via
undergraduate mentoring and curriculum development. Students working on the
proposed research project will receive interdisciplinary training in a field of
great importance toward a sustainable energy future and reduced greenhouse gas
generation.