* 1510920
* UNS: Integrated Tissue Engineering:  A Gastrointestinal-Liver Platform to Investigate the Metabolism of Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Padmavathy Rajagopalan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,999.00

PI: Rajagopalan, Padmavathy &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1510920&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gastrointestinal (GI) tract and the liver are
organs in the body that absorb and metabolize a portion of ingested chemicals
and nutrients. As such, they serve as defense mechanisms against harmful
chemicals and pathogens. This project focuses on engineering an integrated GI
and liver tissue to obtain information on how these organs work in unison to
metabolize chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The metabolism of a wide range of
chemicals, drugs, and pharmaceuticals is mediated by the dual and complementary
actions of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and liver. However, there is a
significant lack in understanding how integrating tissue mimics of these organs
function cohesively. Current studies that use simplistic monolayers fail to
capture the complex interactions in vivo. The PI proposes integrating three-
dimensional (3D) tissue mimics of the liver and GI to obtain physiologically
relevant information on their relative contributions to the biotransformation of
chemicals. The changes in the function and properties of each tissue upon
exposure to chemicals will be investigated under static and dynamic flow
conditions. The following research objectives are proposed. 1. Design an
integrated GI-Liver platform using a primary intestinal cell sheet and a 3D
multi-cellular hepatic organotypic culture model. 2. Investigate the integrated
GI-Liver platform in the presence of dynamic flow. 3. Investigate the effect of
chemicals using the GI-liver platform. With regard to broader impacts, the PI
will conduct K-12 educational outreach through a weeklong activity for female
high school students. The students will learn to identify changes in liver and
GI systems upon adding chemicals. This activity will enable students to learn
how to identify and formulate a research problem, to conduct statistical
analyses, and to work in teams.