* 1510092
* UNS: Ion transport in semicrystalline solid polymer electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2019
* USD 345,148.00

#1510092 Li, Christopher

Although the current state-of-the-art lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been
widely used in consumer electronics, because of the relatively low theoretical
capacity, they cannot meet the need of applications such as electrical vehicles,
autonomous aircrafts, etc. The theoretical capacity of LIBs can be greatly
improved by replacing graphite with lithium metal as the anode to fabricate a
lithium metal battery (LMB). To materialize LMB, the biggest obstacle is the
associated fire or explosion hazards. In order to achieve safe operation for
LMB, solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) with good room temperature ionic
conductivity and high shear modulus are needed. The goal of this proposed
research is to understand the ion transport mechanism in semicrystalline SPEs
for energy device applications. The proposed semicrystalline SPEs could be a
viable candidate for fabricating next generation safe LMBs.

In this proposal, through critical analysis of the past four decades of research
on SPE, an overlooked question regarding the detailed mechanism of the
crystalline morphology effect on ionic conductivity in SPEs has been raised. To
answer this challenging question, the PI proposes a series of semicrystalline
SPEs with precisely controlled crystal size, orientation, and chain folding.
This novel approach, for the first time, decouples the intertwine structural
(tortuosity) and dynamic (tethered chain confinement) effects on ion transport
in SPE. It also demonstrates that tortuosity associated with crystalline
morphology plays a critical role on ion transport in semicrystalline SPEs. The
proposed research will provide a new strategy to design SPEs for energy device
applications: Compared with existing SPEs, the proposed semicrystalline SPE with
controlled crystal morphology and orientation is advantageous because
crystalline polymer is mechanically 3-4 orders of magnitude stronger than
amorphous rubbery polymers, the intrinsic two-phase model (crystalline and
amorphous) associated with semicrystalline SPE addresses the needs for two
performance measures, the mechanical properties and the high ionic conductivity,
respectively.

The proposed research aims to tackle a challenging problem in the energy
research field. If successful, the project will lead to a new type of SPEs,
which enables safe operation of lithium metal batteries, a grand challenge
facing the energy research community. These proposed educational activities
encompass a broad impact. First, the proposed plan will help bridge the existing
gap between levels of educational developments by involving high school students
and teachers in research activities through a number of mentoring programs.
Second, due to the high population of under-represented groups in the
Philadelphia region, the proposed outreach program will be specifically geared
towards encouraging the participation of under-represented populations. Third,
the proposed research will be publicized through scientific media and public
workshops. The dissemination of this information along with hands-on experiences
for secondary education teachers will result in more informed teachers capable
of educating the future by establishing collaborative efforts with school
districts in the surrounding Philadelphia region.