* 1510541
* UNS:Collaborative Reasearch:  Hydrocarbon conversion on oxysulfide surfaces:   Towards the design of sulfur-tolerant reforming catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Michael Janik, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 211,865.00

1510435 (Dooley), 1510541(Janik)

Sulfur-containing compounds are ubiquitous impurities in petroleum resources
that poison catalysts used for the refining and upgrading of both crude oil and
natural gas to fuels and chemicals. The proposed research seeks to develop and
understand novel sulfur-tolerant catalysts for the conversion of natural gas to
gases used to synthesize liquid fuels and chemicals. To this end, the work has
potential to develop a simplified, efficient process for natural gas conversion
without the need for expensive "upstream" desulfurization. The researchers will
also advance education and scientific awareness by involving undergraduate
students in their research with an emphasis on minority, women, and first-
generation students.

Large quantities of natural gas are being produced from shale resources,
providing opportunities to convert the gas to liquid fuels via reforming
reactions. This study reforms methane by reacting it with carbon dioxide, thus
generating feedstocks for liquid fuels while reducing the atmospheric loading of
carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas). A combination of experimental and theoretical
tools will be used to design mixed metal oxide catalysts (combining transition
metals and rare earth oxides) that are both sulfur tolerant and less prone to
poisoning by coking than current catalysts. Specifically, the work addresses the
hypothesis that the mixed transition metal and rare earth oxide catalysts form
stable and active oxysulfides under reaction conditions, with the benefit that
the oxysulfides destabilize coke precursors. Computational methods will be used
to predict candidate oxysulfided catalyst materials that will then be
synthesized, tested, and characterized, with results used to refine the
theoretical predictions. Beyond the direct research, the two PIs on this project
have a strong track record of educational outreach at their respective
institutions including involvement of undergraduates in their research programs
and Dooley's work with the "You be the Chemist Challenge" of the Louisiana
Chemical Education Foundation (focused on middle- and high-school students).