* 1510353
* UNS: Taking Advantage of Metal Interpenetration to Improve the Performance of Conjugated Polymer/Fullerene-Based Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 329,418.00

PI: Benjamin J. Schwartz &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1510353&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun represents the most abundant potential
source of sustainable energy on earth. Solar cells that use light-absorbing
organic polymers to convert light to electricity - organic photovoltaic (OPV)
devices - offer a potentially low-cost route for renewable electricity
production. However, in order to achieve parity with other solar photovoltaic
technologies, organic solar cells must increase their power conversion
efficiency past the current 10.5% world record. The goal of this project is to
add metal nanoparticles into the active layer of the organic solar cell to
possibly enhance solar energy conversion efficiency. The active layer of the OPV
device consists of the conducting polymer and nanostructured carbon. If the
metal nanoparticles are in the right place, they will enhance light absorption,
and ultimately solar energy conversion efficiency, through a complex process
called plasmonic resonance. A key innovation of this project is that that metal
nanoparticles will be formed at precise locations within the active layer to
enable this process. As part of the educational activities associated with this
project, the principal investigator participates in a program where
nanotechnology topics are brought to high school classrooms throughout the
greater Los Angeles area in a series of graduate student-run workshops for high
school teachers. The graduate student supported by this grant will develop and
conduct workshops on solar energy featuring organic solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major technical challenge with the fabrication of
organic photovoltaic devices is to precisely control the nanoscale spatial
distribution of the light-absorbing polymer (electron donor) and fullerene
(electron acceptor) to optimize charge separation and photocurrent collection.
Furthermore, other complicating factors may occur during device fabrication. For
example, conductive metals are deposited on the top of the organic polymer layer
by thermal evaporation to serve as an electrical contact. It is hypothesized
that these evaporated metals easily move through the fullerenes and leave a
layer of metal nanopartÂ¬icles underneath any fullerenes that reside at the top
of the polymer layer, creating unintended consequences to device performance
that have been overlooked to date. Preliminary data supports this hypothesis,
and the overall goals of this proposed research are to determine the effects of
metal interpenetration on the performance of polymer-based PV devices, and then
develop strategies to purposely manipulate metal nanoparticle interpenetration
to improve device performance through plasmonic optical absorption enhancement.
In the proposed research, experimental and computational approaches will be used
to understand these processes. Sequential processing, where the donor
(conducting polymer) and acceptor (fullerene) layers are deposited in separate
steps, will be used to control the vertical fullerene distribution within the
OPV active layer. Transmission electron microscopy, in combination with
ellipsometry and neutron reflectometry, will be used to study the conditions by
which metals penetrate through fullerenes. This information will be used to
develop synthesis strategies to control the distribution of interpenetrated
metal, and ultimately the size and position of the metal nanoparticles that are
formed. The dielectric constant, plasmonic absorption enhancement, and exciton
quenching measurements will performed on the metal nanoparticle impregnated
active layer, and these fundamental optoelectronic property measurements will be
correlated to overall measurements of device performance, including solar energy
conversion efficiency, external quantum efficiency, and
photocurrent/photovoltage transients. Complementary simulations that couple full
solutions of Maxwell?s equations with standard drift-diffusion solvers will be
performed with metal nanoparticles in the active layer to help to understand and
interpret these experimental results. The research outcomes will suggest
purposeful ways to simultaneously enhance OPV device fabrication and
performance.