* 1510749
* UNS: Strained Turbulence and Mixing in Flows of a conducting fluid in a magnetic field
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Pui-Kuen Yeung, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 309,851.00

1510749(Yeung)

The goal of this proposal is to investigate effects of magnetic forces in
turbulent flows that occur in manufacturing processes where liquid metals are
involved.High fidelity simulations will be utilized, since experiments in these
physical systems with liquid metals are not feasible. The proposed research is
expected to have a longer term impact on manufacturing, a research area of
National interest, for example in the production of aluminum that involves
electrical currents that melt the ore), as well as magnetic fields.

The objectives of the proposed research are to pursue fundamental advances in
the study of turbulent flow of an electrically conducting fluid in a uniform
magnetic field, in the low-magnetic-Reynolds number regime. Numerical
simulations of high fidelity (i.e., direct numerical simulations, DNS) of
turbulent flows will be utilized to study the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
phenomena that are important in this physical situation and the effects of the
Lorentz force of electromagnetic induction on flow development and on mixing.
The nature of MHD turbulence is not sufficiently understood - very little
experimental data are available. Simulations of passive scalar fields are
proposed to provide insights on time scales of mixing and relaxation from
different initial conditions. The proposed DNS would provide results to model
the Reynolds stress tensor accounting for the Joule dissipation effect and to
close the turbulence equations for lower-order modeling. In addition, a training
activity is proposed to recent initiatives in a summer internship program
specifically targeted towards undergraduate students with disabilities, to be
selected from a national pool of applicants through working closely with the
American Association for the Advancement of Science. Selected high school
teachers from the Atlanta area participating in a summer program will be
encouraged to incorporate elements of the science into high-school physics
curricula.