* 1510787
* UNS: Improved Risk Mitigation Strategies for Industrial Process Scheduling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Chrysanthos Gounaris, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2018
* USD 310,223.00

Gounaris, 1510787&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the mitigation of
risk in the context of Process Scheduling Optimization (PSO) in view of
uncertainty in problem parameters. The term PSO refers to a family of decision-
making problems that are prevalent in the chemical process industries and which
are typically embedded in the Manufacturing Execution System supervising a
plant's operations. The archetypal setting is the one where a set of limited
available resources (e.g., equipment, personnel, raw materials, utilities) needs
to be coordinated ("scheduled") along a time horizon so as to meet a number of
production goals. Identifying optimal solutions, and sometimes even obtaining a
single feasible solution, of a PSO instance is generally a challenging task.
This is due to the various compounding combinatorial complexities involved,
including complexities stemming from the plant's topology (flowsheet),
complicated production recipes, or other operational restrictions (market-
related, regulatory, etc.). The objective in PSO is typically the maximization
of profit ("produce as much as you can within a limited amount of time") or the
minimization of makespan ("produce a fixed amount as soon as possible"), though
additional objectives, such as the balancing of resource utilization load or the
minimization of environmental footprint, can also be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective is to develop an
Adjustable Robust Optimization (ARO) framework for the systematic treatment of
uncertainty in PSO. PSO involves the coordination of limited available resources
along a time horizon so as to meet a number of production goals. Identifying
optimal solutions of a PSO instance is generally a challenging task, further
complicated by the fact that it is of practical interest that such production
management systems take into account uncertainties in input data, since failure
to do so may lead to solutions that are infeasible or highly suboptimal. This
project applies ARO, a risk mitigation methodology extending the paradigm of
Robust Optimization (RO) that seeks to optimize the problem in view of a "worst-
case" scenario, as dictated by an uncertainty set. But unlike RO, which results
in a static, "here-and-now" solution that is often overly conservative, ARO
results in a more flexible--and generally more profitable--solution policy by
adjusting the decisions on the actual realizations of the uncertain parameters
that have already occurred and been observed by the time of the decision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective algorithms to mitigate technical and financial
risk in the process industries can play an important role in the
competitiveness, product quality and sustainability of the U.S. manufacturing
base. Exploiting efficiencies in process operations limits environmental impact
as well as promotes occupational health and safety. Adopting these innovations
could provide tangible benefits to individual companies by materializing
efficiencies in their utilization of process equipment, raw materials and
personnel. This could be particularly useful for small companies, which cannot
readily develop an "in-house" framework suitable to their setting. There is also
the potential to enhance products of software vendors in the sector of
manufacturing and enterprise resource planning. Potential educational benefits
will be in generating material for a relevant course and creating an
educationally-focused PSO-themed software applet. All students will receive
training in production management, optimization methods and algorithms,
uncertainty quantification and analysis, and scientific computation.