* 1510446
* Optimal Shrinkage Estimation for Heteroscedastic Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Samuel Kou, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 304,146.00

Shrinkage estimators are powerful statistical methods that have profound impact
in scientific and engineering applications. They provide efficient tools to pool
information from related populations for simultaneous inference -- the data on
each population alone often do not lead to the most effective estimation, but by
pooling information from the related populations together one can often obtain
more accurate estimates for each individual population. Examples of the
applications of shrinkage estimators include the analysis of healthcare systems
(quality of hospital services, etc.), the analysis of education programs (the
effectiveness of teaching programs), the assessment of medical treatments
(pooling information from multiple studies or clinical trials), the ranking of
multiple genes on their association with diseases, and the comparison of
multiple manufacturing processes. This research project will investigate
shrinkage estimations in the context of heterogeneous data, aiming to identify
optimal ways to conduct shrinkage estimation in various settings.

This research project studies and identifies risk-optimal shrinkage estimators
under parametric as well as semi-parametric settings for heteroscedastic data.
In addition to thorough theoretical investigation, the project includes
comprehensive numerical studies and real applications. The research topics
include the investigation of optimal shrinkage estimators for heteroscedastic
data from non-Gaussian exponential families; the investigation of optimal
shrinkage estimators for heteroscedastic data from location-scale families; and
the investigation of optimal shrinkage estimators for heteroscedastic data from
linear regression models. The research aims to advance the theoretical
understanding of shrinkage estimators and also provide powerful techniques for
the analysis of data in medical, natural and social sciences, and engineering.