* 1510869
* UNS:  Engineered Nanomaterial Impact on Long-Term Stability of MSW Landfill and Leachate Treatment Pond Geomembrane Liners
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Charles Pierce, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2022
* USD 329,937.00

1510869&lt;br/&gt;Berge &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As engineered nanomaterial-
containing products reach the end of their useful life, they will likely reside
in municipal solid waste landfills. Work conducted in the principal
investigator's (PI's) laboratory at the University of South Carolina suggests
that the mobility of carbon nanotubes, examples of engineered nanomaterials, may
be significant in waste environments containing "mature" leachate (consisting
primarily of humic acid). The main goal of this research is to conduct
experiments and perform molecular modeling simulations to understand the
implications associated with engineered nanomaterial-geomembrane interactions in
municipal solid waste landfills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered nanomaterial
production continues to increase: therefore it is inevitable that engineered
nanomaterial-containing products/wastes will end up in landfills. Unfortunately,
there are no processes or research to evaluate whether currently designed and
operating landfills and leachate treatment/storage ponds can adequately
manage/contain these materials. Of particular importance is the understanding of
how engineered nanomaterials may interact with the geosynthetics present in the
liners. This work will elucidate the impact of engineered nanomaterials on high-
density polyethylene geomembranes and importantly, how they may influence
geomembrane durability/service lives. This research is transformative in that it
is the first study in which engineered nanomaterial-high-density polyethylene
liner interactions will be explored. Results will provide necessary information
to assess whether current solid waste management processes are adequate to
safely manage/contain such wastes. The research results will be widely
disseminated via presentations and publications. This project is guided by the
hypothesis that engineered nanomaterials will influence long-term stability of
geomembranes by increasing antioxidant release/depletion. The nature of
engineered nanomaterial influences on geomembranes are dependent on material
application (e.g., landfill bottom liner or leachate storage pond) and
environmental conditions (e.g., oxygen presence). The specific objectives of
this work are: (1) Elucidate how selected engineered nanomaterials influence
polymer oxidation, antioxidant diffusion, and subsequent changes in mechanical
behavior of high-density polyethylene liners; (2) Understand how engineered
nanomaterial surface chemistry influences polymer oxidation and antioxidant
diffusion; and, (3) Perform molecular level simulations to calculate
adsorption/partitioning coefficients, quantify diffusion coefficients, and
calculate reaction kinetics for oxidation reactions, and develop a process model
to quantify the effects of engineered nanomaterials on antioxidant depletion in
high-density polyethylene liners. The PI is committed to promoting teaching,
training, and learning while conducting this research. The broader impacts plan
is comprised of three components: (1) K-12 outreach; (2) undergraduate research
experiences for underrepresented populations in engineering; and, (3) doctoral
student mentoring. It is anticipated that a large population of potential future
engineers and scientists can be reached through these planned activities.