* 1510305
* Flexibility in Symplectic and Contact Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Emmy Murphy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2019
* USD 182,525.00

This project undertakes a study of flexibility phenomena in symplectic and
contact geometry. Symplectic and contact manifolds represent the kinds of
geometric objects that connect abstract geometry to mathematical physics, and
they give an ideal setup for studying classical mechanics, quantum physics, and
string theory from a geometric perspective. Most work done in symplectic
geometry today is in the direction of symplectic rigidity, meaning that we have
very strong tools for detecting when this geometry obstructs you from doing
something, for example, moving some subset of this geometric space somewhere
else in the space. In contrast, symplectic flexibility aims to find geometric
situations when we have constructive tools. Based on work of the past 40 years
it seems that symplectic geometry is a very delicate thing, meaning that by
making a small geometric alteration almost all geometric rigidity completely
falls apart, allowing the geometry to become extremely malleable and
unrestricted. The project aims to study what these geometric alterations are,
how they cause the geometry to become flexible, and how these phenomena can be
applied to symplectic geometry as a whole.

This contrast of rigidity and flexibility should be thought of as measuring the
difference between geometry and topology. If we are looking for a geometric
structure or equivalence between objects, it certainly must exist as a
topological object if it has any hope to exist geometrically. But when does the
topology determine the geometry? In symplectic geometry this question can be
rephrased as the existence of a solution to an underdetermined PDE, or a partial
differential inequality. An h-principle is a systematic way to construct
solutions to such equations. The project is intended to study how h-principles
relate to symplectic and contact geometry. Depending on the context this has
many different facets. In some situations the PI intends to construct new
h-principles designed to solve specific problems in symplectic geometry, but it
also involves finding new geometric methods to detect when an existing
h-principle applies, or extending existing h-principles to a wider context. The
type of h-principle needed also depends heavily on the geometry available, such
as whether the object in question is symplectic or contact, whether it is the
ambient space or a submanifold, whether it is low or high dimensional, and other
factors.