* 1510615
* UNS:Collaborative Research: Multiscale interactions between active particles and stratified fluids during collective vertical migration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Eckart Meiburg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,028.00

CBET - 1510607/1510615&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dabiri, John/Meiburg,
Eckart&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project uses experiments and
numerical simulation to investigate the collective motion of small swimming
organisms in water. The hypothesis underlying the project is that the collective
motion of many small organisms can induce fluid motion over length scales that
are much larger than the organism itself. The investigators will focus on motion
in stratified fluid layers, which are commonly found in the ocean, where the top
fluid layer usually is warmer and saltier than deeper fluid layers. The
stratification can lead to an instability that induces fluid motion, but the
presence of the swimming organisms may change conditions for the onset of the
motion and affect detailed flow patterns and fluid mixing that result from the
motion. Although the research focuses on motion in the ocean as an example, the
insights gained from the project will apply to other particulate and multiphase
systems. Both investigators will involve high school students, undergraduates
and graduate students in the project. Results from the project will be used in
outreach efforts to engage in the research students from groups that are
traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposal is to address
experimentally and numerically the fundamental questions of multi-scale, many-
body, fluid-structure interactions in stratified layers. The experiments will
use a unique system that can produce on-demand vertical migrations of plankton
via phototaxis in a controlled laboratory setting. A laser-guidance system will
control swimming speed and swimmer spacing in collective motions. Two-
dimensional particle imaging velocimetry will be used to measure flows generated
by the swimmers' motion. The numerical methods implemented in the project are
capable of simulating large numbers of swimming organisms with fidelity
sufficient for studying details of both the near- and far-field flows. Numerical
simulations will help test the possibility that collective swimming motions
drive large-scale convection by modifying effective diffusivities of heat and
salinity so as to induce double-diffusive convection.