* 1510504
* Gamma-Ray Astronomy and Cosmic-ray Astrophysics with the VERITAS and HAWC Observatories (University of Utah Group)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 968,205.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. This award supports scientists at the
University of Utah to carry out gamma-ray astrophysics research using two
complementary ground-based observatories. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is designed to
study high energy gamma-rays with very sensitive pointed observations. The High
Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra
Negra in Mexico, is a continuously-operating array with a wide field of view
that can observe two-thirds of the high energy gamma-ray sky every day. The
University of Utah group will contribute to the operation and maintenance of
VERITAS and HAWC and work on analysis and interpretation of the scientific data.
The group will continue and expand their existing education and outreach
activities using the on-campus South Physics Observatory, the high altitude
Willard L. Eccles Observatory, and the Star Base Utah Observatory for both
public education and student projects. They will build new connections to Utah
senior citizens through courses developed for the University's Osher Institute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Utah group will use VERITAS to extend
detections of flaring active galactic nuclei to higher redshifts, setting more
stringent limits on the flux of extragalactic background light. Long-term
VERITAS observations of high mass x-ray binaries as well as other galactic
binaries and microquasars will be used to explore similarities in their time-
dependent gamma-ray emission, while observations of Galactic supernova remnants
will be used to explore the origin of galactic cosmic rays. Using both VERITAS
and HAWC synergistically, the group will explore the origin of cosmic rays in
diffuse supernova remnants and pulsar wind nebulae, and enhance the search for
neutralino Dark Matter emission from unidentified high galactic latitude VHE
gamma-ray sources.