* 1510845
* UNS: Bi-cyclic peptides for specific inhibition of intracellular protein-protein interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Balaji Rao, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 324,797.00

1510845 &lt;br/&gt;Rao, Balaji M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular processes such
as growth, death and differentiation are regulated by interactions between
proteins in the cell. Disruption of a protein-protein interaction (PPI) is a
useful tool to study its significance in a given cellular context. The goal of
this project is to develop a class of compounds that specifically inhibit PPIs
of interest. Specifically, inhibitor compounds targeting a model PPI of
relevance in cancer and human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) will be developed. If
successful, the results from this project will have significant broader
scientific impact as an enabling tool for cell biology, and applications
involving stem cells in particular. Furthermore, inhibitor compounds may be
attractive as drug candidates. Research activities undertaken will also be
integrated with a plan for education and K-12 outreach, including hosting a high
school teacher in the PI's lab and engaging with high school students through a
stem cell themed workshop to create general awareness of the science,
technology, ethics and regulation of stem cell
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell-permeable small molecules represent a
powerful tool for inhibiting PPIs. However, the use of these compounds is often
limited by insufficient target specificity and potential toxicity. Furthermore,
the identification of a small molecule capable of specifically inhibiting a
given PPI in the intracellular milieu is not trivial. To overcome these
limitations, it is proposed to design bi-cyclic peptides for specific inhibition
of intracellular PPIs, wherein one cyclic moiety enables cell penetration, and
the second moiety selectively binds a specific region on the target protein. In
Objective 1, mRNA display libraries will be screened to identify cyclic moieties
that mediate cell penetration. In mRNA display, each peptide is linked to its
coding sequence. Peptides with desired properties are selected from the library
of nucleic acid-peptide hybrids and identified by DNA sequencing. In Objective
2, a mRNA-display library of bi-cyclic peptides containing a cell penetrating
moiety will be screened to identify cyclic peptide moieties that disrupt a PPI
mediated by beta-catenin. Finally, under Objective 3, the bi-cyclic peptide
inhibitors will be validated through experiments in HEK293T cells. Subsequently,
the validated inhibitor will be used to investigate the role of the target PPI
in hESCs. To facilitate K-12 outreach, the PI will host a high school teacher as
part of the Kenan Fellows Program - a prestigious year-long fellowship program
for North Carolina K-12 public school teachers designed to advance and retain
exceptional science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) educators.
Additionally, the PI will engage with high school students through a stem cell
themed workshop. Key aspects of the proposed research will be incorporated into
courses currently offered by the PI and undergraduate students will be actively
involved in targeted research projects that contribute to the overall goals of
this project. Participation of women and minority students will be particularly
encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics
and Function Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.