* 1510203
* UNS:  Collaborative Research:  Newly and To-Be-Discovered Phytometabolites of Antimicrobials:  Importance to Fate in Environmental and Human Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Dawn Reinhold, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 309,416.00

1510203 Reinhold

1510714 Bornhorst

Recently the growing threat of antibiotic compounds in natural waters and the
antibiotic resistance in microorganism in those waters has been recognized and
is an emerging field of intense research. The uptake and accumulation of
antibiotics by food crops has prompted concerns about unintentional human
exposure. In addition to accumulation, plants metabolize organic chemicals,
including antibiotics, through conjugation reactions, resulting in phyto-
metabolites that are sequestered into cell walls and vacuoles. The overall aim
of the proposed project is to elucidate the production of phyto-metabolites of
antibiotics and their subsequent release in human systems when plants are eaten.

The proposed research will evaluate the central hypothesis that plants
predominantly metabolize antibiotics through conjugation with glycosides and
glutathione, forming phyto-conjugates that are reverted to the parent antibiotic
by human digestion. In order to evaluate this hypothesis, the research will: 1.
Identify the metabolites of antibiotics in Arabidopsis thaliana in sterilized,
controlled systems. 2. Quantify the production of phyto-metabolites of
antibiotics in soil systems planted with A. thaliana and three vegetables, as
relevant to the environmental fate of antibiotics in crop systems. 3. Elucidate
pathways of degradation of phyto-metabolites of antibiotics during human
digestion. The proposed research addresses the limitations of existing research
on the fate of antibiotics through coupled use of radiolabeled chemicals and
mass spectrometry, which will facilitate quantification of phyto-metabolism and
degradation of phyto-metabolites in controlled mesocosms and column studies.
Consequently, the proposed research is expected to advance understanding of
phyto-metabolism of emerging pollutants through the following outcomes: (1)
development of a generalized, transferable model of phyto-metabolism, (2)
realistic estimates of the mass of phyto-metabolites of antibiotics in vegetated
systems, including quantification of individual phyto-metabolites sequestered in
vacuoles and cell walls with time, and, (3) determination of the bioavailability
of sequestered phyto-metabolites during consumption of vegetables. This study
will broadly impact society and science through integrating discovery and
teaching, engaging underrepresented groups, broadly disseminating results, and
addressing environmental and human health challenges. Research will engage and
train a graduate student, at least two undergraduate students, and least four
high school students in active research that transcends engineering and biology.
This project will involve minority high-school students in research to encourage
interest in engineering careers. Research outcomes will be broadly disseminated
through academic avenues, including journal publications and conferences.