* 1510214
* Singular Kahler-Einstein Metrics: Analytic and Algebraic Aspects
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Christian Schnell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 145,008.00

Complex spaces or complex manifolds are spaces that carry a certain additional
structure that arises naturally in physical theories. Complex geometry aims to
study the shapes of complex manifolds through distances and angles;
mathematically these measurements are called Kähler metrics. In the physics
context, manifolds that carry a metric that is both a Kähler metric and an
Einstein metric are of interest; these are called Kähler-Einstein metrics. This
project considers several central problems in complex geometry, both from
analytic and algebraic points of view, and builds around the notion of a so-
called singular Kähler-Einstein metric. This relatively recent notion has been
introduced in an attempt to extendi Yau's theorem on the resolution of Calabi's
conjecture to singular settings directly coming from algebraic geometry, and
more precisely birational (complex) geometry. A major current challenge consists
of constructing these objects in various contexts and trying to understand their
behavior; a good understanding of the behavior of singular Kähler-Einstein
metrics would have important consequences both in complex geometry as well as in
areas of theoretical physics, such as string theory. Moreover, studying families
of singular Kähler-Einstein metrics is very closely linked with the moduli
theory, one of the main components of algebraic geometry. It is expected that
results of the project concerning applications of singular Kähler-Einstein
metrics will advance knowledge in the theory of singular spaces, in analytic and
algebraic geometry, and in other areas of mathematics and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three central topics:
behavior of the Kähler-Einstein metrics near the singularities of the variety,
families and degenerations of singular Kähler-Einstein metrics, and applications
of the Kähler-Einstein theory to algebraic geometry. The first circle of ideas
is about finding models for Kähler-Einstein metrics near their singularities.
The singularities can arise from those of the variety or from the boundary
divisor of the pair to consider. The project examines the general case of (semi)
log canonical pairs, through past results of the PI and others, as well as
numerous questions that arise in the these works. The topics include improving
the pluripotential methods to get sharper estimates, understanding the
(Riemannian) geometry of the singular Kähler-Einstein metrics by relating
singularities and completeness, and deriving higher regularity at the singular
points. The second circle of ideas centers on families of singular Kähler-
Einstein metrics, and in particular studying the moduli space of canonically
polarized varieties from a differential geometric point of view through Weil-
Petersson geometry. Other related questions are about Gromov-Hausdorff (or more
refined) convergence of conic Kähler-Einstein metrics. The hope is that the
recent developments in pluripotential theory should give a new angle to tackle
these problems. The third circle of ideas focuses on various applications of
singular Kähler-Einstein metrics, particularly in algebraic geometry. Typical
questions that arise in the project concern vanishing/parallelism theorems or
semi-stability properties of the tangent sheaf of singular varieties. Here
again, a consequent part of the questions is motivated by recent progress in the
theory of Monge-Ampère equations.