* 1510006
* GOALI:   Graphene Paper Sensor for Disease Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Warren Perger, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 349,250.00

1510006 Caryn Heldt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over half a million children died in
2012 from malaria, yet with early diagnosis, this is a treatable disease. The
investigators have joined forces with industrial and academic collaborators to
create a disposable point-of-care (POC) device that has the potential to save
many lives. They will prototype a sensor that is functionalized for detection at
a very high sensitivity of one malarial parasite in a droplet of blood. The same
device with modifications may be used for detecting other human pathogens, and
therefore, potentially reduce health care costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal will examine the conductive and capillary wicking properties of a
graphene nanoplatelet (GNP) paper microfluidic device as a sensitive, selective,
and disposable electrochemical sensor for malaria. The investigators will test
the new device using a novel malaria biomarker, the activity of parasitic
Topoisomerase I (pfTopI). Thus, the overall objective of this proposal is to
prototype a graphene paper malaria sensor that utilizes pfTopI activity to
detect an active malaria infection. The hypothesis is that controlling the
graphene/cellulose composition and chemistry, coupled with innate amplification
due to enzymatic activity, will create an inexpensive, paper-based platform for
detection of a unique and selective malaria biomarker. Our goal is to create a
sensor that can detect 1 parasite/&amp;#956;l (or less), whereas the current
devices on the market have poor sensitivity of ~50 parasites/&amp;#956;l. The
research team will realize the improved sensitivity by 1) Creating a GNP paper
sensor, 2) Improving the sensitivity through paper chemistry and DNA
functionalization and 3) Integrating pfTopI extraction with GNP detection for
creating a POC device. During the project period, we will expose graduate and
undergraduate students from Michigan Tech and community colleges to the
development process of a medical device, the interworking of an international
and multidisciplinary team, and the presentation of scientific data at a
national and international level. The undergraduate students will be involved
with an outreach project to a local, economically disadvantaged high school,
where we will demonstrate our GNP paper device using a handheld multi-meter.