* 1510207
* RUI: Wet Printing of Carbon Nanotube-Enhanced Osmosis Membranes for Water Desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Corinne Lehr, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 312,000.00

CBET-1510207&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;Cal Poly St Univ&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research uses nanotechnology to redesign osmosis membranes for cost-
effective desalination and purification of water. In particular, a solution-
based printing technique is proposed to fabricate large-area, vertically-aligned
carbon nanotube-based osmosis membranes. A systematic analysis of the structure-
processing-property correlations will provide a foundation for the optimization
of new multifunctional nanomaterials. The transformative research driven by this
concept will have the potential to radically change current scientific
understanding on new water treatment technologies to meet water resource needs
in energy-constrained areas. The educational impacts of this proposal include
the development of new undergraduate curricula to strengthen students? desire
for lifelong learning. A large number of undergraduate students, including
under-represented students and women, will receive the multidisciplinary
training on chemistry, physics, materials and engineering. The outreach
activities will target local K-12 students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project is aimed to develop facile
screen-printing systems for massive production of nano-enhanced, ordered osmosis
membranes from liquid crystalline solutions. The target osmosis membranes
consist of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes in the polymer matrix. Carbon
nanotubes will be dispersed in liquid crystals of polymerizable surfactants that
serve as an orientation template to organize nanotubes in the surfactant
micellar cores. The ink printability in relation to the rheology of nanotube
dispersions will be evaluated systematically. During screen-printing, the
vertical shear flow will allow surfactant wrapped nanotubes to reorient
themselves to form vertically aligned nanostructures on the substrate, which
will be subsequently photo-polymerized into aligned nanotube-polymer composites.
Finally, the porous polyamide will be incorporated into aligned nanotube
composites to produce nano-enhanced, ordered osmosis membranes. Such ordered
nanostructures will maximize fast water flux and minimize biofouling in
molecular channels of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes.