* 1510551
* UNS: Engineered Protein-Inorganic Self-Assembly to Control Enzyme Performance and Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Andreas Bommarius, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,404.00

1510551 &lt;br/&gt;Champion, Julie &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immobilization of
enzymes on various support structures is used to enhance enzyme stability,
activity, recovery, and economics. The goal of this work is to create a new mode
of enzyme immobilization that contains high enzyme levels per volume, and most
importantly, retains or improves enzyme activity. Through the use of protein
self-organization in the presence of biocompatible materials, a porous, high
surface area particle containing active enzyme will be created. As a test case,
an enzyme that produces pharmaceutical precursors and its regenerating partner
enzyme will both be immobilized in the particles. The particles will be tested
for production of product, stability over time, and the ability to collect and
reuse over multiple reaction cycles. The results of this research will not only
be an improved method of enzyme immobilization, but will generate fundamental
knowledge of how placement of partner enzymes in immobilized structures can
improve their performance and productivity. The particle platform developed here
is modular and can be easily applied to a wide variety of enzymes that make
important products. The PIs will integrate the research with activities for
middle to graduate school to recruit and retain women in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to create bio-catalytic,
self-assembled materials capable of providing the required micro and nano-
structured environment to support and enhance enzymatic activity for
industrially relevant applications. Traditionally, enzymes are immobilized on
solid synthetic supports via covalent interactions or adsorption in order to
enhance activity, recovery, and/or lifetime. Here, enzymes are engineered to
assemble with complementary protein building blocks to create biocatalytic
materials. This provides a local protein-crowded environment and eliminates the
need for covalent immobilization or non-specific adsorption which often leads to
loss of structure and function, and lack control over specific enzyme placement
or density. This project combines protein engineering, to produce proteins
containing both enzymatic and self-assembly domains, and protein-inorganic self-
assembly, to build appropriate structures to control enzyme performance and
recovery. Self-assembly occurs first at the nanoscale and then at the microscale
to produce hierarchically structured supraparticles that have internal
structural complexity to achieve high surface area and porosity. The proposed
research will provide basic knowledge and proof of concept of protein-inorganic
self-assembly with a coupled two enzyme system for production of chiral amines
with co-factor regeneration. The employed design strategy is modular, so that
multiple enzymes can be used simultaneously in the same supraparticles, either
dispersed homogenously or segregated spatially. The modular design also sets the
material structure independently of the physical properties of the enzyme(s),
and allows almost any enzyme(s) to be used. The impact of supraparticle
immobilization on enzyme activity and synergy will be evaluated, and also a
practical assessment of the utility of this system to be used in industrial
reaction processes will be provided. Additionally, this work also generates
fundamental knowledge on protein self-assembly with inorganic components and
insight as to how spatial control of enzyme placement can give control of
kinetic parameters and activity. This work will demonstrate that protein-
inorganic self-assembly of enzymes can provide a general template, as well as
the required chemical and physical environment, to support complex industrial
biocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the
Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research.