* 1510289
* Collaborative Research: American Innovations in an Age of Discovery: Teaching Science and Engineering through 3D-printed Historical Reconstructions
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Tandra Tyler-Wood, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 06/30/2019
* USD 356,766.00

Advanced manufacturing technologies, such as 3D printing, are transforming
design and several fields of engineering. This innovative project will use 3D
technology to help students learn about science and engineering through the
history of inventions in the United States. As part of science and engineering
classes, middle and high-school students will use 3D printing technology to
recreate historically significant inventions, using digitized versions from the
Smithsonian Institution (e.g., the Wright brothers' airplane -
http://3d.si.edu). The project will create modules that will connect these
significant inventions from the past with contemporary technologies, science,
and engineering. Student teamwork will help participants understand the
collaborative process of invention. The project will develop supporting
materials for middle school science and engineering teachers. This project will
advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices that
increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The module development will address calls in recent national reports
and standards for the integration of engineering in science teaching and
learning. The research questions and data collection/analysis will examine how
the modules impact student knowledge of the concepts and if teachers can
successfully implement them in classrooms. Data to be collected include
students' work on the modules, interviews and focus groups with students,
interviews with teachers, and classroom observation. Using comparison
classrooms, the study will also use pre-tests and post-tests of students'
content knowledge to understand the impact of the modules in the treatment
classrooms on students' knowledge of science and engineering. The goal will be
to document the impact of the modules on students' learning in science and
engineering courses and to understand how historical inventions can be used to
engage students in how scientific and engineering innovation happen. The
implementation will include school districts with diverse populations of
students in two states, providing a range of test sites for the materials.