* 1510635
* UNS: Predicting the Interfacial Activity of Complex Grafted Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Robert Riggleman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 12/31/2018
* USD 337,159.00

#1510635 Riggleman, Robert A.

Numerous consumer products ranging from cosmetics, detergents, and fluids for
oil recovery require the stabilization of two immiscible fluids (e.g., oils and
water) as an emulsion, where one phase (typically the oil) is dispersed as
stable droplets in the second phase (water). Recently, experiments have shown
that adding nanometer-sized particles that have polymer chains grafted to their
surface is an unusually effective and inexpensive method for stabilizing these
emulsions, but the mechanism for stabilization remains poorly understood. The
research goal of this proposal is to study the effect of the chemistry of the
grafted polymer chains on the interfacial properties of grafted nanoparticles.
We will study the conformations of the polymer brush on isolated nanoparticles,
the interactions of multiple nanoparticles, including their effect on the
interfacial tension and self-assembly at the interface, and we will study the
effect of having charges on the grafted polymer chains. These calculations are
enabled by recent simulation techniques developed in our group. Our educational
goals include the training of graduate students in polymer science and
engineering, and state-of-the-art simulation techniques. We will continue our
group's effort at involving undergraduate and high school students in our
research. Finally, we will impact the broader scientific community by developing
and publishing simulation codes that perform our calculations.

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the thermodynamics of
nanoparticles functionalized with polymers for use in applications such as
separations membranes and oil extraction fluids. By carefully tuning the
interactions between the particle cores, the grafted chains, and any components
that make up the host matrix of the grafted particles, one can easily control
optical and mechanical properties simply by controlling the aggregation and
dispersion state of the polymer. Very recently, experiments have shown that
grafted nanoparticles exhibit a remarkable interfacial activity in oil and water
emulsions, and they are highly effective at stabilizing the emulsions over long
periods of time at surprisingly low concentrations. Furthermore, the effect of
the grafting architecture has not been explored at all; recent advances in
synthetic chemistry enables grafting diblock polymers, a mixture of
homopolymers, or patchy (Janus) grafting on the surface of nanoparticles. This
large parameter space available to experimentalists creates a need for molecular
modeling that can guide experiments toward systems that show the most promise
for various applications. The goal of this proposal is to use a field theoretic
simulations framework recently developed by my group to examine the structure
and interfacial properties of complex grafted nanoparticles. We will examine
mixed brushes, diblock polymer brushes, and Janus brushes on the surface of
nanoparticles as a function of the particle core size, grafting density, brush
composition, and interactions with the matrix phases. Finally, we will examine
how the picture changes when one of the polymers carries a charge, while
incorporating the effects of ion solvation and dielectric mismatch between the
two phases creating the interface. Overall, we expect our results to have a
significant impact on the design of future experiments.

Our efforts will have a broad impact to society by providing fundamental
insights into the design of fluids for oil extraction and a wide variety of
consumer products. In addition to the doctoral students trained in polymer
physics and state-of-the-art molecular modeling techniques, our work has a
substantial education and outreach component involving undergraduate (and
potentially high school student) research, course development, and outreach to
the scientific community in general. Our lab has one undergraduate student
currently working with us who has co-authored a paper, and in the summer of 2014
we had a local high school student visit our lab, performing molecular dynamics
simulations of polymer melts. We are developing course modules both for
specialized molecular modeling courses as well as broad first-year statistical
mechanics courses that introduce and develop the field theoretic simulations
framework. Finally, in addition to the standard conference meetings promoting
our work, we are developing a code base that we can publish and freely release
to the public. Our hope is to broaden the application and use of the field
theoretic simulations framework, and we believe this can be most effectively
achieved by lowering the barrier to entry. Making our codes widely available is
a key part of that vision.