* 1510965
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Coal Ash Wastes as a Resource for Critical and Strategic Elements
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Mark Wiesner, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,399.00

1510965(Hsu-Kim) &amp; 1510861(Hower)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
quantify and characterize critical elements in coal combustion residues from
U.S. power plants and explore methods of extraction that could enable an
alternative and more sustainable resource of high value materials, rare earth
elements. Critical and strategic elements are those in which disruptions to the
supply are a concern for the manufacturing of consumer products and for
materials crucial to national welfare and defense. Collectively coal combustion
residues represent one of the largest industrial waste streams in the country,
with more than 100 million metric tons generated annually. Less than half of the
total is currently used beneficially (mostly for construction, agriculture, and
other sectors). This project will provide fundamental information that is
necessary for the utilization of coal ash as a resource for these high value
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will result in a comprehensive
database of critical metals concentrations in ash from a broad array of U.S.
power stations and coal sources. The results should also improve the
understanding of the types of coal deposits and ashes that are enriched in these
elements and the geochemical speciation of these elements in the ash. This
project will systematically explore acid extraction and physical-chemical
separation methods that will provide a basis for resource recovery. This project
will investigate the potential for coal ash wastes to serve as an alternative
resource for critical metals such as rare earth elements. Previous surveys have
shown that some coal sources and their respective ash by-products are enriched
in rare earth elements to levels that are similar to deposits at mining sites.
Despite the intense interest in alternative rare earth elements sources, data is
limited for coal and coal ash in the U.S. Specific objectives of the research
are to: 1) Perform a survey of coal ash materials collected from a wide variety
of coal sources and combustion conditions and develop a database that will
include concentrations of rare earth elements, platinum group elements,
germanium and other critical metals. The data will also include the origins and
geochemical and physical properties of the ash. 2) Characterize the speciation
of elements identified for resource recovery, and evaluate how they are bound in
the coal ash material. 3) Evaluate how speciation, coal mineralogy and particle
physical properties influences acid extraction efficiencies and explore
separation methods to extract and purify critical elements from fly ash and
bottom ash. Thus, this project will address a great need to diversify the supply
market while also utilize a solid waste material (coal ash) for beneficial
purposes. Partnerships with industry stakeholders will be leveraged to provide
avenues for dissemination and feedback of this work. Educational activities will
include mentorship and research opportunities for K-12 students and
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups.