* 1510510
* UNS: Regional Industrial Structure, Economic Resilience and Energy Consumption: Comparative Evaluation, Historical Analysis and Pathway towards a More Sustainable Economy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Laura Taylor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,927.00

1510510 (Moreno-Cruz). Understanding of how regional economic activities and
energy use interact with each other is incomplete. We need to better understand
these interactions to be able to develop a more sustainable economy. In previous
work, an industrial structure-based indicator for regional economic resilience
was developed that is especially suited for large-scale inter-region comparison.
In addition, how the historical evolvement of regional industrial structure
causes change in regional energy consumption patterns was investigated.
Particularly, the roles that different economic sectors have played in shaping
regional energy consumption pattern were identified. Finally, a computable
general equilibrium (CGE) model to investigate economy-wide energy rebound
effects and other economic impacts resulting from increased energy efficiency
was developed. The current project will 1) comprehensively evaluate the economic
impact and the rebound effect of increased energy efficiency (e.g., energy use
for lighting has increased with every increase in lighting efficiency) by
introducing the concept of structural adjustment cost (SAC) into the CGE model;
2) investigate how the impact of an energy efficiency shock diffuses through the
entire economic system accounting for industry interaction; 3) compare the
heterogeneous impact of the same shock on states with different resilience
rankings.

Introducing SACs will allow a more realistic evaluation of how an economy
responds to energy efficiency shocks. SACs characterize the difficulty that an
industry faces when trying to adjust the quantity of intermediate inputs from
another industry. Also, how the impact of an exogenous shock permeates through
the entire economy will be tracked. Given the assumption of increased energy
efficiency, the CGE model will estimate change in the production scale of an
economy's industries. This change will be projected onto the industrial
structure network developed earlier. A third step emphasizes horizontal
comparison across states. Based on previous comparative analysis results, states
of different resilience levels will be selected. The same energy efficiency
shock will generate different economy-wide impacts on these states in terms of
GDP, industrial structure, energy price, energy production and consumption, etc.
These simulations will reveal how various segments of an economy respond to
external shocks, and how "resilience" manifests itself through this process. To
broaden the impact of the research, a participatory game for students will be
developed anchored in rich scenario based narratives and underpinned by a
simplified version of the CGE model. Additionally, workshops will be held for
African American high school students in collaboration with Georgia Tech's
Center for Education Integrating Science, Mathematics, and Computing, and
involve African American undergraduate research assistants (RAs) will be
involved in the project and encouraged to participate as RAs in the field of
sustainability.