* 1510727
* Beyond the Standard Model Searches using Mono-Boson Final States and the ATLAS Pixel Detector Upgrade
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Shih-Chieh Hsu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this project is to search for physics that does not have an
explanation in the Standard Model (SM), the theory that classifies all the known
elementary particles. Using the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN (the
particle European laboratory in Switzerland) this group of scientists will look
for events in the ATLAS multi-particle detector where a Z or W Boson (identified
by observing electrons or muons to which it decays) is observed moving away from
the proton-proton interaction point in the LHC, accompanied by an object that
leaves no visible tracks in the detector. This final state can probe many
fundamental mysteries of the Universe, e.g. the nature of dark matter, the
existence of extra dimensions, and the existence of an extended family of Higgs
Bosons predicted by some theories beyond the SM. This group will also play a
role in the planned upgrade of the ATLAS detector itself. They will work on the
development and use of a device that uses silicon detectors to map out the paths
of charged particles passing through. This award will support one PI, a
postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student. The PI will continue as a mentor in
the U. Washington QuarkNet program, and will also work with high school students
from local Seattle High Schools in the MasterClass program. He will also
continue to organize events that bring results from the LHC closer to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will focus on W/Z + large EtransT events
in which the particle recoiling against the Boson is invisible and has large,
missing transverse energy. Such events would signal the existence of massive
neutral particles that could have a number of origins in a variety of theories
that lie beyond the SM. The group will also work on data acquisition for use
with the ATLAS inner tracker.