* 1510700
* UNS: Three Dimensional Microengineered Diseased Tissue Model to Study Invasive  Phenotype of Cancer Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Robert Ros, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2019
* USD 449,884.00

PI: Nikkhah, Mehdi &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1510700&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer cell invasion is a highly orchestrated and
complex biological process, which is influenced by a plethora of biophysical and
biochemical signals that emerge from the tumor microenvironment. In this
project, a team of bioengineers, physicists and cancer biologists aim to develop
an innovative platform technology to study the dynamic alterations in breast
cancer cells and tumor microenvironment during disease progression. The proposed
platform technology is comprised of a tumor model integrated with advanced
imaging and measurement techniques. Insight from this research will
significantly benefit society in terms of advancing our fundamental
understanding of cancer progression to an invasive state. Furthermore, the
proposed research plan will provide a foundation for a highly collaborative and
teamwork oriented environment to engage students and researchers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a novel
three-dimensional (3D) microengineered breast tumor model integrated with
nanoscale force tomography technique to assess the mechanobiological changes
that the cancer cells and their surrounding matrix undergo during tumor
progression. By successfully building upon the diseased tissue model, the first
objective of this research is to determine whether the biophysical properties of
the tumor extracellular matrix, in presence of stromal components, are
sufficient to promote cancer cell invasion. The second objective is to determine
the dynamic changes in the biomechanical properties of cancer cells, while
penetrating through the tumor tissue. Furthermore, this study aims at drawing a
direct correlation between the geometrical features of the primary tumor region,
invasive activity and biomechanical properties of cancer cells. Novel features
of the proposed tumor model include that it is modular and that it enables
decoupling and analyzing the effect of various microenvironmental cues on cancer
cell invasion. Although this interdisciplinary research focuses on breast
cancer, the 3D diseased tissue model along with the quantitative measurement
technique is versatile and can be used for studies on other types of cancer as
well. In addition, the proposed platform technology has a broad impact to
investigate other biological processes related to cell migration and biophysics.
With respect to the educational impact, this study will provide a solid
foundation for interdisciplinary training in the areas of microscale
technologies, tissue engineering and cell biophysics to high school,
undergraduate and graduate students.