* 1510347
* E-Communities: Investigating how a collaboration between STEM educators and engineers impact underserved youth's participation in engineering design
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Deena Khalil, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 09/30/2021
* USD 946,273.00

E-Communities is a project that will advance efforts to better understand and
promote practices that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue
careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM)
through the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST)
program. The project is investigating whether combining the expertise of
professional engineers with that of STEM educators will enable classroom
mathematics and science teachers to engage students in the engineering design
process in ways that affect students' awareness, interest, and ability to
identity with engineering principles and careers. Ninety (90) middle school
teachers and more than 9000 students from Prince George's County, Maryland will
participate in the study. To prepare for the implementation of E-Communities,
teachers will engage in face-to-face and virtual professional development to
learn how to adapt and integrate this model into their existing instructional
practices. Teachers will also collaborate with STEM educators to train engineers
for their roles in E-Communities. They will also participate in social network
activities with engineers and STEM educators from diverse careers and ethnic
backgrounds to support student engagement in the engineering design process. The
overall mission of E-Communities is to increase teachers' ability to prepare
students to participate fully in STEM careers at the post-secondary
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a mixed-method design that
consists of pre/post measures, surveys, and a case study. The study is
collecting data on the benefits of collaborations among participating middle
school leaders, teachers, and students; STEM educators; engineers; and
engineering outreach offices to assess the influence of the engineering design
model on teachers and students. Products developed through this project will
include web broadcasts between engineers and students, teacher-developed lessons
that highlight engineering-related mathematics and science practices, and
instructional materials useful in engaging middle school students in the
engineering design process. Access to the products and other information will be
available through online resources, publications, and dissemination at
mathematics and science education conferences.