* 1510367
* UNS: Walking and Talking: Improved Quality of Life Through Enhanced Mobility and Communication
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Kevin Fite, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 125,000.00

This work will synergistically bring together students of engineering, physician
assistant studies, and business to work to develop assistive technology devices
to improve the mobility and communication of impaired individuals. Ten student
teams will work directly with patients (end users), faculty, and regional
clinical collaborators to define a product need, evaluate preliminary designs,
and assess the assistive device that is ultimately designed. This collaboration
will facilitate design solutions that pragmatically address real limitations to
independent mobility and communication in daily living. The marketing expertise
provided by business student involvement and planned interactions with
Clarkson's Shipley Center for Innovation and Reh Center for Entrepreneurship
will ensure that commercialization potential remains a focus throughout the
design effort. Each project will produce a custom prototype and it is expected
that some projects will lead to marketable products to benefit specific user
cohorts. Furthermore, each project will develop an ethos of user-centered design
in the engineering, physician assistant, and business
students.&lt;br/&gt;Students will have the unique opportunity to work directly
with clinicians and end-users to understand challenges related to limitations in
mobility and/or communication and to focus their collective expertise on
clinically relevant and practical assistive devices that address these needs.
This emphasis will facilitate a unique educational experience for participating
students that highlights how engineering principles can be applied to benefit
humanity, thereby increasing awareness of opportunities for engineering and
societal engagement. Students will also develop bench-to-bedside
commercialization plans for each device and share their designed products in
regional and national publications and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this proposal is to implement an undergraduate design
experience that fosters interdisciplinary interactions between engineering,
business, and health sciences students. The design experience will be carried
out over an academic school year with the option to continue the work plan over
the summer. Each design experience will include the following components: 1)
problem identification, 2) market analysis, 3) design conceptualization and
analysis, 4) economic development plan, 5) device design and testing, 6) bench
top to market transition plan, 7) final prototype design, and 8) dissemination
of results and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
work lies both in the assistive devices that will be designed, as well as the
framework of the undergraduate design experience itself, which brings
engineering, business, and health sciences students together with clinical
providers, end users, and business professionals to develop customized assistive
devices and commercialization plans for bringing the devices to market. The
design experience will also prepare undergraduates to pursue graduate education
and research opportunities, a tradition that has been established through prior
students involved in biomedical design projects at Clarkson.&lt;br/&gt;The main
broader impacts of this work are threefold: 1) the establishment of a multi-
disciplinary collaborative framework for the design, evaluation, and marketing
of user-centric assistive devices, 2) the engagement of engineering students
(and faculty) with rural healthcare providers whose patient populations will
benefit from the assistive devices, and 3) the establishment of the necessary
design infrastructure for continued Clarkson University interaction with the
clinical professionals and patient populations in support of assistive-device
needs. Ultimately, interactive engagement of multi-disciplinary student teams,
clinical providers, and patient communities will enhance the broad education of
all involved while concomitantly addressing limitations to independent living
that adversely impact overall quality of life. In addition to the benefits to
students, the end users involved in the design process will gain insight into
articulating limitations and needs in a technical context and an appreciation
for the role that engineers play in quality of life enhancements.