* 1510354
* Atmospheric Turbulence - Detailed Modeling and Characterization from Radosonde Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Marvin Geller, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/29/2020
* USD 302,025.00

Turbulence in the free atmosphere plays a very important role in energy
dissipation and the diffusive transport of heat, momentum, and constituents.
Understanding the nature and influences of turbulence is among the most
challenging topics in fluid dynamics, atmospheric and ocean sciences. The
research will increase understanding of the life cycle of atmospheric turbulence
from initiation to decay. It will also put the derivation of atmospheric
turbulence quantities on a firmer basis than it is at present. The new study
will be done, such as cataloging the climatology of unstable atmospheric layers
that have not been done before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of
the occurrence and influences of atmospheric turbulence will contribute to many
aspects of atmospheric science and applications. These range from improving
understanding of the role of turbulent transport of atmospheric constituents,
for example, to better forecast clear-air turbulence for aviation. A strong Ph.D
student will gain expertise in state-of-the-art direct numerical simulation
(DNS), radiosonde analysis, and the synergism of merging these efforts. The
radiosonde analysis techniques and results will be made publicly available,
hopefully stimulating additional investigations by other scientists.