* 1510183
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Harnessing Language to Reduce Anxiety and Enhance Rational Perspectives and Decision-Making in the Face of Ebola Concerns
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Marc Berman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 11/30/2015
* USD 1,500.00

The threat of Ebola gripping our nation has incited a crisis that has far-
reaching implications for public health and policy. This poses an important and
timely opportunity to simultaneously (a) advance scientific knowledge concerning
how self-control works in consequential, high-stakes contexts, and (b) translate
existing research in this area to enhance public health and policy surrounding
Ebola and future crises involving similar threats. The proposed research will
capitalize on these opportunities by using methods from neuroscience and social
psychology to examine whether a well-studied, simple linguistic shift that
promotes self-control can be harnessed to reduce anxiety and enhance short- and
long-term Ebola-related decision-making and behavior. This project was submitted
in response to NSF 15-006 Dear Colleague Letter on the Ebola Virus.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Previous work by the PI (Ethan Kross, University of Michigan) and
colleagues has shown that using one's own name to refer to the self during
introspection (i.e., "Why is Ethan feeling this way?"), rather than the first
person pronoun "I" (i.e., "Why am I feeling this way?"), powerfully enhances
people's ability to control their thoughts, feelings, and behavior under stress,
facilitates emotionally intelligent decision-making, and does so effortlessly.
These shifts in language facilitate self-control by providing the psychological
distance needed to calmly navigate stressful thoughts and events. Building on
this work, the proposed research will manipulate whether people reflect on their
thoughts and feelings about Ebola using 1st or 3rd person perspectives, and
examine whether these shifts in language reduce Ebola-related anxiety and
irrational decision-making and behavior.