* 1510420
* UNS:  Class-Specific Transformations of Antibiotics in UV-Based Water/Wastewater Treatment Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Lee Blaney, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 342,000.00

1510420&lt;br/&gt;Blaney&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work focuses on
ultraviolet-based transformation reactions for three classes of antibiotics:
fluoroquinolones, tetracyclines, and sulfonamides. The blockbuster drugs (e.g.,
ciprofloxacin, tetracycline, sulfamethoxazole) in these classes have been
extensively studied; however, the behavior of these compounds during ultraviolet
-driven water/wastewater treatment processes does not necessarily extend to
other compounds within the same class. Furthermore, a potential for antibiotic
transformation into other antibiotics exists. The overall objective of this
project is to provide a comprehensive understanding of ultraviolet-based
reactions of 40 compounds from three critical antibiotic
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include antibiotics of concern
including 15 fluoroquinolones, 10 tetracyclines, and 15 sulfonamides. The
hypothesis is that a significant potential for antibiotic-to-antibiotic
transformation exists during ultraviolet -based processes. This avenue for
antibiotic generation during water/wastewater treatment is critical to lowering
the risks associated with antibiotic concentrations in finished water and
wastewater effluent. This hypothesis will be tested by the following Specific
Aims: 1. To develop an online solid-phase extraction liquid chromatography
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry analytical method for 40
antibiotics. 2. To measure reaction kinetics and antibiotic transformation with
ultraviolet light at 253.7 nm and hydroxyl radicals in synthetic solutions,
finished water, and wastewater effluent. 3. To identify antibiotic-to-antibiotic
transformations within each class and construct reaction pathways to demonstrate
potential for residual antimicrobial activity after ultraviolet treatment. 4. To
characterize the residual antimicrobial activity of treated solutions (i.e.,
synthetic, drinking water, and wastewater) containing ultraviolet transformation
products. The approach is a multi-pronged research strategy which will increase
understanding of the fate of an increasingly important class of chemicals in
water and wastewater. Awareness of antibiotic-to-antibiotic transformations
within specific classes has been confined to natural systems, not engineered
ultraviolet processes. The proposed study represents transformative research
that challenges conventional wisdom surrounding transformation of antibiotics in
ultraviolet processes. Another transformative quality of this project derives
from the emphasis on a class-based approach to study of pharmaceutical and
personal care products, rather than a large investigation of chemically-diverse
molecules. The expected benefits of the proposed research include measurement of
specific molar absorptivity, quantum yield, and fluence-based pseudo-first order
rate constants; determination of second-order rate constants for antibiotic
reaction with hydroxyl radicals; identification of phototransformation
products/pathways for antibiotics; and characterization of the toxicity of
transformation products. To better understand the impact of the national
prescription drug take-back day program on preventing pharmaceuticals from
entering the aquatic environment, the PI will be working with a DEA Special
Agent to gather quantitative data on future collections. In particular, the PI
proposes identifying and massing all prescription drugs deposited at the UMBC
and Howard County Police Departments each year.