* 1510468
* UNS: Signal-Amplification for Instrument-Free, Multiplexed Immunoassay - a Generalized Platform for Biosening
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Yu Lei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,413.00

CBET - 1510468 Lei, Yu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has proposed a novel
biological assay that can be visualized (instead of instrument) for detecting
pathogenic bacteria and biomolecules that indicate disease state. If successful,
it could be used in the food industry, water quality monitoring and medical
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A modified Enzyme-Linked Immuno-Sorbent Assays
(ELISAs) which would be visual (instead of an instrument) and is expected to
have good sensitivity, simplified procedure, lower cost, and allows for the
facile simultaneous detection of multiple targets. Intellectual Merit: A simple
but potentially very powerful amplification and instrument-free biosensing
technology based on visual height measurement with excellent simplicity,
portability, sensitivity, and adaptability will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;In lieu
of an enzyme the detection antibody is modified with self-assembled lipid-based
nanoparticles (NPs). After a washing-step the assay tubes are loaded with a
triblock polymer solution followed by dyed lipid-based NPs that self- aggregate.
After the precipitation of dyed NP clusters by gravity, the visual height of
dyed NPs clusters is expected to show concentration-dependent behavior, due to
the difference in the surface-bound clusters resulting from targets captured by
the conjugated antibody on the tube inner surface. By using multiple tubes, each
coated with specific antibodies in series, multiple targets can be detected
simultaneously. Broader Impacts: Positive research outcome will potentially
impact positively on public health, especially for remote and low-resource
regions. This project will also positively impact education of the graduate,
undergraduate and high school students by integrating advanced nano-biosensing
into their educational and laboratory training. Interaction with the general
public (through Connecticut Science Center and focus conference sessions) and
industry companies will enable broader dissemination of the results. Two new
courses (Special topics in Bioanalytical Sensor and Nanostructure
Characterization) will be offered to UConn students in Fall 2016. The graduate
students to be recruited on this project will actively interact with UConn Tech
Plaza to learn about entrepreneurship and spin off a start-up company if any
promising IP emerges in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;