* 1510100
* UNS: Physical Mechanisms of Wall-Bounded Turbulence and Turbulent Mixing at Extreme Reynolds
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Marcus Hultmark, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 319,320.00

1510100(Hultmark)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to
improve our theoretical understanding and modeling of turbulent flow close to a
solid object, which is the most important and relevant to engineering
applications class of turbulent flows (since turbulence found in industrial
processes, aerospace and naval applications, and in the atmospheric boundary
layer fall within this class). A new experimental technique for measuring
velocity fluctuations at resolutions that are one order of magnitude finer than
currently available techniques is also proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of
the complexity of turbulent flows, it is very challenging to obtain high quality
experimental data and to conduct high fidelity numerical simulations at the
scales and resolutions that have practical interest and that are needed to
validate theoretical advances. Detailed studies have often been replaced with
simple parameterizations and correlations. Simple analogies between momentum
transfer and heat transfer have been the foundation for most turbulent heat
transfer models, even if it is well-known that these analogies perform poorly in
many applications. While significant breakthroughs have taken place in the last
twenty years, there are still limitations in current instrumentation and high
Reynolds number studies have often been limited to measurements of only one
component of the velocity vector. This is where the contribution of the proposed
work is: it proposes a study of turbulent transport over a wide range of
Reynolds numbers. It is proposed to overcome experimental limitations by
deploying novel MEMS-based flow sensors. By combining the proposed novel
instrumentation with a heated pipe-flow facility, unprecedented multi-component
velocity and temperature data are expected to be obtained in a unique facility,
the Princeton Superpipe, at extreme Reynolds numbers. In addition fundamental
theoretical work will be conducted to integrate the study of turbulent heat
transfer with turbulent momentum studies. Results from this work, if successful,
has the potential to increase the capabilities of laboratory setups across the
world. Educational and outreach activities that include graduate and
undergraduate students, and restructuring of undergraduate lab courses are
proposed. Activities of the project will find leverage from an existing REU
program at Princeton.