* 1510725
* Collaborative Research: ET-ECS: Electronic Textiles for Exploring Computer Science with High School Students and Teachers to Promote Computational Thinking and Participation for Al
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Joanna Goode, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2018
* USD 113,491.00

This project advances efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM by producing empirical
findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about which models
and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely to increase
capacity in the STEM and STEM cognate intensive workforce of the future.

The project will develop implement, and test an expansion unit using electronic
textiles for the Exploring Computer Science (ECS) curriculum that is currently
implemented in high schools across the nation by providing an alternative to the
existing robotics unit that can appeal and recruit larger group of girls and
address the longstanding lack of women and minorities in computing. Over the
last decade, there has been a steady decline in the number of women earning
bachelor's degrees in computing, with the percentage decreasing from 27.5% in
2002 to 18.2% in 2012, continuing a trend where in some US states no female high
school students took the Advanced Placement in CS exam. With the current push to
re-introduce CS education into the K-12 schools, there is a great need for
carefully developed curriculum materials that introduce high school students to
key CS concepts and practices that are also rich and diverse in content that can
broaden high school students' perceptions of computing and CS career aspirations
coupled together with teacher professional development. The project will mainly
take place in the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) in addition to the
School District of Philadelphia (SDP), two of the largest public school
districts in the country with high percentages of underserved students. The
study also uncovered that high numbers of low-income students of color were
offering courses labeled as CS, but their coursework included little other than
keyboarding and other basic rudimentary computing skills. Rarely did schools
offer rigorous computer science courses, but when they did, they were located in
affluent communities and included few girls or students of color. Los Angeles
Unified School district (LAUSD) students in ECS reveal high participation rates
that closely mirror District demographics. In 2013-14, over 2500 LAUSD students
enrolled in ECS; 73% of the students were Latino, 11% African American, 7%
Asian, 8% White, and 46% female. There are no other nationwide computer science
programs that have attracted such diverse students.

The grant's goals will be (1) to develop robust curricular materials that are
accessible to a large group of teachers and students, particularly in
underserved communities, (2) to provide evidence that students not only can
learn key CS concepts and practices with electronic textiles but also broaden
their perspectives of computing and STEM career aspirations, (3) to illustrate
an alternative model to competitions for showcasing and disseminating students'
final e-textile designs and (4) to pilot teacher professional development. Our
interdisciplinary team, versed in addressing issues of equity and diversity in
CS, will bring together expertise from curriculum design, computer science, and
learning sciences. The CS curriculum will be consisted of six units covering:
Human-Computer Interaction, Problem-Solving, Web Design, Introduction to
Programming (Scratch), Computing and Data Analysis, and Robotics. The
instructional design of the course will adopt inquiry-based teaching practices
so that all students are given opportunities to explore, design investigations,
think critically, test solutions, and solve real problems. These links to
computational thinking will also connect ECS to the Common Core State Standards
and Next Generation Science Standards. A key part of ECS will be a professional
development (PD) program that builds and supports an on-going teacher learning
community. The ECS PD program will spans two years with a combination of two
summer week-long institutes and quarterly Saturday workshops. The key features
of ECS PD will include: (1) immersion into inquiry and equity-based practices;
(2) a focus on teachers' instructional practice done through a teacher-learner-
observer model, where teachers take turns planning and delivering lessons in
teams with feedback in debrief sessions with fellow teachers; and (3)
development of an on-going professional learning. The proposed development of
the ECS curriculum and teacher professional development will use electronic
textiles with middle and high school students to support their learning of
computer science CS concepts and practices and their broadening of perceptions
of computing. The project will be leveraged with previous foundational work that
developed and piloted introductory and advanced electronic textile activities to
introduce CS concepts and practices in line with the existing ECS curriculum to
promote computational thinking.