* 1510817
* UNS:Synthetic multilayer targeting DNA devices for detection of specific cancer indicators and programmed assembly of split yCD for prodrug activation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

1510817 &lt;br/&gt;Chen, Wilfred &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop a new cancer-killing strategy by simultaneously targeting cancer-
specific extracellular and intracellular cues for additional levels of
specificity. Specifically, the investigators seek to develop a new generation of
synthetic DNA devices that can be used for programmable intracellular
reconstitution of a split suicide enzyme capable of activating a non-toxic
prodrug into a toxic product for cancer killing. By combining these DNA devices
with active extracellular targeting and exogenously applied, inactive prodrugs
to trigger cell death, a higher degree of specificity for cancer cells can be
achieved. Because each of these components can be independently designed to
achieve the desired outputs, this strategy is highly tunable and can be
customized for different cancer markers of interest. Educational impacts include
graduate school workshops aimed at increasing enrollment of underrepresented
students in graduate Chemical Engineering programs and summer internships for
local high school students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
technological hurdle confronting cancer therapeutics is how to take advantage of
cancer-specific markers to achieve targeted therapy. Active targeting of surface
markers alone is inadequate and must be merged with additional layers of
intracellular signals to provide a higher level of specificity. We propose to
address this need by developing a transformative approach of prodrug therapy
that senses both the extracellular and intracellular disease states in a complex
cellular environment and actuates an appropriate, localized therapeutic response
for cancer treatment. The central idea is to create multi-layer targeting,
sensing, and responsive DNA-gated lock and key devices based on toehold-mediated
strand displacement for programmable intracellular reconstitution of a split
suicide enzyme capable of activating the prodrug deaminate 5-fluorocytosine
(5-FC) into the toxic product 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Extracellular targeting
will be achieved by incorporating PEG-modified cell-targeting and endosomolytic
peptides via site-specific conjugation with the alkyne and keto groups on two
orthogonal unnatural amino acid residues. The integration of principles from
protein engineering, synthetic biology, and drug delivery represents a truly
multidisciplinary effort. Graduate students participating in this research will
gain an integrated perspective of the important interfaces and synergies
connecting biochemistry, protein engineering, material design, and drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.