* 1510895
* UNS: Biomolecular Engineering of siRNAs
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Christina Chan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 376,000.00

1510895&lt;br/&gt;Walton, Stephen P. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA interference
(RNAi) is a natural cellular pathway that can be used to reduce the expression
of a targeted protein. This pathway can be activated by double-stranded RNAs
called short, interfering RNAs (siRNAs). The specific aims of the proposed work
are to: i) define the sequence and structural features of siRNAs that result in
the proper processing of siRNAs by the RNAi pathway proteins; ii) characterize
the siRNA features that affect binding of the siRNAs by RNAi pathway proteins;
and iii) determine the cellular uptake pathways for siRNA-containing complexes
that maximize function of the delivered siRNAs. Due to the potential specificity
of RNAi and its applicability against nearly any protein target, siRNAs have
garnered considerable attention as the next generation of biomolecular
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA interference holds promise as a tool for
manipulation of biological processes and for the development of a new class of
therapeutics. RNAi is initiated by short, interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and results
in the knockdown of a targeted protein. To achieve knockdown, exogenous siRNAs
must be delivered to the cytoplasms of targeted cells and interact productively
with the RNAi pathway proteins. However, siRNA delivery remains a significant
challenge. To achieve silencing, siRNAs must first enter the targeted cells by a
mechanism that allows them to be active. Currently, the uptake pathways that
result in siRNA function are poorly understood. The proposed work seeks to
identify the rules that govern the design of siRNAs and the vehicles used to
deliver them to cells. Using in vitro and cellular systems, siRNAs and delivery
vehicles with unique characteristics will be studied to determine which
combination of features results in the highest siRNA activity. The specific aims
of the proposed work are to i) define the sequence and structural features of
siRNAs that are associated with functional asymmetry using an in vitro system;
ii) characterize the sequence features that influence in vitro binding
interactions of siRNAs with RNAi pathway proteins using degenerate siRNAs and
parallel RNA sequencing; and iii) determine the cellular uptake pathways for
siRNA-containing complexes that maximize silencing efficiency of the delivered
siRNAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.