* 1510017
* UNS: Detailed molecular-thermodynamic methods for high-precision calculation of condensation, criticality, and supercritical behaviors of fluids and fluid mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* David Kofke, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2021
* USD 324,613.00

#1510017 Kofke, David A.

Given a detailed mathematical description for how molecules interact, it is
difficult to predict how a macroscopic material formed from those molecules will
behave. Yet such a capability is extremely valuable, because it gives us a
powerful means to understand, optimize and control the behavior of natural and
engineered systems. The most reliable technique is to perform a molecular
simulation, and observe what happens when many molecules are made to interact
virtually, on a computer. This approach has some disadvantages though: it takes
a lot of computer time, which limits the type of molecular models that can be
used, and instead of producing an equation that can be manipulated, it yields
data, like an experiment, that requires further processing to be useful. The
work performed in this project takes a completely different approach to the
problem. It proceeds via a methodical examination of how two molecules interact,
then three, four, etc., and in this manner builds a theoretically-correct
equation that describes the macroscopic behavior. The resulting formula can be
even more accurate than molecular simulation, but it has different limitations,
which pertain to the state conditions such as temperature and density where it
is applied. The aim of this project is to understand and overcome these
limitations, so that this "cluster integral" approach can take its place
alongside molecular simulation as a robust and widely-used means for
understanding and using materials for practical applications.

This work proceeds in several mutually reinforcing directions: (1) refining and
extending an important algorithm that appeared in the literature in 2013. This
is used to better enable calculation of cluster integrals needed for the
project; (2) exploring methods to estimate very high-order cluster integrals,
and investigating their ability to identify the condensation binodal density;
(3) developing and applying approximants that enforce known critical scaling.
Evidence suggests that the critical singularity hampers application of the
virial series for a sizeable range of conditions in the vicinity of the critical
point. Analytic treatment of the singular behavior via an approximant enables
the virial series to locate the vapor-liquid critical point accurately, while
providing a greatly improved equation of state for the surrounding region; (4)
examining cluster series in relation to the Joule-Thomson effect; (5) applying
the methods to fluid systems of practical interest.

The impact of this research and related activities will be felt in many ways.
First, the tools and understanding developed here can aid design and operation
of many technological processes, allowing manufacturing and other commercial
activities to be performed more safely, with lower cost, less energy usage, and
reduced environmental impact. Educational tools will be produced relating to the
topics studied here, and open-source software for implementing the methods we
develop will be disseminated online. Finally, the ideas underlying this research
will be introduced into curricula at the undergraduate and graduate levels, as
well as part of an annual 2-week workshop for high-school students.