* 1510661
* UNS:Catalytic Deoxygenation of Lignin Derived Compounds for the Production of Aromatics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Aditya Bhan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,995.00

The proposal seeks to understand and further develop a relatively new class of
metal carbide catalysts for the selective catalytic conversion of woody biomass
material to useful chemicals. Refining of biomass material is presently a
complicated and energy intensive process. The proposed work aims to make the
conversion process more efficient by improving catalyst design and targeting the
selective conversion of intermediate products to high-value chemicals. The work
will help make bio-refining processes more competitive with existing petroleum
refining processes, and thereby aid progress toward a sustainable chemical and
energy future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine the conversion of
a set of lignin-derived monomers to aromatic compounds utilizing metal carbide
catalysts. It is inspired by preliminary results from the same group showing
greater than 80% carbon conversion of anisole to benzene with stable time-on-
stream performance for approximately 60 hours. The proposed work will obtain
more detailed understanding of the rate constants, site requirements, and
relationships between catalyst structure and composition, all of which can be
used to develop improved metal carbide catalysts. To this end, the researchers
will develop synthesis and characterization protocols for metal carbide
catalysts, and then identify active sites and opportunities for selective
carbon-oxygen bond cleavage to produce high-value aromatic products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although this proposal is directed specifically at metal
carbide catalysts for upgrading intermediates of lignin pyrolysis, it
potentially will advance the field by providing a framework for thinking about
catalysis on materials exhibiting a range of surface functionalities, and
reactions involving equally complex molecules. The catalyst synthesis work,
combined with structural and chemical characterization data, and rigorous
kinetic data, will be integrated to obtain better understanding of the
challenges and opportunities for optimizing catalysts to attack specific bonds
and selectively produce specific products. The PI has developed corresponding
educational and outreach programs that increase awareness of sustainable
chemistry and renewable energy across a broad community ranging from university
alumni to elementary through high school students.