* 1510788
* UNS: Environmental Impacts of Using Distributed Energy Storage for Power System Reserves
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Johanna Mathieu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2017
* USD 309,995.00

1510788&lt;br/&gt;Johnson, Jeremiah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to investigate the environmental impacts of using distributed energy
storage (DES) for power system reserves and to develop operational strategies to
mitigate the environmental burdens of the system. As more renewable energy
sources are integrated into the power system, additional reserves are required
to ensure the functionality and reliability of the system. DES is a promising
alternative to generators for providing such reserves because, in general, these
resources are more responsive than conventional power plants and costs are
increasingly competitive. Due to their low emissions during operation, DES
systems are often assumed to reduce environmental impacts. However, due to the
complex nature of the power system, the use of DES may lead to negative outcomes
under certain system configurations, generation mixes, and reserve requirements.
Thus, it is important to thoroughly evaluate the environmental impacts of
introducing DES for reserves. Using life cycle assessment (LCA), the researchers
will investigate the full environmental impact of providing reserves with DES.
Additionally, they will develop a reduced-form LCA that can provide real-time
feedback on environmental impacts to power system operators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance the fields of industrial ecology
and power systems. To evaluate the environmental impact of using DES for power
system reserves, LCA will be coupled to optimal power flow (OPF) methods. While
fossil fuel combustion is expected to be a major contributor to life cycle
environmental impacts, the short product lifetime and operational impacts of
using DES demonstrate the importance of upstream and downstream impacts and the
need for LCA to robustly determine environmental performance. A key contribution
of this work is the application of model reduction techniques to develop
reduced-form LCAs so that approximate impacts can be calculated in real-time and
used within the OPF. These methods which support the use of LCA for active
feedback response could be readily tailored for use in other systems such as
transportation and water treatment. This project also advances the formulation
of the OPF problem by incorporating life cycle environmental impacts into the
objective function and/or constraints. This will help us understand the tradeoff
between system operation costs and environmental benefits, informing system
operators and policy makers. This project will advance the utility of LCA by
tailoring the method to provide active feedback to systems operations. The
results of this study will identify operational strategies that improve
environmental outcomes for power generation and inform public policies that
strategically remove of barriers to participation for DES. This project will
also yield educational impacts through the involvement of undergraduate students
in research activities and the development of age-appropriate educational
activities for K-12 students. The team will develop a factsheet on DES
distributed by the Center for Sustainable Systems at the University of Michigan,
to serve as a freely available public resource for students, researchers, and
policy makers. This project will also support the development of two modules to
be integrated into courses for environmental professional students and
electrical engineers.