* 1511005
* UNS:  ZIF Membranes with Gated-Ultramicropores for Gas Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1511005&lt;br/&gt;Lin&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks are a promising
group of microporous metal-organic framework membrane materials for gas and
liquid separation. However, in spite of a large number of zeolitic imidazolate
framework materials, only a few of these materials have been made into
membranes. These membranes still do not offer the desired pore size for
separation of some industrially important gas mixtures, such as ethylene and
ethane. This project will investigate synthesis of metal-organic framework
membranes with gated-micropores of tailorable pore size by a new membrane
surface modification method for separation of industrially important gas
mixtures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted in this project to
understand the post-synthesis modification of microporous metal-organic
framework membranes by the membrane surface modification method, and to
synthesize and characterize the modified metal-organic framework membranes for
separations of small gas mixtures including that of ethylene/ethane. These
studies will demonstrate a new membrane structure for gas separation and
establish the foundation for the new post-synthesis modification method for
synthesis of other microporous metal-organic framework membranes for separation
of gas and liquid mixtures. Successful synthesis of these microporous membranes
will represent an important advance in membrane science because this will lead
to the development of many other high performance membranes for separation of
gas and liquid mixtures of a close molecular size. The project will also educate
and train graduate, undergraduate and high school students, in particular,
female and minority students, to become leaders in membrane science and
separation technologies.