* 1511096
* UNS: Lift Generation in a Functionalized Supra Molecular Porous Layer, From Red Cells to Super Lubrication
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Qianhong Wu, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 279,993.00

The focus of the proposed research is on the investigation of lubrication
effects at the boundary of a soft porous medium when it is compressed under
flow. This phenomenon is often called super lubrication, because the friction
loss is dramatic. The project is inspired by the frictionless motion of the red
blood cells over the endothelial glycocalyx layer (EGL) that covers the inner
surface of our blood vessels. Theoretical analysis, based on detailed
experiments will be pursued that can lead to the design of a new type of bearing
that would utilize super lubrication with vastly increased hydrodynamic lift and
reduced drag.

It is proposed to perform a systematic study to investigate fluid flow and lift
generation inside random soft porous media of different scales under rapid
compaction. These porous layers range from macro-scale synthetic fibers to
micron-scale functionalized supramolecular layers (SML). The mechanisms that
provide for the structural integrity of a functionalized SML in response to fast
compression and its subsequent restoration will be examined. An experimental
approach will be developed to examine the lift generation and friction reduction
as a planar surface glides over a soft porous layer. These objectives are
integrated in a combined research plan, which involves theoretical,
experimental, and computational approaches. The proposed research circumvents
the extreme difficulty in performing experiments with living organisms, and
provides a bio-mimetic approach to study fluid flow in a functionalized soft
porous layer. It will have broad impacts on both energy efficiency for
frictionless flow and for biophysical understanding of the EGL. There are plans
to engage undergraduate students in research, and to leverage existing
activities at Villanova University to reach out to Girl Scouts and
underrepresented minority students.