* 1511660
* SusChEM:  Installing the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway in a clostridium platform organism for enhanced metabolite production
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Eleftherios Papoutsakis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

1511660 &lt;br/&gt;Papoutsakis, Eleftherios T. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to engineer the industrial organism Clostridium acetobutylicum
to make it capable of utilizing carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and hydrogen, as
sole substrates for growth and product formation. This will enable the
production of biofuels (e.g. butanol) and other useful chemicals from waste
gases in a fermentation system that can be easily scaled for industrial
production, and with exceptional efficiencies. From the fundamental point of
view, the ability to install this complex, primordial pathway in a different
organism constitutes a major advance in synthetic biology that would open new
horizons for pathway engineering and synthetic approaches in other industrial
microorganisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most efficient pathway for non-
photosynthetic chemotrophic carbon utilization is the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway
(WLP) employed by acetogens, which are Clostridium organisms that fix enormous
quantities of carbon dioxide in the geobiosphere. Comparative genomic analysis
of the three sequenced genomes of mesophilic acetogens showed that the WLP genes
of all three organisms are concentrated in a highly conserved region in their
respective genomes. Based on the published literature and work from the
investigator's laboratory, the model acetogen C. ljungdahlii was chosen as the
source of most of the WLP genes that will be used to install the WLP in C.
acetobutylicum. The plan is to integrate a number of genes into the chromosome
and express other genes on two large compatible/co-existing plasmids.
Chromosomal integrations will be based on a recently developed technology for
double-crossover allelic DNA exchange that enables markerless chromosomal gene
deletions and DNA integration. The constructed strains will be assessed for the
WLP functionality through in vitro assays, growth experiments and carbon-13
based carbon-fixation assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-
funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biology.