* 1511120
* GOALI: Effluent Dissolved Organic Nitrogen: Compound Level Assessment of Sources and Sinks
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Deborah Bronk, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,677.00

1511120&lt;br/&gt;Bronk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A substantial portion of the
nitrogen released in wastewater effluent from water resource recovery facilities
is in the form of dissolved organic nitrogen. Despite the economic and
ecological importance of the dissolved organic nitrogen, relatively little is
known about how different nutrient removal treatments and disinfection
procedures impact the chemical composition. This work is potentially
transformative because the first step in dealing with the problem of organic
compounds in effluent is to determine what is in it and then the extent that it
is a problem in receiving waters. This proposal fits in one of the 14 Grand
Challenges in Engineering which were articulated in a National Academy of
Engineering report, managing the nitrogen cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past
research has shown that a large fraction of effluent dissolved organic nitrogen
can be bioavailable to estuarine microbes, and that low molecular weight-N
substrates are released from effluent dissolved organic nitrogen during
disinfection with germicidal doses of UV and chlorination and when it is exposed
to sunlight or elevated salinities in the environment. What is still not known,
however, is the amount and type of effluent dissolved organic nitrogen that is
produced during different combinations of treatment and disinfection procedures
within WRRFs and how these differences will impact how effluent dissolved
organic nitrogen responds in the environment. The research proposed seeks to
answer these questions. The proposed work will also extend past efforts
primarily focused on N to include both C and P. This expanded emphasis is
important because of the potential for effluent dissolved organic carbon to
contribute to hypoxia/anoxia and effluent dissolved organic phosphorus to
eutrotrophication in the environment, particularly in freshwater. The proposed
research has three objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1. Chemically characterize the carbon,
nitrogen, and phosphorus pools present in the influent and after treatment in
four sequencing batch reactors performing four different treatments
(nitrification only, nitrogen removal, nitrogen and biological phosphorus
removal, and nitrogen and chemical phosphorus removal) during winter and summer
using wet chemical and high-resolution analyses. 2. Determine how differences in
treatment process configuration impact the concentration and composition of low
molecular weight-nitrogen and phosphorus following germicidal UV and
chlorination relative to the effluent dissolved organic matter that receives no
disinfection using wet chemical and high resolution analyses. 3. Determine how
treatment process configuration and disinfection procedure combinations impact
the effluent dissolved organic matter produced with respect to biological uptake
and any changes in concentrations of low molecular weight carbon, nitrogen and
phosphorus after exposure to sunlight and elevated salinities in receiving
waters using wet chemical analyses. Perhaps one of the most important aspects of
the project is bringing together a team of oceanographers (PIs Bronk and Sipler)
with an environmental engineer (PI Bott) to be a valuable means of cross
fertilization of knowledge, tools, and approaches between the disciplines and
communities of oceanography and engineering.