* 1511051
* UNS:  Formation and Toxicity of Disinfection Byproducts in Desalinated Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Michael Plewa, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2019
* USD 339,870.00

1511051&lt;br/&gt;Amy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, seawater reverse osmosis
is the most commonly used desalination technology. Specifically, the blending of
reverse osmosis desalinated water with single or multiple treated fresh waters
drawn from other sources is a low-cost method to meet the demands of drinking
water and to increase the concentration of some desired ions. Therefore, the
objective of this project is to conduct a comprehensive and systematic study to
examine the formation and speciation of reaction byproducts of disinfection and
the toxicity changes of seawater reverse osmosis desalinated waters as a
consequence of blending.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first comprehensive
research that combines a disinfection byproduct study on the formation,
speciation, and factors affecting bromide/iodide incorporation with a toxicology
study to determine possible toxicities on mammalian cells. In this study, the
PIs propose to investigate: 1) the formation and speciation of
brominated/iodinated disinfection byproducts in the presence of hydrophilic
organic matter (e.g., algal organic matter, wastewater effluent organic matter,
natural organic matter) of different origins in treated waters that are likely
to be used for blending with seawater reverse osmosis permeate, 2) the effects
of pH and temperature on the formation and speciation of brominated/iodinated
disinfection byproducts, 3) the change in mammalian cell cytotoxicity and
genotoxicity of waters from blending, and 4) the ability of total organic halide
species and/or other individual brominated/iodinated disinfection byproducts to
predict the cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of the blended waters based on a
multiple regression. The project will be conducted in two phases: Phase 1, which
entails a disinfection byproduct study on the formation, speciation, and factors
affecting bromide/iodide incorporation under various mixing scenarios and using
chlorine and chloramine for post-disinfection (i and ii); and Phase 2, which
entails a toxicity study on mammalian cell cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of
waters from blending and multiple regression analysis between total organic
halide components and experimentally measured water toxicities (iii and iv).
Educational components of the project will provide opportunities for
undergraduate (e.g., Creative Inquiry Program at Clemson, UIUC WaterCamps
program, the UIUC Global Safe Water Institute) and high school student research,
including recruitment of underrepresented groups in scientific research.