* 1511367
* UNS: A Novel Cell Selection System Using Evolved, Natural-Product Responsive Caspases
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Susan Roberts, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2020
* USD 606,000.00

1511367 &lt;br/&gt;Hardy, Jeanne A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various plants make
many different chemicals that are of use to human beings in personal healthcare
products, neutraceuticals, flavors and fragrances, oils and fats and other high-
value foods and pharmaceutical ingredients. In this project it is proposed to
increase productivity of plant cell cultures by eliminating the non-producing
cells and by keeping the high-producing cells alive with the help of a mammalian
protein. This cell-killing protein has a binding site that can be manipulated so
that it binds a specific chemical. When that compound binds it inactivates the
protein. In cells that make lots of the desired chemical, the cell-killing
protein is turned off and cells remain alive. This system will first be
developed for plant culture based production of Taxol, a chemotherapy drug. The
approach is expected to be applicable to many valuable chemicals produced by
plant cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant natural products represent a promising
sector of rare and unique chemical entities impacting healthcare, energy,
agriculture, food and nutraceuticals. Production and supply of desirable natural
products is often challenging due to their chemical complexity, incompletely
characterized biosynthetic pathways and prohibitive numbers of steps in their
synthetic preparation. The synthesis of compounds with plant cell hosts often is
suboptimal due to low production levels and cellular heterogeneity, with some
cells producing high levels and other cells producing no product. In this
project a completely novel approach has been designed that enables selection of
high-producing cells from heterogeneous plant cultures. This approach relies on
the finding that particular mammalian proteases sentence plant cells to death. A
fluorescent reporter will be used to engineer an existing protease allosteric
site to recognize and be inhibited by paclitaxel (Taxol). This protease that can
be inhibited by Taxol, will selectively kill non-paclitaxel producing cells,
while leaving productive cells intact. The approach likely will be useful not
only for the production of Taxol but for a broad range of plant culture
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics
and Function Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.