* 1511284
* UNS:Coupling Thermophoresis with Engineered Convection for Label free, Continuous Bionanoparticle Concentration in Microfluidic Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2021
* James Gilchrist, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2021
* USD 317,798.00

1511284 Cheng Lehigh University

Bionanoparticles, such as viruses and vesicles, are commonly concentrated in
clinical diagnosis, defense surveillance and food safety monitoring.
Conventional methods, such as high-speed centrifugation and nanofiltration, are
instrument and labor intensive and unpractical under resource-limited
conditions. These challenges motivate the researchers to create a novel
microfluidic solution for nanoparticle processing. Success of the proposed
research will have broad practical impact in viral sample processing for
clinical diagnostics of infection, homeland security surveillance and food
safety monitoring. This interdisciplinary research will provide excellent
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate student training. This research
will contribute to course development and directly impact the undergraduate and
graduate curriculum. The investigators will continue to actively participate in
K-12 outreach programs to motivate and attract talented students to STEM fields.
The investigators will also continue the effort to increase the participation of
students from underrepresented groups in this research program.

The proposed strategy combines thermophoresis with engineered convection to
overcome Brownian motion and achieve directed nanoparticle migration. The
proposed strategy is enabled by a fundamental investigation of nanoparticle
migration in a temperature gradient and rational design of convective flow to
augment such separations. Using a simple microscale flow having controlled
kinematics and thermal profiles, the approach is universal for suspended
nanoscale constituents such as viruses, liposomes and exosomes in biological
solutions. The separation process is biocompatible, label-free, and the
concentrated species are retrieved continuously. In addition to the
transformative societal impact associated with designing faster, better, cheaper
diagnostics, the research is also innovative in generating fundamental
understanding of both non-equilibrium transport of biological species and flow
field control in inertial-free flows by microstructured substrates.