* 1511939
* UNS: Understanding the Prokaryotic Pathways for Triacylglycerol Synthesis and Turnover in the Plastid of Microalgae and Implications for Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Yantao Li, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2018
* USD 308,440.00

PI Name: Yantao Li&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1511939&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microalgae are single-celled photosynthetic
organisms that grow on atmospheric carbon dioxide, sunlight, and dissolved
mineral nutrients. Under the proper conditions, microalgae also produce fatty
acids stored as lipids, which can be readily converted to biofuel such as
biodiesel. The proposed research seeks to improve biomass and lipid production
from microalgae by understanding how lipids are made and stored in algal cells,
using the tools of genetic engineering to manipulate and study of their lipid
metabolic pathways. Outcomes from the research have the potential to suggest new
engineering strategies to boost productivity and facilitate the development of
sustainable processes for the production of biofuels from microalgae. Subject
matter built around algal biofuel topics will be designed to promote K-12,
undergraduate and graduate education through workshop and internship programs at
the University System of Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
proposed research is to advance fundamental understanding of prokaryotic
pathways associated with triacylglycerol synthesis and turnover in single-celled
microalgae using the green microalga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii as a model
organism. The eukaryotic pathways of triacylglycerol synthesis and turnover in
the cytosol of microalgae, which produces eukaryotic glycerolipids with C18 at
sn-2 position of the glycerol backbone, are well studied. However, the
prokaryotic pathways in the plastid, which produce prokaryotic glycerolipids
with C16 at sn-2 position, are still poorly defined. The knowledge gained by
understanding the prokaryotic pathways could potentially enable development of
new engineering strategies to simultaneously increase algal biomass and lipid
production through metabolic engineering of these prokaryotic pathways. This
will be achieved through proteomic and functional analyses of lipid bodies and
plastids of Chlamydomonas to identify novel genes involved in prokaryotic
triacylglycerol synthesis and turnover. These genes will be engineered to
generate strains with improved biomass and lipid yield. This project will
involve under-represented minority K-12, undergraduate and graduate students,
who will be provided with the opportunities to gain knowledge about algal
biofuel research and obtain hands on experiences through workshop and internship
programs at the University System of Maryland.