* 1511014
* UNS: Improving Energy Density of Layered Vanadium Pentoxide Nanostructure for Aqueous Electrochemical Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Xiaowei Teng, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2019
* USD 270,817.00

Teng, 1511014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adoption of renewable non-carbon-emitting
energy offers the potential to reduce dependence on petroleum and significantly
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Renewable sun and wind energy sources generally
have on-peak and off-peak load variations. To provide clean and efficient energy
solutions, the development of electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices can
accelerate the adoption of renewable energy generation sources. Thus,
electricity generated during off-peak hours can be stored efficiently and
economically for use during peak demand. Such devices need to have high energy
density (defined as the amount of energy stored in a given system or region of
space per unit volume or mass) to be economically viable. Electrochemical
reactions release the energy in such materials. The PI plans to develop
electrochemical capacitors (ECs), often called supercapacitors, with high enough
energy density to be used as EES devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Means to increase the energy density of ECs include the design of layered
nanomaterials to shorten diffusion distance of ionic transport, and the
utilization of mono- and bi-valence charge carriers (e.g., Na+ and Mg2+) for EES
instead of lithium-ion to increase the ionic conductance and storage capacity.
The proposed project will investigate the charge-storage mechanism of vanadium
pentoxide (V2O5) and silver doped V2O5 (Agx-V2O5; X: 0.1, 0.5 and 1) layered
nano structures as electrode materials for (ECs) in various aqueous electrolytes
containing mono- and bi-valence cations such as Na+ and Mg2+. Results obtained
from material syntheses, structural and functional characterizations, and in
situ/ex situ synchrotron/neutron measurements will provide fundamental
understanding of the factors that influence of Na+ and Mg2+ storage inside the
V2O5 and Agx-V2O5 nanolayers, and help design new types of layered
nanostructures with tailored thickness and interplanar distance to enhance
energy storage capacity while retaining high power performance in an EC device.
The hypotheses are: (i) Ag dopant will improve the electrical conductivity of
V2O5; (ii) tailored thickness and interplanar distance of V2O5 and Agx-V2O5
nanolayers will facilitate ionic transport; (iii) Na+ and Mg2+ ions have higher
ionic conductivity in water than Li+. Particularly, bi-valence Mg2+ will further
improve the capacitance of the EES devices by bringing more charge transfer upon
same amount of ionic transport. To validate the hypotheses, the PI will: (i)
synthesize and characterize V2O5 and Agx-V2O5 layered nano materials with
controlled composition, thickness and interplanar distance; and (ii) perform the
electrochemical measurements and electro-kinetic studies in half-cells and
button-cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Success with the proposed
research could result in a new type of ECs that could outshine batteries and
electrostatic capacitors, and could favorably impact the energy sector. The
project will integrate educational programs dedicated to the cross-disciplinary
training of students at their home institution and national laboratories via
established collaborations and summer research programs. The educational goals
of the proposed research are to create a research platform at the home institute
for training graduate and undergraduate students as well as high school teachers
on the fundamental study of energy research, and to develop&lt;br/&gt;learning
materials for high school science and engineering education. The PI will mentor
high school chemistry teachers to participate in three-week summer research in
the PI?s lab, so that quality instructional materials based on the summer
research can be combined to enhance STEM curriculum and education.