* 1511093
* RAPID: Development of a handheld, rapid molecular diagnostic tool for Ebola
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* David Galbraith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2016
* USD 211,436.00

1511093 &lt;br/&gt;Galbraith, David W.&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ebola virus infection provides considerable current cause
for concern due to a lack of effective interventions, its high lethality, and a
lack of rapid and sensitive means to detect viral presence. Molecular
diagnostics, based on detection of the Ebola virus genome using the Polymerase
Chain Reaction (PCR) technique developed in the US by Nobel Laureate Cary
Mullis, represents a sensitive approach to screen for infection. However,
current PCR instruments are large, expensive and complicated, and do not operate
at the speeds required to make clinical decisions. The investigators have
developed a novel PCR device, termed Droplet-On-Thermocouple Silhouette
quantitative PCR (DOTS qPCR), which operates on the basis of sensing interfacial
effects instead of the established fluorescence detection of the PCR reaction.
This innovative detection method enables much faster analysis times with sample-
to-answer times within 5 minutes. This RAPID project aims to further develop the
device to demonstrate its applicability for detection of Ebola virus from human
samples, to interface the device with standard smartphones for data collection,
processing and transmission, and to show how it can be used as a handheld
device. Beyond the rapid detection of Ebola virus, the DOTS-PCR device will be
universally applicable for detection of any biological disease organism of
concern to the US National health, agriculture, and security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel PCR methodology (DOTS qPCR) utilizes for the
first time innovative engineering principles on interfaces to achieve droplet
actuation, inhibition relief, and sensing of the PCR reaction, resulting in
sample-to-answer times as short as 5 minutes. Towards diagnosis of the presence
of Ebola virus, the investigators propose to demonstrate reproducibility,
differentiation of virus species, sub-picogram limit of detection, and
thermocycling speeds of 28 s/cycle in the presence of blood/tissue contaminants.
The specific aims of this project are (i) development of a second-generation
handheld DOTS qPCR appropriate for diagnostic use, (ii) demonstration of the
ability to identify target in the presence of typical blood/tissue contaminants,
(iii) integration of smartphone-based identification of amplicons using the
interfacial effect instead of traditional fluorescence sensing, with development
of appropriate software for data processing and result communication. Although
aimed at detection of Ebola, this technology clearly has general applicability
in the high-throughput, low-cost detection of other specific biological
organisms and agents. The intellectual merit underpinning these aims rests in
the innovative exploitation of interfacial effects on the surface of aqueous
reaction droplets and the surrounding oil phase associated with the partitioning
of contaminating proteins and the formation of amplification products resulting
in detection speeds far superior to traditional, fluorescence based instruments.