* 1511959
* UNS:  Data Assimilation and Forecasting for Real-Time Drinking Water Distribution System Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dominic Boccelli, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 336,321.00

1511959&lt;br/&gt;Boccelli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time modeling of drinking
water distribution systems has the potential to provide several benefits for
water utilities by improving energy management, water quality maintenance, and
response activities. While most utilities have a network model for planning
purposes, these models are "static" and not amenable for making real-time
decisions. Thus, there is a critical need to develop a real-time modeling
framework that can estimate and forecast the unobserved demands that drive
network dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a composite demand-hydraulic model - one that couples a demand model
with a network hydraulic solver - capable of being updated in real-time using
observed hydraulic information. The central hypothesis is that the observed
hydraulic data commonly collected via utility computer systems can be used to
estimate the expected values and uncertainty of a structured demand model that
characterizes the temporal and spatial patterns of consumptive demands. The
rationale for developing the real-time composite demand-hydraulic model is to
provide a framework to inform real-time analytics and decision support
associated with our drinking water distribution systems. Collectively, these
outcomes will produce a holistic approach for real-time demand estimation and
forecasting through the development of the composite demand-hydraulic model and
monitoring placement algorithm. The long-term positive impacts of this project
will result from the ability provide real-time demand estimates and forecasts
that will lead to real-time analysis and decision support tools such as pump
scheduling to minimize energy usage, rapid main break detection, and spread
forecasting of contamination events to better identify response and mitigation
activities. The PIs will strengthen the link between academic research and
industrial entrepreneurship to provide opportunities to the students through: 1)
providing industrial research opportunities to both graduate and undergraduate
students to extend our research and development activities; 2) developing and
distributing our software through open-source activities to further enhance the
opportunities within our field; and, 3) introducing a broader range of students
to technology transfer and the opportunities and challenges associated with
industrial research.