* 1511784
* UNS:  Temporal Monitoring of Waterborne Contamination: An Engineered Substrate with Selective Cryptosporidium Adsorption Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Kristen Jellison, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,024.00

1511784 Jellison

Cryptosporidium is a waterborne parasite responsible for a gastrointestinal
disease that can be fatal for the elderly and immunocompromised individuals.
Cryptosporidiosis has no medical cure, and since oocysts may not be completely
removed/inactivated in municipal water treatment plants, monitoring
Cryptosporidium contamination in source waters is necessary to identify public
health risks and determine where limited budgets should most effectively be
spent to protect consumers from waterborne exposure to pathogenic oocysts.
Current sample methodology for Cryptosporidium monitoring in water supplies (EPA
Method 1623.1) relies on filtering and processing 10 L of water, providing a
"snapshot" of river conditions at the time of filtration. The primary goal of
the team is to develop a cheaper and more reliable method for detecting
Cryptosporidium oocysts in public water supplies.

Previous work in the PIs laboratory has shown that Cryptosporidium spp. oocysts
can robustly attach to biofilms; however, biofilm sampling is limited by the
inherent variability in biofilm growth. Taking inspiration from this biofilm
sorptive nature, the current team will focus on developing a manufactured
substrate with fixed sorptive capacity for Cryptosporidium oocysts. These
substrates will be engineered with surface features complementary to the oocyst
that allow either non-specific adhesion through surface chemistry that would
allow for hydrogen bonding or specific adhesion by imprinting a molecular
fingerprint of the oocyst surface onto the substrate. These substrates will be
analyzed initially in lab-scale bioreactors, which will provide crucial binding
parameters. The substrates will then be deployed in natural waterways to
determine the robustness of the substrates, with the goal of eventually
providing a more temporal look at the health of the waterway. This research
program is highly interdisciplinary, providing an excellent opportunity for
student training through new courses and hands-on research opportunities. The PI
and co-PI have a history of mentoring students from underrepresented groups in
STEM, and will continue to recruit from these groups for inclusion in this
project. In addition, several educational programs will be developed in
collaboration with Broughal Middle School, a nearby Title 1 school. These
educational programs will include brochures, projects, and field education
focused on water safety and conservation.