* 1511498
* UNS:  Heterogeneous Nucleation on Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Barbara Wyslouzil, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2020
* USD 355,019.00

#1511498&lt;br/&gt;Wyslouzil, Barbara E.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The streaming
vapor trail near an airplane's wing during takeoff or landing illustrates
condensation in a high-speed flow initiated by heterogeneous nucleation. The air
cools as it passes over the wing, and its relative humidity starts to exceed
100%. This unstable situation drives water condensation on particles forming a
cloud. The same phenomenon can play an important role in many other engineering
applications including energy extraction from low pressure steam turbines,
dehydration and heavy hydrocarbon removal from natural gas, and development of
hypersonic wind tunnels. Unfortunately, there are few experimental data to test
theories of heterogeneous nucleation at the extreme conditions in these devices.
This project will use a supersonic nozzle apparatus to measure rates of
heterogeneous nucleation, rates at which particles grow, and the size and
structure of the final droplets. All of these are crucial for developing
accurate models of heterogeneous condensation in industrial
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores heterogeneous nucleation
under highly non-equilibrium conditions that occur in supersonic flows and
investigates the resulting particle growth and structure. Vapor-carrier gas
mixtures containing two condensable species will flow through a supersonic
nozzle. The seed aerosol will be produced by homogeneous nucleation and growth
of the lower vapor pressure condensable under conditions where the higher vapor
pressure condensable is subsaturated. As the flow continues to cool, the higher
vapor pressure material will become supersaturated and will nucleate on the
preexisting aerosol. Static pressure measurements will characterize the flow,
spatially resolved small and wide angle X-ray scattering will characterize the
aerosol, and infrared spectroscopy will quantify the distribution of the
condensable between the vapor, liquid and solid states. A one-dimensional flow
model that incorporates heterogeneous nucleation and growth will be tuned to
match experimental observations to yield estimates for the heterogeneous
nucleation rates.