* 1511526
* UNS: Modeling and Experimental Studies of the Interactions of 2D Materials with Solvents and Surfactants: Exfoliation, Self-Assembly of Composites, and Wetting.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2019
* Daniel Blankschtein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 03/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

Modeling and Experimental Studies of the Interactions of 2D Materials with
Solvents and Surfactants: Exfoliation, Self-Assembly of Composites, and Wetting
Blankschtein, Daniel

Two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),
and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) are poised to usher in the next generation of
digital electronics, sensors, and membranes due to their unique and exotic
electronic, optical, and mechanical properties. However, the commercialization
of technologies based on these materials is impeded by the absence of cost-
effective, large-scale production techniques. One potentially inexpensive,
scalable manufacturing route consists of immersing the corresponding bulk
material (for example, graphite in the case of graphene) in a liquid and rapidly
stirring the entire system. This separates individual monolayers from the bulk
material in the same way that a food processor slices vegetables. The efficiency
of this "exfoliation" process depends on the interactions between the solvent
molecules and the material. Consequently, understanding these interactions at a
molecular scale is essential in order to determine the optimal exfoliating
solvent for a given material. To shed light on these interactions, the PIs
propose to use computer simulations to study the behavior of a variety of
solvent molecules around sheets of several promising 2D materials. The insights
obtained from these computer simulations can also assist in designing solvents
that encourage the spontaneous formation of mixed stacks of several 2D materials
(such as graphene on top of h-BN on top of MoS2) that could have very special
properties and applications. The PIs seek to understand and model the molecular
interactions operating between solvent / surfactant molecules and various 2D
materials in a solution phase. This will enable the prediction of the
thermodynamic and kinetic stability of colloidal dispersions of various new 2D
materials and their composites, which are becoming increasingly important for
modulating the band gap in electronic and optoelectronic applications. For this
purpose, a classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulation approach retains atomic
detail of the system, without sacrificing on the length and time scales
involved. Although several good models for liquids and materials are currently
available, much less effort has been devoted to modeling the interaction forces
between liquids and materials. To this end, the PIs propose to develop force
fields to model the interfacial phenomena involving 2D materials and liquid
media. The predictions made by the models developed will be compared with
experiments, thereby allowing transferability of parameters across different
interfacial systems. The insights obtained from such modeling efforts will
enable the precise control of the size, shape, number distributions, and
stacking order of layers in suspensions of 2D materials to obtain desired
electronic and optical properties. Furthermore, the force fields will be used to
predict wetting properties, which are critical to the use of these materials in
membranes, microfluidic devices, battery electrodes, and other electrochemical
devices.

The modeling and experimental advances made will be incorporated into courses
and workshops at MIT that will expose a larger scientific audience to the
fundamentals of 2D material dispersion and stabilization in liquid phases,
wetting behavior of 2D materials, as well as to modeling these phenomena at the
molecular level. The students involved in the proposed research, at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels, will gain intellectually and professionally
from the integrated modeling / experimental research proposed here.