* 1511025
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Experiments and Theory of Nonequilibrium Processes in Turbulent Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Noel Clemens, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2018
* USD 166,000.00

1511834 (Raman, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor)/1511025 (Clemens, University
of Texas-Austin)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid flows are complicated under
conditions found in engines and power plants, due to fuel combustion. The
research team proposes to investigate the fluid flow phenomenon by using the
state-of-art computer simulation techniques with the help of advanced laser-
based measurements. The results will be used for constructing models for the
flame and flow predictions under such complex conditions. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in the research. The PIs also propose
K-12 activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel multi-scale modeling approach is
proposed to elucidate energy transfer mechanisms between scales in low-Mach
number and highly turbulent reacting flows with premixed and non-premixed
injections. For the experimental effort, advanced, laser-based diagnostic tools
are proposed: PIV (particle imaging velocimetry) and Rayleigh and Raman
scattering for velocity field and scalar/species concentration measurements,
respectively. The experimental data will provide large ensembles of statistical
data that have direct bearing on the presence and impact of non-equilibrium in
the velocity and scalar fields. They will also be used for comparison with
result from CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) simulation, based on DNS (Direct
Numerical Simulation), to understand the interaction between combustion and
turbulence and between phenomena occurring at various length scales in turbulent
combustion. Furthermore, by using time and length scales characterizing non-
equilibrium generating impulses, the structure and evolution of turbulent flames
will be studied. A variational multiscale approach will be used as a framework
for modeling non-equilibrium turbulent combustion, where the energy transfer
across impulse-generating scales will be modeled explicitly. A small-parameter
expansion based unsteady dissipation rate model will be developed. The
experiments will be critical to the modeling effort since a far larger range of
conditions can be investigated than is possible with DNS.