* 1511346
* GOALI:   Development of Spatiotemporal Metabolic Models for Syngas Fermentation in Industrial Bubble Column Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Derek Griffin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Henson - 1511346

One of the most promising routes to renewable liquid fuels and chemicals is the
fermentation of waste carbon by specialized microbes. This can not only enable
advanced biofuel and renewable chemical production but could also help reduce
carbon emissions. Commercial development of gas fermentation technology is being
led by emerging companies such as LanzaTech, but many fundamental research
problems must be addressed to further advance the technology towards economic
competitiveness. A particularly important challenge is to develop integrated
metabolic and transport models that describe gas fermentation in industrially
relevant bubble column reactors. The development of such spatiotemporal
metabolic models is an emerging research problem with numerous potential
applications in environmental science, biotechnology, bioenergy and human
health. The objectives of this GOALI project are to develop general tools for
spatiotemporal metabolic modeling and to evaluate the methods through
application to gas fermentation in bubble column reactors.

The PIs plan to convert CO-rich waste streams as well as synthesis gas (syngas -
mainly comprised of H2/CO/CO2) to liquid fuels and chemicals in bubble column
reactors. His proposed modeling approach involves combining genome-scale
reconstructions of species metabolism with transport equations that govern the
relevant convective and/or diffusional processes within the spatially varying
system. The resulting models consist of linear programs for intracellular
metabolism embedded within partial different equations for spatial and dynamic
variations within the extracellular environment. UMass will develop efficient
model formulation and robust numerical solution techniques using gas
fermentation and biofilm growth problems as in silico testbeds. The syngas
fermentation models will be developed in collaboration with LanzaTech, an
industrial leader in gas fermentation and bubble column reactor technology.
These models will be formulated by combining a recently developed genome-scale
metabolic reconstruction of the syngas fermenting bacterium Clostridium
ljungdahlii with convective transport equations for the feed gas components and
the major metabolic byproducts, ethanol and acetate. Following initial testing
at UMass, the syngas fermentation models will be validated with data collected
from a LanzaTech laboratory/pilot facility. Using these data, the spatiotemporal
metabolic models will be refined as necessary to capture the key features of
industrial bubble column reactors.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research will both advance fundamental research
and impact industrial practice. While a few isolated papers have been published
on spatiotemporal metabolic modeling, our research will produce a considerably
more general treatment of this important problem. We expect the application work
focused on syngas fermentation to produce new computational tools to simulate,
design and optimize industrial bubble column reactors. The UMass graduate
student supported by NSF funds will complete a four month internship at
LanzaTech?s Skokie, IL research facility to participate in data collection and
to perform model refinement and validation. The student will be co-advised by
the two project investigators, with Prof. Henson (UMass, PI) leading the methods
development work and Dr. Griffin (LanzaTech, co-PI) overseeing the bubble column
model development work. While at LanzaTech, the student will work with a broad
array of scientists and engineers in a highly multidisciplinary and team
oriented environment. Tight integration of the UMass and LanzaTech efforts will
be achieved through frequent email exchanges, biweekly videoconferences and
biannual project meetings. At least two undergraduate students will participate
in the research by having the funded Ph.D. student serve a partial advising
role. These students will interact with other students funded through the
Institute of Massachusetts Biofuels Research (TIMBR) and participate in ongoing
TIMBR activities.