* 1511098
* SUSCHEM: A Green Chemistry Approach to Organic and Transparent Photovoltaic Material Synthesis and Device Fabrication
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Richard Lunt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,894.00

PI: Annick Anctil Proposal Number: 1511098

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells that use organic conducting polymers to convert light to
electricity - organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices - offer a potentially low-cost
route for renewable electricity production. OPV devices have other unique
properties such low weight, flexibility, and transparency, which enable their
integration into portable electronics, smart fabrics, and buildings. As organic
solar cells get closer to commercialization, it is important to understand the
potential unintended consequences of their large-scale manufacturing. This
project will develop and use life cycle analysis to assess the environmental
impacts of organic solar cell manufacturing. Towards this end, the safety,
toxicity and scarcity of the materials will be considered to determine if
organic solar cells are truly a sustainable energy option. The research outcomes
will suggest ways to change the manufacturing process to make OPV devices more
sustainable. The educational activities of this project include student-led life
cycle assessment of facilities at Michigan State University for future renewable
energy building retrofits through the Students Planned Advanced Retrofit
Applications (SPARTA) initiative at Michigan State University, and efforts to
broaden participation of women in solar photovoltaics professional societies.

The goal of the proposed research is to assess the sustainability of organic
photovoltaic device (OPV) manufacture by life-cycle assessment (LCA) and green
chemistry metrics. LCA will be used to identify critical steps in the life cycle
where the most significant reduction in resource and emissions can be achieved,
and suggest new materials synthesis and device fabrication pathways to minimize
environmental impact. Toward this end, the research will 1) develop a
sustainability-based approach to evaluate organic solar cell manufacturing
processes using green chemistry metrics; 2) conduct life cycle inventory of
materials and processes used to fabricate single and multi-junction solar cells;
3) develop LCA models to assess current environmental/health/cost impacts of OPV
device manufacture, and 4) propose sustainable OPV cell design and manufacturing
process based on consideration of alternative materials and processing steps.
The research outcomes seek to demonstrate that integration of LCA with OPV
device design and manufacture can serve as proactive model for the design of
sustainable solar PV processes. Life cycle inventory data will be submitted to
the Ecoinvent database to encourage future LCA studies of organic solar cells
and other organic polymer based electronic devices.