* 1511915
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Role of Biofilms in Engineered Infiltration Systems in the Removal of Bacteria in Urban Stormwater
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Edward Bouwer, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,998.00

1511915(Chen) & 1511941(Li)

Urbanization has resulted in a significant increase in surfaces which prevent
stormwater from infiltrating the subsurface and recharging the groundwater.
Instead, stormwater accumulates as surface runoff that can result in streambed
erosion and flooding events. The runoff can also pick up contaminants (e.g.,
pathogens) from the surfaces, which eventually enter and contaminate natural
aquatic systems. An important component of this research is to investigate the
influence of variation in stormwater chemistry and length of drying periods on
the chemical properties and microbial diversity of the biofilms and the
efficiency of biofilm-modified engineered infiltration systems to remove
bacteria during a storm event.

This research is the first to systematically study the effects of biofilms grown
under environmentally relevant conditions in engineered infiltration systems on
the removal of bacteria from stormwater. The changes in the structure,
distribution, and microbial diversity of biofilms in porous media grown under a
variety of environmental conditions will be revealed for the first time through
confocal laser scanning microscopy and high throughput sequencing. The use of
atomic force microscopy for the measurements of interfacial forces between a
bacterial colloid probe and biofilms will shed light on how a variety of biofilm
structures will influence the interfacial interactions between bacteria and
biofilm-modified surfaces and the propensity for bacteria to adhere to biofilms.
By coupling pore scale and continuous scale modeling, this work will
quantitatively link the influence of biofilms on pore scale hydrodynamics with
the rate of bacteria transport and attachment at continuum scale. This research
will provide new insights on the mechanisms for bacterial retention during
filtration, as well as the remobilization of bacteria during draining in
biofilm-modified engineered infiltration systems. This research is
transformative because it reveals the intricate relationship between
environmental conditions, physicochemical properties and microbial diversity of
biofilms, and bacteria-biofilm interactions, which will be relevant to the
fields of environmental, chemical, and biomedical engineering. The specific
tasks include: 1) characterization of biofilms grown under environmentally
relevant conditions in microfluidic cells; 2) probing bacterium-biofilm
interactions using atomic force microscopy; 3) column filtration experiments
including biofilms grown under environmentally relevant conditions; and 4) pore-
and continuum-scale modeling of hydrodynamics and bacterial removal in
engineered infiltration systems. Research findings will also be incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate course materials and further augmented by the
involvement of the PIs and their graduate students in organizing scientific
activities for third through fifth-grade students in predominantly African
American elementary/middle schools in inner-city Baltimore. Short courses on
stormwater reuse-related topics will also be developed for the Nebraska EPSCoR's
Young Nebraska Scientists summer camps which are attended by K-12 students, a
large fraction of them to be underrepresented minorities.