* 1511759
* UNS: Nanotopographical Memory Modulates Stem Cell Fate
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Justin Legleiter, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2018
* USD 350,888.00

1511759&lt;br/&gt;Yang, Yong &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional cell culture
methods using flat, stiff plastic surfaces do not recapitulate characteristics
(e.g., stiffness and nanotopography) of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with
which cells interact in vivo. Therefore, cell behavior on such surfaces
significantly deviate from their in vivo counterparts. There is a pressing need
to incorporate the ECM characteristics into stem cell culture technologies. The
goal of this research is to advance next-generation cell culture technologies by
investigating nanotopographical memory effects of stem
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECM/substrate nanotopography and stiffness
critically influence numerous developmental, physiological and pathological
processes in vivo, and have a profound influence on cell behavior and stem cell
fate decision in vitro. It is hypothesized that stem cells can retain
nanotopographical information from past culture environments and the
nanotopographical memory can influence future fate decision of stem cells. The
objective of the proposed research is to test this hypothesis and to delineate
the underlying mechanism of nanotopographical memory effects. Three research
objectives using human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) as model cells are
proposed to study the nanotopographical memory effects: (1) Regulate Yes-
associated protein (YAP) intracellular localization by using nanotopography, (2)
Validate nanotopographical memory effects, and (3) Delineate the underlying
mechanism of nanotopographical memory effects. This research will advance the
understanding of cellular mechanotransduction and stem cell plasticity during
developmental and pathological processes. It will call attention to unintended
nanotopographical memory effects during in vitro culture, which may affect stem
cell function and differentiation. This research will contribute to the
development of next-generation stem cell culture technologies, and provide
insight into the design of new biomaterials and the cell-substrate interfaces of
implants and medical devices for regenerative medicine. In addition, a
collaborative, cross-disciplinary, learn-through-research system will be
established to provide the basic infrastructure to promote nanobiotechnology
education in West Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology
and Biochemical Engineering Program of CBET is co-funded by the Biomaterials
Program of the Division of Materials Research.