* 1511646
* UNS: Engineering Stable Two- and Three-Component Bacterial Consortia
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Laura Jarboe, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1511646 &lt;br/&gt;Jarboe, Laura &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Naturally-occurring
microbial consortia are communities of microorganisms that work together to
perform complex tasks. This project aims to use a well-characterized series of
genetic interactions to generate stable, tunable microbial consortia.
&lt;br/&gt;The application of this idea will be demonstrated in two aspects of
the production of biorenewables. In the first demonstration, the problem of
simultaneous utilization of mixed sugars will be developed. Lignocellulosic
biomass contains a variety of sugar types and conversion of these sugars to
biorenewable fuels and chemicals would optimally utilize all of these sugars. A
microbial consortium capable of utilizing the three most common biomass-derived
sugars will be established. The second demonstration involves a consortium in
which all members consume the same sugar (glucose), but produce two distinct
products. This work will develop new technology that will enable improved
production of biorenewable fuels and chemicals. This project will provide
training for undergraduate and graduate researchers and provide a basis for K12
outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
redesign an existing consortium-generating Escherichia coli genetic circuit to
form microbial consortia for utilization of mixed substrates and production of
mixed products. This consortium will be distinct from existing consortia in that
it will be (i) isogenic and (ii) self-tuning. While the consortium exists in
discrete expression states, the members are all genetically identical and will
not require the engineering of auxotrophic features in order to maintain a
stable population. The self-tuning behavior will ensure that the population
distribution will shift in response to external or metabolic signals. The
ability of this isogenic population to attain such discrete and self-tuning
behavior is based on a complex set of interactions that occur shortly after DNA
replication in the pap and fim operons in the context of pathogenesis. This work
involves fundamental engineering research of biomolecular processes that could
lead to the development of enabling technology for biotechnology and bioenergy
industries. Specifically, the utilization of biomass-derived sugars and the
production of biorenewable chemicals will be demonstrated. The specific aims of
this work include (i) the construction of reporter systems and characterization
of the isogenic, self-tuning consortium in a variety of growth conditions; (ii)
the engineering of the system for simultaneous, self-tuning consumption of
glucose, xylose and arabinose; (iii) the engineering of the system for co-
production of methylsuccinate and 1,4-butanediol
(BDO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.