* 1511925
* UNS: A Novel Approach to Multistage Stochastic Programming  for Smart Grid Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Donald Chmielewski, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 05/31/2019
* USD 313,515.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Chmielewski, Donald and Li,
Zuyi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1511925 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Illinois Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Novel Approach to Multistage Stochastic
Programming for Smart Grid Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electric grid
must maintain a balance between power generation and consumption at all times.
Due to the uncertainty of power consumption (denoted as 'demand'), dispatch
capable power generators are in a constant state of flux. Introduction of
renewable power does little to alleviate the overall problem because renewable
power has no dispatch capability. Thus peak power from the dispatch capable
generators remains the same, indicating that retirement of these (mostly fossil)
plants is unlikely. To alleviate this dispatch problem, many advocate energy
storage and / or demand response. Energy storage units collect energy during
periods of excess power (when renewable generation is high and consumer demand
is low) and return energy to the system during times of
scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
notion of Demand Response (DR) is to enlist a subset of consumers (the demand)
to respond to renewable sources as well as demand from other consumers. The
expected impact is a reduction in peak power (creating an opportunity to retire
some dispatch capable plants) and a reduction of the variance (indicating that
remaining generators will experience fewer burdens). While the grid-level
benefits of energy storage and demand response seem clear, what incentives
justify investment in a storage facility or a demand response program? These can
be found in the time-dependent electric energy prices, a result of a recently
deregulated (or market based) compensation system for power generators. The
central issue is that uncertainty (in price, demand or renewable generation)
will force the Net Present Value (NPV) analysis to a stochastic framework.
Specifically, the equipment design question becomes a Multistage Stochastic
Program (MSP). In many cases, a separation of timescales converts the MSP to a
simple two-stage problem. Unfortunately, this approximation fails if given
significant energy storage and MSP solution methods will be required for these
systems. MSP is one of the most challenging optimization problems in all of
engineering. Thus, the project objective is to investigate a new solution
procedure for MSP problems. This procedure employs a novel combination of
existing and recently developed solution methods and is tailored to exploit the
specific characteristics of the smart grid application. The project is
collaborative in nature. Concepts and solution techniques from two research
communities (chemical process control and power system optimization, represented
by the PI and co-PI), will need to be combined to achieve project goals. This
intellectual cross-pollination at the boundary of two fields is expected to
yield unforeseen discoveries for both. The proposed MSP solution procedure is
expected to have applicability beyond smart grid. A clear extension is to the
longstanding problem of integrated process design and control. Another is
process operations scheduling, which is very much similar to the integer
constrained unit commitment problem studied in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentoring of
three REU projects is planned and the PI's K-12 outreach program will be
continued. In addition, a major goal of the project is to foster a chemical
engineering smart grid community, through the organization of invited tutorial
sessions at chemical engineering conferences, multi-community workshops and
mini-conferences, and review and tutorial type publications. Development of
computationally tractable MSP solution methods is perceived as an essential step
to the transfer of technology for widespread investment in energy storage
facilities and adoption of demand response participation.