* 1511038
* Engineering Sustainability 2015: Innovation and the Triple Bottom Line (ES15)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Eric Beckman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 30,710.00

1511038 &lt;br/&gt;Beckman, Eric J. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mascaro Center for
Sustainable Innovation at the University of Pittsburgh and the Steinbrenner
Institute for Environmental Education and Research at Carnegie Mellon University
will host Engineering Sustainability 2015: Innovation and the Triple Bottom Line
in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania from April 19-21, 2015. This Engineering
Sustainability conference will include participants from many professional
realms, and will focus on issues related to engineering sustainable built
environments and water infrastructure. These topical areas are inherently
interdisciplinary, but also have engineering as the foundation for progress.
Intellectual merit includes that this conference will bring together engineers
and scientists from academia, government, industry, and non-profits to share
results of cutting edge research and practice directed at development of
environmentally sustainable buildings and infrastructure, especially urban water
infrastructure. The conference is unique in its focus on environmentally
sustainable engineering for the urban environment, and its ability to bring
together engineers, architects, economists, and urban planners and managers. The
attendance goal is 375 participants. Plenary talks and concurrent oral and
poster sessions will be organized around the following themes: green building
design and construction; greening the indoor environment; sustainable
distributed power for the built environment; sustainable urban drinking water,
stormwater, and wastewater infrastructure; design of more sustainable
transportation grids; using principles of sustainability to foster innovation
and new product development. There will also be numerous planned opportunities
for informal exchanges and networking.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Engineering
Sustainability 2015 will further the public interest in sustainable community
infrastructure by advancing the state of scientific knowledge of issues
affecting human health and the environment. This conference will also enhance
interdisciplinary dialogue on environmental sustainability research with cross-
cutting applications in both basic and applied sciences. The conference will
have significant participation from students and young faculty members, who are
so important to the next generation of innovations. The interdisciplinary
presentations on cutting edge research in sustainable engineering for the built
environment and infrastructure, the mixture of disciplines and backgrounds
represented among the participants, and the networking opportunities provided by
the conference will enable participants to leave the conference with new
information and ideas about research needs and opportunities. This will
strengthen the ability of the participants to develop novel and impactful
proposals to NSF and other organizations funding research in sustainability
science and engineering.