* 1511199
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Ultrafast Phonon Spectroscopy for Lifetime Measurements of Phonons in 2-D Transitional Metal Dichalcogenides
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mark Siemens, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 216,000.00

1512776 / 1511199 Yang, Ronggui / Siemens, Mark

In very thin materials (of a few atoms), the opto-electronic properties can be
dramatically different from a macroscopic chunk of the same material that has
implications in conducting heat. One of this type of materials is the transition
metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). Further progress in integrating these ultra-thin
TMDCs into devices requires full understanding of their heat transfer
capability, but the thinness that enables their novel physical properties also
prevents the use of traditional characterization techniques. Researchers from
the University of Colorado and the University of Denver propose to develop a new
technique for measuring the dynamics of phonons which carry heat in TMDCs.
Results from this project are expected to yield critical insight into the design
of novel materials and devices with desired thermal conduction characteristics.
The principal investigators will implement a hands-on program encouraging
students to explore scientific questions about lasers and heat transfer.
Graduate students will be involved in the research for their graduate degrees.

Throughout the recent work on nanoscale thermal transport, phonon mean free path
(proportional to phonon lifetime) is a central concept that governs the
extraordinary phenomena observed and explored over the past two decades for
ultra-low and ultra-high thermal conductivity of nanostructured materials.
Although the mean free path and lifetime of carriers are simple kinetic
concepts, the first-principle calculations of mean free path and lifetime of
phonons are only recently being undertaken. A convincing measurement technique
is yet needed to measure frequency-dependent phonon lifetime. The objective of
this collaborative research project is to adapt two-dimensional coherent
spectroscopy, a high-impact technique used to study electronic coherence, to the
measurement of phonon lifetime. To demonstrate the efficacy of this novel
technique, the frequency-dependent phonon lifetime in 2-D TMDCs will be measured
and compared with the first-principles calculations. Phonon lifetime
spectroscopy on monolayer and few-layer TMDCs will yield critical information
about the layer-dependence of thermal conductivity and phonon in few-layer
TMDCs, which can have immediate impact on the design of 2D TMDC-enabled novel
devices.