* 1511437
* UNS: Molecular Modeling of Wetting and Dewetting Transitions on Nanotextured Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Amish Patel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2019
* USD 335,248.00

1511437 - Patel

Surface roughness or texture can amplify the desirable properties of hydrophobic
or "water-hating" surfaces. Such superhydrophobic surfaces have numerous
applications due to their ability to repel water, to be self-cleaning, and to
resist the formation of biofilms. However, the widespread adoption of these
revolutionary materials has been thwarted by the fact that superhydrophobicity
is fragile, and can be destroyed if water penetrates the surface texture. Thus,
fully realizing the promise of these materials requires strategies to stabilize
the fragile superhydrophobic state. The work proposed here will employ
specialized molecular simulation methods to improve understanding of the
connection between surface topography and the stability of the superhydrophobic
state, and transform the ability to design robust superhydrophobic surfaces.

The proposed work seeks to establish an understanding of how the thermodynamics
of wetting-dewetting transitions on nanotextured surfaces are affected by the
morphology of the surface nanotexture, and to use this understanding to inform
the design of robust superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. Although
wetting-dewetting transitions on textured surfaces have been studied extensively
using macroscopic interfacial thermodynamics, a fundamental understanding of how
such transitions are affected by collective water density fluctuations is
missing. Our work promises to break new ground by using molecular simulations to
characterize the free energetics of such wetting-dewetting transitions on
nanotextured surfaces, the corresponding mechanistic pathways, and their
dependence on external conditions such as pressure. The results of the work
could also shed light on other phenomena where wetting-dewetting transitions on
nanotextured surfaces are important, e.g., heterogeneous nucleation of bubbles
and contact line pinning. By uncovering the fundamental connection between
surface nanotexture and the stability of the superhydrophobic Cassie state, the
proposed work has the potential to inform the rational design of robust
superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces, and bring about a transformative
effect on the use of these materials in real-world applications that range from
self-cleaning paints and coatings to water-repellent automobile windshields, and
ice-resistant coatings for airplane wings and solar cells. The proposed work
will lead to the training of a doctoral student and will also facilitate the
mentoring of under-represented minority and undergraduate students by the PI.
The findings of this project will also serve as the basis for augmenting a new
course being developed by the PI at the University of Pennsylvania.