* 1511177
* UNS: Development and Comparison of New Methods for Stabilizing Amputee Gait
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,02/28/2018
* Steve Collins, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 02/28/2018
* USD 370,227.00

1511177(Collins)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About half of the one million people in
the United States with lower-limb amputation experience a fall each year,
usually during walking. These falls often result in serious injury, with annual
health care costs of over one billion dollars. Side-to-side motions are least
stable during walking, especially on uneven terrain, and require more active
control for balance. Surprisingly, little is known about how balance is affected
by prosthesis properties that influence side-to-side motions. While robotic
prostheses have improved propulsion and energy cost, this technology has not yet
been used to improve stability or reduce fall risk. This project explores new
approaches to the control of side-to-side balance using robotic prostheses,
characterizes the effects of prosthesis parameters on stability, and establishes
quantitative cost-benefit relationships for balance-related performance. It will
yield new fundamental understanding of the role of ankle control in human
balance and of the impact of instability on other aspects of gait and mobility.
The project will develop technologies that lead to reduced fall rates, increased
satisfaction and enhanced mobility for individuals with amputation, improving
quality of life. Active, semi-active and passive prosthesis elements that
enhance balance are being developed and their relative costs and benefits
quantified along key dimensions, facilitating rational design choices. This will
lead to increased efficiency in health care delivery, with increases in device
cost being offset by reductions in costs for treating fall-related injuries.
This project takes place in an interdisciplinary educational setting, in which
doctoral, Master's and undergraduate students interact with clinical experts and
gain experience in developing technologies to address disability. This
compelling application of technology to improve people's well-being attracts new
participants to science and engineering, enhancing the recruitment of female and
minority students. A private-sector partner is helping to address commercial
translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes new techniques for
stabilizing amputee gait and compares implementation costs to balance-related
benefits in terms of stability, metabolic energy use, and balance confidence.
Experiments utilize a previously-developed, tethered ankle-foot prosthesis with
high-fidelity torque control in both plantarflexion and inversion-eversion
directions. This tool enables a new class of rapid, well-controlled tests of the
effects of prosthesis features and control on human performance. The project
team includes experienced physicians, prosthetists, entrepreneurs and
researchers to ensure medical, clinical, commercial and scientific relevance.
The primary goals of the project are: Goal 1: Develop new prosthesis control
methods to stabilize amputee gait. Several promising techniques are being
examined in experiments with unilateral trans-tibial amputees, including: i)
once-per-step ankle push-off work modulation based on medial-lateral center of
mass velocity, a technique the investigators previously established in
simulations and experiments with non-disabled subjects; ii) once-per-step
inversion-eversion torque modulation, expected to further enhance side-to-side
balance; iii) once-per-step surface matching, expected to mitigate the effects
of ground irregularities; and iv) optimized inversion-eversion stiffness,
expected to modestly improve balance at low implementation cost. These methods
are independently examined in separate tests and then compared. Participants are
subjected to irregular terrain, a common balancing challenge for amputees.
Performance is measured in terms of gait variability, metabolic rate, muscle
activity, and self-reported confidence and preference. Goal 2: Cost-benefit
analysis of stabilization techniques. Active control techniques, such as push-
off work modulation, require expensive, high-power motors and large batteries.
Semi-active techniques, such as surface matching, could be implemented with
smaller, less-expensive actuation schemes. Estimates of implementation costs are
combined with experimentally measured benefits to determine relationships
between cost and benefit for each outcome and identify Pareto-optimal prosthesis
characteristics.