* 1511953
* UNS: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Nanoengineering biomimetic nanobrushes for pathogen sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Eric McLamore, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 10/31/2019
* USD 166,473.00

Collaborative Project 1512659 Gomes, Carmen 1511953 McLamore, Eric S.

This research will develop a novel sensor device designed to detect foodborne
pathogens. The researchers will stimuli-response material in combination with a
specially developed biomolecule for detecting Listeria monocytogenes (pathogen
present in foods). The proposed work is particularly important because we do not
have antibodies (a molecule that recognizes the pathogen) that have high
affinity for this particular pathogen.

The objective of this research is to develop biosensors which combine stimuli-
responsive polymer nanobrushes and aptamers. Such an approach is expected to
significantly improve the field of pathogen detection. The biosensor device will
be evaluated on a broad range of criteria such as sensitivity, selectivity, and
response time with appropriate controls. The intellectual merit of this proposal
lies in combining the actuation of stimuli-responsive polymers with selective
capture of bacteria by aptamers immobilized on the polymer surface for
increasing selective capture and retention of target pathogens. The biomimetic
approach proposed in this work is inspired by selective recruitment of symbiotic
bacteria by ciliate actuation in the bobtail squid light organ, which is capable
of capturing a specific target species from a solution with a complex microbial
background and a wide range of particle sizes. When combined with nanomaterial-
modified electrodes, it is anticipated to provide two distinct advantages;
namely, enhanced capture of target bacteria due to lower non-specific binding,
and enhanced limit of detection. Broader Impacts : A convenient, rapid, and
sensitive biosensor for foodborne pathogens can have significant impact in food
safety and medical diagnostics. This proposed research also serves as a unique
opportunity for dissemination of engineering research to underrepresented
population at the two collaborating institutions and will focus on food safety
and nano-biosensing technologies. These activities will include at Texas A&M
University: (i) demonstrating practical applications on detecting foodborne
pathogens in the Expanding Your Horizon one-day camp ( reaches 70 sixth-grade
girls per year), (ii) mentoring and hosting young women through the Women
Explore Engineering summer camp; and (iii) hosting a high school teacher through
Enrichment Experiences in Engineering program. At University of Florida
activities will include (i) recruiting secondary science educator to participate
in the research project through the Center for Precollegiate Education and
Training (ii) developing online learning modules using animation software to
teach biosensor concepts; and (iii) coordinating and hosting K-12 students
through 4H Bioengineering summer camp