* 1511905
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Development of a multi-scale model to determine optimal urban heat mitigation strategies for vulnerable populations in a changing climate
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,03/31/2016
* David Sailor, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2016
* USD 141,148.00

1512429 - Ban-Weiss&lt;br/&gt;1511905 - Sailor, David
J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme heat in urban areas can have deleterious
consequences on human health and can lead to increases in building cooling
energy use. These impacts are projected to become more significant in the future
due to ongoing urbanization, population densification, and global climate
change. The aim of this research is to answer the question, what are the most
effective urban heat mitigation strategies for the populations that are most
vulnerable to extreme heat? The analysis will focus on neighborhoods in Los
Angeles, CA that contain populations that are especially physically and
financially vulnerable to increasing extreme heat: (1) the elderly, (2) those
without air conditioning, and (3) those of low socioeconomic status that cannot
afford increased energy costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will develop a
multi-scale coupled modeling framework that resolves regional-scale meteorology,
micro-scale meteorology, and building energy flows. Neighborhoods in Los Angeles
with vulnerable populations will be identified using parcel-level GIS datasets
of population age, income, and access to air-conditioning. The heat mitigation
strategies that will be assessed include solar reflective rooftops and
pavements, and increased use of street-level and rooftop urban vegetation. These
mitigation strategies will be assessed for impacts on (a) outdoor and indoor air
temperatures, (b) human thermal comfort, heat stress, and heat-related
mortality, (c) indoor thermal conditions for representative buildings without
air conditioning, and (d) air-conditioning energy use for representative
buildings with air conditioning. Model performance for each element of the model
will be thoroughly evaluated by comparing to observations. The multi-scale model
and methods for targeting vulnerable populations will be applicable to other
cities worldwide in future work. Results from the project will provide targeted
solutions to help vulnerable populations deal with extreme heat. Solutions will
be communicated to local policy makers, utilities, and other stakeholders, all
of whom the PIs have already-established relationships, to provide pathways for
implementation. Discoveries will also be communicated to middle and high school
students in areas with vulnerable populations through outreach programs at
University of Southern California (USC). The PI will work with teachers through
USC's Research Experience for Teachers program, with the goal of designing
curriculum and research focused lessons that teach students about the
fundamental physics describing extreme heat mitigation. Additionally, the PI
will teach a demonstration focused lesson in participating teacher's classrooms
to excite future young scientists and engineers to follow careers in STEM. A
simple website will be created summarizing research outcomes and providing
practical solutions for mitigating extreme heat.