* 1511928
* RUI: Biological Engineering of Neural Migratory Streams
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Elmer Price, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2019
* USD 349,682.00

PI: Price, Elmer M. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1511928&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent evidence indicates that there exist
locations in the adult brain that constantly generate new cells that migrate
into specific regions involved in olfaction, memory and learning. This project
aims to provide new information regarding the mechanisms that are responsible
for this important and complex process. The PI also plans to use this knowledge
to bioengineer structures which, when implanted into brain, will form new
migratory paths that will deliberately target new neurons into specific regions
of the brain. When delivered to areas impacted by injury or disease, these new
neurons are anticipated to restore lost function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
adult neurogenesis, a large number of molecules participate in complex
signaling, which requires precise spatial and temporal control. Although several
of these neurotrophic ligands and cognate receptors have been identified, many
questions remain regarding the molecular mechanisms by which these components
function. The goals of this project are to characterize the mechanism by which
specific factors mediate neurogenesis using an in vitro system and then use this
information to bioengineer cylindrical fibrin-based implants which will generate
new neural migratory paths in vivo. The project involves in vitro and
complementary in vivo aims. The premise of the in vitro studies is that neural
stem cells receive neurotrophic signals in a particular order and one role of
each ligand is to induce the expression of the receptor for the next ligand. The
in vivo experiments will exploit novel, readily bioengineered fibrin cylinders
that will be implanted into the brain in order to recruit endogenous neural
progenitor cells from their usual niche and target them into non-neurogenic
regions. The project will use time-lapse microscopy, fluorescence microscopy,
immunochemistry, and animal behavioral studies to accomplish the aims.
Undergraduate researchers will participate in this research through a program
dubbed FIRE (Full Immersion Research Experience), where the students will be
involved in all aspects of a research program, including literature evaluation,
grant writing, technical and presentation skill development, and preparation for
graduate school application.