* 1511603
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Impact of Pregnancy on the Mechanics of Vaginal Tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Raffaella De Vita, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Pelvic floor disorders (PFDs) encompass a number of medical conditions including
stress urinary and fecal incontinence, and pelvic organ prolapse. Although not
often discussed, these conditions are extremely common, with more than 50% of
parous women having some degree of a PFD during their lifetime and 11% of women
requiring surgery. These disorders severely alter the quality of life of women
often leading to isolation and depression. To someone not entirely familiar with
internal female pelvic anatomy, it may appear that the vagina is no more
important than the rectum or urethra in the development of these disorders.
However, the vagina is the primary support structure for the urethra, bladder,
uterus, and rectum. The vagina is, in turn, supported by a combination of muscle
and connective tissues. A direct insult to the vagina and/or its supportive
muscles and tissues compromises the function of other pelvic organs. Thus, it
should come as no surprise that excessive stretching and tearing of the vagina
during labor and vaginal delivery are predisposing factors for the development
of PFDs. It is still unclear, however, which of the structural and mechanical
alterations that occur in vaginal tissue during pregnancy predispose women to
the development of PFDs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project aims
to characterize, for the first time, the mechanisms of stretch induced damage
and tear propagation in virgin and pregnant rat vaginal tissue. A comprehensive
set of ring tests will be conducted to determine the functional role of the
tissue?s constituents (collagen, elastin, and smooth muscle cells) on both the
active and passive mechanics of the vagina. Planar biaxial tests will be
performed to study the tear propagation process. The results of these tests will
guide the development of a new constitutive model that will capture the active
and passive mechanical response of the vaginal tissue, including stretch-induced
damage. The constitutive model will be implemented into a finite element code
especially developed to simulate damage and tear propagation of vaginal tissue.
For validation, three-dimensional in-vivo experimental data, which are collected
by conducting inflation tests that simulate a birth injury within a state-of-
the-art 7T micro-MRI, will be utilized.