* 1511637
* SusChEM: Enhancing Tolerance and Performance of a Renewable Aromatic Biorefinery
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Xuan Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 378,000.00

1511637 &lt;br/&gt;Nielsen, David &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although microorganisms
can be engineered to convert renewable biomass into an array of useful
chemicals, the same products often inhibit the productivity of the producing
microbes. This project seeks to explore strategies for engineering more tolerant
microbes in support of enhanced chemical production. Novel enzyme pathways will
first be engineered to enable the individual biosynthesis of four aromatic
products that are currently derived from petroleum. Their alternative
bioproduction will ultimately help to reduce U.S. dependence on foreign oil and
gas. The materials and strategies developed in this project will ultimately
benefit not only the production of renewable aromatic chemicals, but also a
broad range of other useful bioproducts, including biofuels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to expanding the number and diversity of
conventional petrochemical replacements that can be synthesized microbially
through the creation of enzyme pathways, this project further seeks to explore
strategies for engineering more tolerant microbes in support of enhanced
chemical production. Novel enzyme pathways will first be engineered to enable
the individual biosynthesis of four aromatic products: styrene, (S)-styrene
oxide, (R)-styrene glycol, and 2-phenylethanol. To counter the inhibitory
effects associated with microbial chemical production, strategies will be
explored to improve tolerance and productivity by actively excreting toxic
products from cells as they are synthesized. This will be achieved with the aid
of both native and heterologous efflux transporter proteins. Finally, novel gene
circuits will be engineered to control the expression of efflux pumps only if
and when needed by the cell, thereby allowing cells to conserve valuable
resources for further chemical production. The development of novel, aromatic-
inducible gene circuits to control transporter expression will demonstrate how
self-actuating control strategies can be used to maintain maximal host fitness
by affording cells the ability to sense and respond to dynamic changes in their
environment and intrinsic metabolism. The close integration of the research with
educational and outreach activities will be a key component of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.