* 1511138
* UNS: Tunable Plasmonic Nanostructures by Atomic Layer Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Brian Willis, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 01/31/2020
* USD 317,999.00

1511138(Willis)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonics is a general term that describes
a broad array of research activity to study the interaction of light with noble
metal nanostructures. Noble metals are metals that are resistant to corrosion
and oxidation in moist air. Ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, silver, osmium,
iridium, platinum, and gold are noble metals. The field of plasmonics is growing
rapidly due an increasing number of studies on the applications of plasmonic
materials. These applications are for their uses in photocatalysis, as
biochemical sensors, as photodetectors, and for solar energy harvesting,
including harvesting infrared (IR) wavelengths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
features of plasmonic materials are localized surface plasmon resonances that
lead to strong absorption and scattering of electromagnetic radiation by small
metal particles. An experimental research program to investigate tunable
plasmonic nano structures is planned, with an emphasis on process schemes for
electrical connectivity. The central features of plasmonic materials are
localized surface plasmon resonances that lead to strong absorption and
scattering of visible and near-IR radiation by small noble metal particles. The
resonances are sensitive to the size and shape of nanostructures as well as the
dielectric properties of the materials and surroundings, and can be tuned
throughout the visible/near-IR region. The coupling of optical phenomena and
charge transfer processes is one of the exciting new areas of the science of
plasmonic materials. In this work, the PI plans to investigate atomic layer
deposition of noble metals on Pd nanostructures to tune the optical and
electrical properties of electrically conductive nanostructures coupled by
nanogaps on the order of a few nanometers. Atomic layer deposition will be used
to create electrically coupled plasmonic nanostructures that combine optical and
electrical phenomena at the nanoscale. This research should enhance the ability
to engineer useful structures at the nanoscale with critical dimensions on the
order of 1 nm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts encompass STEM
educational and outreach activities, including building infrastructure for
education through new senior laboratory experiments, starting a new graduate
student mentoring program, supporting undergraduate research and participation
by underrepresented student populations, and hosting high school students and
teachers for summer learning activities.