* 1511562
* UNS: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Study of Amyloid Protein Oligomerization Using Microchannel Electrophoresis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Melissa Moss, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1511562/1511876 &lt;br/&gt;Moss/Hestekin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aggregation of
amyloid proteins is involved in a wide range of processes including the
pathogenesis of numerous diseases (Alzheimer's disease, type 2 diabetes, etc.)
as well as in biofouling associated with applications such as food production or
water purification. A better understanding of the aggregation process will not
only help to prevent unwanted protein aggregation, but may also be used to
design small-scale manufacturing processes where molecules are able to assemble
in an ordered and repeatable fashion, such as in the production of nanowires for
electronics. The goal of this project is to discover the primary mechanism
involved in the initiation of protein aggregation by examining proteins involved
in diseases and biofouling. In order to understand this mechanism, key
properties of the proteins will be altered in a controlled manner and their
effect on protein aggregation will be explored using methods that analyze
aggregate size and structure. In addition, changes in amyloid behavior in the
presence of inhibitor molecules will be examined. By advancing our understanding
of these early stages of protein aggregation, we will be able to design better
drugs for treating debilitating diseases, reduce unwanted biofouling, and
facilitate industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
employs a custom Microchannel Electrophoresis (ME) system that utilizes a
blended polymer matrix to facilitate separation of individual oligomer
populations that span a wide range of molecular weights. Three model proteins
will be studied: amyloid-beta, involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's
disease, amylin, a pathogenic protein in type 2 diabetes, and chaplin H, a
protein critical for biofouling. ME will be employed to elucidate the effect of
protein amino acid sequence, including the length of hydrophobic stretches and
protein flexibility, on the evolution of oligomeric aggregates. In addition, ME
will be employed to investigate the ability of eight known small molecule
inhibitors of aggregation to modulate oligomer formation. Oligomer size
determination as well as binding of florescent dyes that recognize hydrophobic
domains and amyloid structure will be coupled with time-dependent studies to
define the conformation, size, time to appearance, and relative quantity of
oligomers formed. The custom ME's dual optical detection capabilities will be
exploited to simultaneously detect oligomers via UV and bound fluorescent dyes.
The advancement in understanding the influences of protein amino acid sequence
and small molecule inhibitors on amyloid protein oligomerization will define new
directions for the inhibition and manipulation of protein aggregation with
applications in drug development, pharmaceutical production, biofouling, and
nanotechnology. The experimental work will be integrated with biomedical
engineering education. Specifically, the proposed work will establish a
collaborative undergraduate research exchange for six undergraduate students and
will develop a design based module to be distribution to high school and middle
school teachers that familiarizes precollege students with the concepts of
protein aggregation and separation of protein aggregates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Biomaterials
Program of the Division of Materials Research and by the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).