* 1511314
* UNS: Dynamic Contact Line Region Heat Transfer and Interface Behavior at High Heat Fluxes Through a Controlled Oscillating Meniscus
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Zhaolin Lu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 305,932.00

The principal investigator proposes to investigate the boiling phenomenon (much
like boiling in a pan) when the surface temperature is exceedingly higher than
boiling temperature. The result has many industrial applications including
cooling powerful computer and supercomputer devices. The PI will also use
liquids other than water that are commonly used in industrial cooling. Graduate
students will be involved in the research activities. The PI will expand his
current work with students in the 6th grade class from Franklin Roosevelt Middle
School from the Rochester city school district serving minority and
underprivileged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaporation of liquid film
sandwiched between the vapor bubble and the solid surface (i.e., the meniscus)
is responsible for the phase change. The PI will perform experiments,
simulations and analytical studies on an evaporating meniscus in a pressure-
controlled environment with three liquids and on different surfaces. The PI
proposes boiling conditions up to CHF (critical heat flux) conditions. The
intended results will provide quantitative data on (a) transient film thickness
by capturing laser interference fringes at high temporal resolutions, (b) high-
resolution transient thermal response of the underlying heater surface, and (c)
contact angle and interface modulation with high speed imaging. The proposed
tasks are important and provide high-quality data that have been rarely
obtained, by using high-speed optical methods with high resolutions (50,000
frames per second), while using a combined analytical and numerical method to
help elucidate the physics and heat transfer mechanism in the meniscus region.