* 1511767
* UNS:  Priming of Organohalide-Respirers to Degrade Chlorinated Ethenes with Natural Organochlorines
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Mark Krzmarzick, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 330,000.00

1511767&lt;br/&gt;Krzmarzick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite several decades of
bioremediation efforts, chlorinated ethenes (widely used solvents in the past)
are still present and pose significant threats to water systems. Bioremediation
of these compounds depends on the activity of bacteria capable of destroying
those compounds, but their activity and presence is often low and unevenly
distributed. Published studies have demonstrated that these bacteria grow while
treating naturally-occurring compounds which are similar in structure. By
exploiting this physiology, technologies may be developed to enhance the ability
of bacteria to treat these compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to determine the feasibility and effectiveness of using naturally-
occurring organochlorine compounds as stimulants for effective remediation of
chlorinated solvents. The central hypothesis is that organohalide respiring
bacteria will be stimulated to dechlorinate chlorinated solvents faster and more
completely in response to natural organochlorine amendments. The rationale is
that with this knowledge, chlorinated pollutants may be more thoroughly and
quickly remediated, thus removing major threats to groundwater systems and human
health. By investigating the biogeochemical links between organohalide respiring
bacteria, natural organochlorine compounds, and chlorinated pollutants, a
significant barrier in bioremediation is likely be found. Current research and
strategies for bioremediation has focused on increasing the availability of
electron donor (and perhaps carbon) to organohalide respirers, and/or by
bioaugmentation with cultures rich with organohalide respiring bacteria. Both of
these methods have a fundamental weakness in approach, which is the assumption
that the electron acceptor needed for the bacteria's growth and energy, the
chlorinated pollutant, is sufficiently bioavailable and biochemically suitable
for the biology of the bacteria. This proposal is innovative because it
approaches the stimulation of organohalide bacteria on the respiration side
(electron-accepting side) of its metabolism using naturally produced substrates.
Giving organohalide respiring bacteria the electron acceptors they need to live
to stimulate their broader organohalide respiring abilities represents a
paradigm shift from current bioremediation practice. The high-throughput
metatranscriptomic sequencing of this proposal will be used as a component of an
independent research topic undertaken in a graduate level course on molecular
methodologies. Findings of this proposal will also be incorporated immediately
into undergraduate and graduate lecture classes that cover biogeochemistry
topics, which will expose the undergraduate and graduate students to ongoing
research. The proposal will fund one PhD student who will travel to conferences
to present this work and who might otherwise not pursue this degree. With
undergraduate funding, up to three undergraduate researchers are expected to be
trained in research over the three years of the grant, and these researchers
will pursue small and independent projects which will be presented at local
symposia. This research has the potential to fundamentally impact society. This
proposal aims to complete the fundamental knowledge needed prior to the
development of engineering technologies. This work has the potential to complete
the fundamental knowledge needed for future SBIR/STTR or similar grants that
would then phase this research towards the development of technologies for field
implementation.