* 1511333
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Fluid mechanical basis of universal natural propulsor bending patterns
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* John Dabiri, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 103,284.00

#1511721 / #1511333 / #1510929 / #1511996&lt;br/&gt;Costello, John H. / Dabiri,
John, Colin, Sean / Gemmell, Brad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
study is to investigate the mechanisms by which different swimming animals
propel and maneuver themselves in order to identify common flow characteristics.
Results of this work will be applicable to the engineering of vehicles that can
bend and twist, mimicking efficient swimmers from
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient swimmers in nature appear to exhibit
common traits in the bending and twisting of their bodies. While the effects of
other morphological characteristics of swimmers have been explored, this is an
area that we do not have a good understanding. The basic hypothesis is that the
bending kinematics among various species are similar, and these unifying
characteristics need to be discovered. Validation of the hypothesis to the
broader animal kingdom will be tested using animal informatics. The proposed
work focuses on the study of the propulsion of three different model animals
(jellyfish, pteropods and lamprey), so that the common swimming traits can be
identified, characterized and theoretically analyzed. State-of-the-art
experimental techniques (such as 2D and 3D particle image velocimetry and
holographing imaging) will be used to quantify the flow, the forces, the torque
and the pressure fields generated during bending by these animal models. The
final goal is to provide not only quantitative but also predictive evaluation of
the fluid dynamic effects of propulsor bending.