* 1511470
* UNS: Fundamental Studies of Two-Phase Flows of Binary Fluids Driven by Temperature Gradients
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Roman Grigoriev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 05/31/2020
* USD 370,000.00

1511470 - Grigoriev

The principal investigators propose to develop a theoretical model where
condensation of vapor on a surface significantly increases heat transfer rates.
If the model is successful, it can help understand the mechanism of enhanced
heat transfer and lead to design of more energy-efficient energy handling
devices. The model will be verified by the accompanied experimental efforts.

This team of a theoretician and an experimentalist propose to develop numerical
models and experimentally validate them for application of binary fluids in
enhancing phase change heat transfer in multi-phase flows. The work builds on
recent research involving multi-phase flows but adds complex approaches with
pseudo-dropwise and film condensation. The approaches are novel and different in
fundamental ways from prior research on the topic. This project will investigate
convection in volatile confined binary-fluid layers driven by a horizontal
temperature gradient. The transport model is aimed to accurately predict heat
transfer enhancement and determine the specific conditions (in terms of liquid
composition, maximum level of noncondensables, and subcooling or temperature
gradient) required to maximize this enhancement. Condensation of binary mixture
vapor both in the presence and absence of non-condensables is considered. Due to
the favorable surface tension gradient (as opposed to the unfavorable surface
tension gradient as in Marangoni convection) caused by concentration gradient,
dropwise condensation is preferred. The principal investigators suggested that
the favorable surface tension gradient can mitigate dry spot formation during
evaporation.