* 1511881
* SusChEM: Design of Ionic-Liquid-Biocatalyst Systems for Production of Platform Chemicals and Intermediates Directly from Plant Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Nicole Labbe, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 433,480.00

In the future, for biorefineries to operate economically, they will require an
integrated process with the complete use of all carbons in the lignocellulosic
biomass including cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin to produce biofuels,
biochemicals, and biomaterials. Biomass is difficult to process, however. Ionic
liquid (IL) pretreatment is an emerging technology that aids biomass processing.
For its successful commercialization, this technology must overcome significant
barriers, namely cost of the ILs, recycling expense, and general toxicity to
biocatalysts. To tackle these barriers, the objective of the proposed research
is to develop novel highly-compatible IL-biocatalyst systems for simultaneous
saccharification and fermentation (SSF-IL) of lignocellulosic biomass into high-
value organic chemicals (HVOs).

Specifically, the team will fundamentally study and optimize high IL-tolerance
of Yarrowia lipolytica, a generally regarded-as-safe oleaginous yeast, that can
thrive and perform efficient biotransformation in at least a 10% IL solution.
The team will also elucidate and optimize Y. lipolytica metabolism for efficient
co-utilization of glucose and xylose, the major sugars of lignocellulosic
biomass. Finally, the team will develop highly compatible IL-biocatalyst systems
for enhanced conversion of lignocellulosic hybrid poplar (a potential bioenergy
crop), into high-value organics, specifically alpha-ketoglutaric acid via SSF-
IL.

The project will gain fundamental understanding of how the engineered IL-
biocatalyst system can transform recalcitrant biomass into valuable biofuels,
biochemicals, and biomaterials, and demonstrate a model for an unconventional,
economical, and competitive integrated biorefinery. It will present a promising
sustainable pathway for energy independence, security, and a greener environment
by utilizing renewable, sustainable, and domestic lignocellulosic biomass
instead of fossil fuels. The project will also provide educational components
including training of postdoctoral, graduate and (underrepresented minority)
undergraduate students in the areas of biomass conversion, biocatalysis, systems
biology, and metabolic engineering. In addition, outreach will involve engaging
undergraduate students in the Internationally Genetically Engineered Machinery
(iGEM) program that the PI has organized since 2012 as well as organizing summer
workshops for K-12 students who will be exposed to various aspects of Catalysis
and Biocatalysis to address challenging energy-related problems. The project is
co-funded by the NSF Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).