* 1511819
* UNS:Catalysis at Acid-Base Site Pairs: Thermodynamic and Kinetic Studies of Aldol Additions to Upgrade Biofuels on Metal and Mixed Metal Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* David Flaherty, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2019
* USD 348,640.00

Flaherty, 1511819&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global energy consumption will increase
dramatically in the next several decades, thus stimulating demand for fuels and
chemicals produced from renewable sources such as biomass. While the processes
for converting biomass to chemicals such as ethanol are well-known, the further
processing of those fermentation products to the larger molecules that make up
fuels and chemicals is presently inefficient and not well understood. This
project will investigate new combinations of catalytic materials specifically
designed to promote the coupling of fermentation products into diesel fuel,
lubricants and chemical feedstocks. By understanding the detailed catalytic
chemistry and its relationship to the structure and composition of the catalytic
materials, the research will lay the groundwork for a new class of catalyst
materials that can convert fermentation products into higher-value products both
more efficiently and with significant energy savings compared to existing
processes. The work will also provide opportunities for the training of both
graduate students and undergraduates in science, technology, and engineering,
with special emphasis on providing opportunities to female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most biomass upgrading processes rely on acidic
catalysts. Basic catalysts have generally been avoided because of poisoning by
water and carbon dioxide associated with fermentation processes. These
researchers have recognized an opportunity to combine both acidic and basic
catalytic functions into a single catalyst in a way that promotes aldol type
condensation (i.e. chain growth) reactions without the usual poisoning effects.
They will do this by investigating more than 25 technologically relevant
catalysts containing a range of acid sites, base sites, and acid-base site
pairs. Using a combination of experimental tools, they will characterize the
number and strength of acid, base, and acid-base pair sites and then relate
alcohol and aldehyde adsorption on those sites to detailed aldol condensation
kinetics and identification of critical transition states. The broader
scientific impact of this work will be to produce guiding principles for the
design of more active and stable catalysts for the production of carbon-neutral
biofuels and chemicals. In addition, the principal investigator is building an
undergraduate research program that focuses on developing graduate-student
female mentors to work with undergraduate mentees in the STEM areas.