* 1511718
* UNS: Engineering Cell-penetrating Peptides to Transport Molecular Cargo into Fungal Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Amy Karlsson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2019
* USD 330,401.00

PI: Karlsson, Amy J.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1511718&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Treating systemic fungal disease is a difficult
task, due to the limited number of antifungal agents that can effectively
eliminate fungal infections without harming the patient. This project seeks to
enable the development of antifungal agents with an improved ability to
selectively kill fungal cells without harming human cells. To accomplish this
task, peptides will be studied as tools to target fungal cells and to carry
molecules across cellular barriers and into fungal cells. This project will
reveal properties of the peptides that are important for specifically targeting
fungal cells over human cells and will provide information on limitations on the
size of molecules that can be carried into the cells. This information could
then be used to design improved antifungal agents and will also contribute to
knowledge of fungal cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
rational design strategies and molecular biology tools to build an understanding
of the interaction of cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) with fungal cells,
specifically the fungal pathogen Candida albicans, by (1) identifying CPPs able
to cross the cell wall and cell membrane of C. albicans, (2) determining cargo
tethering and size limitations for CPP-mediated transport into fungal cells, and
(3) engineering CPPs for improved translocation and selectivity. CPPs previously
shown to enter mammalian cells will be screened for their ability to translocate
into fungal cells, and limitations on the size of cargo and how the cargo is
tethered to CPPs will be studied using genetic fusions of CPPs to protein cargo.
To improve the translocation and selectivity of CPPs, peptides will be designed
with varied hydrophobicity and net charge, and the translocation into both C.
albicans and mammalian cells will be assayed to determine a set of rules for
designing CPPs for high levels of translocation into fungal cells and low levels
of translocation into mammalian cells. This project will elucidate the
relationship between a peptide's structure and its function as a CPP in fungal
cells and provide a new platform for designing targeted antifungal agents and
delivering bioactive molecules for fungal cell biology studies. This project
will provide knowledge needed to design improved antifungal agents with the
specificity and efficacy needed to treat systemic fungal disease, and the
approaches developed in this project will be transferable to developing delivery
systems for treating other diseases. In addition, this project will provide
students with training for future positions in biomolecular engineering by (1)
involving high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in the proposed
research project, (2) creating activities for Maryland Day that introduce
children and their parents to biomolecular engineering, and (3) incorporating
research techniques and results into undergraduate courses. This proposal is co-
funded by the Biomedical Engineering Program and by the Particulate and
Multiphase Processes Program, both in the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems Division.