* 1511152
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Numerical and Experimental Study of the Instability Mechanisms and Bubble Growth due to Explosive Boiling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* James Hermanson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 130,011.00

1512093 / 1511152&lt;br/&gt;Esmaeeli, Asghar / Hermanson, James C.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal aims to provide much needed insight of the
very rapid, explosive vapor bubble growth much like those in boiling water but
even faster. This can occur by properly providing and focusing energy on
liquids. One potential application of this knowledge is that, since the bubble
comes into existence and grows fast while at micro-scales, it can help design
micro-scale actuators commonly used in small devices. Both undergraduate and
graduate will be involved in, while K-12 students and their teachers will also
be exposed to, the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose a combined
experimental and modeling approach to (1) determine the range of parameters over
which explosive boiling in quiescent flows will occur and, under this condition,
(2) to gain fundamental understanding of the dynamic growth of a single vapor
nucleus, and (3) to explore the dynamics of multi-nuclei growth. Current
research in the field is almost exclusively experimental in nature, and many
crucial aspects cannot be probed quantitatively due to the complexity of
experimentation. The numerical modeling will facilitate interpreting
experimental results, which will be acquired using high-speed imaging, yielding
much-needed quantitative insights and helping to solve problems over a broader
range of engineering problems involving rapid evaporation. If the bubble growth
dynamics is captured, it can be used as an actuator by properly focusing energy
onto its initial growth that occurs at micro-scales. The results can improve
understanding of energy focusing phenomena at the micro-scale involving bubbles
as actuators if successful. Similarly, it will help to improve the design of
flash-boiling atomizers and the processes involving transport and storage of
volatile liquids or large scale energy generation.