* 1511896
* UNS:  Electric-Field Alignment of Immiscible Polymer Blends with Dispersed Nanoparticles for Mesoporous Reactive Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Mukerrem Cakmak, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2019
* USD 411,948.00

CBET - 1511896 PI: Millett, Paul

This project uses experiments and numerical simulation to examine the dynamics
of thin films of phase-separating polymers that contain nanoparticles. When
phase separation occurs, the nanoparticles segregate to the interfaces between
polymer phases, which locks the configuration of the phases into place. To
control the spatial morphology of the thin film, an electric field is applied to
align the phases and the particles perpendicular to the film. Then, one of the
polymer phases can be dissolved away, leaving a membrane-like structure
containing channels that are lined with the particles. The particles can be made
on the scale of nanometers and they can be made catalytic, which gives rise to a
variety of technological capabilities, including using the resulting membranes
for chemical separations, catalysis, and in energy-related devices such as
photovoltaics and light-emitting diodes.

The goal of the project is to understand the microstructural morphology of
melted, phase-separating polymer blends containing particles in thin films and
how its evolution can be controlled by an electric field. The project will use a
polymer film apparatus that can simultaneously impose elevated temperatures and
out-of-pane electric fields. Experiments will be integrated with Brownian
Dynamics/Cahn-Hilliard simulations to model the evolution of the thin film
morphology. The experiments and simulations will combine to identify parameter
ranges that optimize the desired thin film morphology. Parameters that will be
investigated include the strength of the electric field required to align phases
and particles, volume fractions of the polymer phases and the resulting channel
dimensions, particle size and volume fraction, and film thickness.