* 1511826
* UNS:  Role of dopant concentration and distribution in the environmental behavior of indium tin oxide nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Navid Saleh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,917.00

#1511826&lt;br/&gt;Saleh, Navid &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-scale metal oxides
are one of the most prepared and used engineered nanomaterials with applications
in electronics, optical devices, and medical processes and devices. Nano-scale
indium tin oxide (nITO) is one such doped metal oxide particle that is used
heavily in electronic display modules such as touch screens, electronic inks,
and organic light-emitting diodes. Manufacturing processes and end-of-life
disposal events for these products might serve as exposure pathways of nITO to
humans and the natural environment and thus raise concerns for eco- and nano-
toxicity. This project systematically assesses the influence of crystal
properties (at the atomic scale) on the environmental health and safety of nITO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to determine key
physicochemical properties and band gap energetics of nITO as a function of the
concentration and distribution of tin doping and to elucidate mechanisms for
fate, transport, transformation, and toxicity of these nano-scale bimetallics.
This study will address the following aims: (1) synthesize nITO with tunable
band structure via control over dopant concentration and distribution; (2)
sample preparation and characterization of nITO for a range of tin doping to
gain detailed understanding of crystal structure, bimetallic morphology, and
colloidal properties; (3) examination of aggregation kinetics, fractal
dimension, and porous media transport as a function of ionic strength and
organic matter composition; (4) evaluation of microbial toxicity (to planktonic
and biofilm cells) and toxicity mechanisms using band gap energetics and ROS
measurements; (5) assessment of chemical transformation of nITO and evaluation
of fate and toxicity of the transformed materials. This study will be the first
of its kind, using changes in fundamental electronic and physicochemical
properties of nITO caused by controlled variations in tin doping distribution
and concentration at the atomistic level to elucidate mechanisms of fate,
transport, and toxicity in aquatic environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will generate critical and fundamental knowledge to better
understand the environmental implications of a highly concerning and
commercially important next- generation nanomaterial, nITO. nITO, that are
utilized as transparent catalysts in touch-screen devices with higher recycling
rate and relatively short lifetime, necessitate understanding their
environmental safety. The results obtained from this project will result in
direct societal benefit by providing better understanding of nTO environmental
health and safety. In outreach and education aspects, the PIs will continue
their strong track records of recruiting students from underrepresented groups.
At least one graduate student from an underrepresented group will be attracted
via the University of Texas at Austin?s Diversity Mentoring Fellowship, while
undergraduate women and minority students will be brought into this cutting-edge
nanomaterial and microbiology research utilizing the University's Graduates
Linked with Undergraduates in Engineering (GLUE) and the Texas Research
Experience (TREX) programs. Multi-pronged outreach activities at San Juan Diego
High School (which has 85% Hispanic students) will have profound educational
impact on the high school students through seminars and hands-on experiments.