* 1511425
* UNS: Combining strain recombineering with molecular reporters and customized selections to overcome limitations in producing renewable hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Patrick Cirino, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1511425 &lt;br/&gt;Cirino, Patrick C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research aims to take advantage of recent advances in genome engineering, gene
sequencing, and high-throughput screening of genetic variants to isolate
improved, genetically modified microorganisms. Unique combinations of genome
modifications will be identified that allow engineered Escherichia coli to more
efficiently convert abundant and renewable sugars derived from biomass into
precursor metabolites and higher value chemical products, such as biofuels and
building blocks for producing natural products. In addition to advancing
understanding in sustainable biochemicals production, these research activities
will yield new insights into metabolism and microbial physiology, thereby
contributing broadly to many biology-related disciplines. Outreach and
educational activities are also incorporated into the research
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overcoming many coordinated metabolic constraints
that limit microbial biochemical production requires a large number of genetic
and epistatic modifications. This research plan aims to use customized,
endogenous biosensors or molecular reporters to find strains from large
combinatorial genome libraries with improved production of compounds not coupled
to cell growth. The focus is on screening expression level libraries of many
genes at once, to enhance production through pathways that consume acetyl-CoA
and NADPH (mevalonate synthesis/mevalonate sensor), malonyl-CoA (triacetic acid
lactone synthesis/TAL sensor), and NADPH (xylitol production/ NADPH sensor). The
same recombineered strain libraries will be combined with uniquely designed
genetic backgrounds to enable the use of selections to identify new combinations
of genetic modifications that show relaxed redox-based regulation and enhanced
flux through non-fermentative pathways. The targeted product molecules are
directly linked to key branch points in central metabolism and precursor
metabolites associated with a broad range of biochemicals. The wide variety of
genomic libraries synthesized through this research will be made available to
the scientific community, to be applied in selections/screens for other
biosynthetic pathways of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-
funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biology.