* 1511061
* Promoting Student Education &amp; Outreach at the 19th Annual Green Chemistry &amp; Engineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Jennifer MacKellar, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

The award will provide funding for U.S. student participation in the 19th Green
Chemistry and Engineering Conference organized by the American Chemical Society
Green Chemistry Institute. The conference this year will be held in Bethesda, MD
on July 14-16. The conference will focus on catalyzing innovation in the areas
of environmental-friendly chemistry and chemical engineering. Student support
will be directed toward travel scholarships to attend the conference,
registration fees for students, a judged student poster session, and defraying
expenses of instructors for a one-day free student workshop before the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference reaches beyond the normal
curriculum for undergraduate and post-graduate students. It will introduce them
to the broad range of technical innovations and opportunities available in the
vitally important areas of energy sustainability and the environment. These are
areas of extreme importance to our nation's future and quality of life in
general. The conference will catch many of these students at a time when they
are considering career paths, and it will open up a broad vista of exciting
opportunities. In addition they will learn how to conduct outreach activities
and advocate for green chemistry and chemical engineering in their local
communities.