* 1511303
* UNS: Enhancing charge transport in enzymatic bio-electrodes using an iron-sulfur-based synthetic electron-transport-chain
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Sandun Fernando, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2019
* USD 302,000.00

Fernando, 1511303&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymatic biofuel cells work on the same
general principles as all fuel cells, they use a catalyst to separate electrons
from a parent molecule and force it to go around an electrolyte barrier through
a wire to generate an electric current. The enzymatic biofuel cell uses enzymes
derived from living cells. The enzymes that allow the fuel cell to operate must
be "immobilized" (attached) near the anode and cathode in order to work
properly; if not immobilized, the enzymes will diffuse into the cell's fuel and
most of the liberated electrons will not reach the electrodes, compromising its
effectiveness. The overall effectiveness of all enzyme-based electrochemical
devices is dependent on the ability of the molecules that attach enzymes to the
electrode to successfully harvest and transport charges from the outer oxidizing
point (enzyme active-site) to the inner electrode surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redox enzymes are naturally-occurring sensing devices that
can act as power plants due to their ability to generate an electron stream in
the presence of the enzyme-specific analyte. When these enzymes are wired to
electrodes (outside a living cell or ex vivo), their ability to harness these
electrons (or electricity) diminishes significantly due to the thermodynamic
limitations associated with the coenzymes (that are essential for proper
functioning of the enzyme). The common coenzymes, nicotinamide-adenine-
dinucleotide (NAD) and Flavin-adinie-dinucleotide (FAD), are resistant to cyclic
oxidation and reduction ex vivo; and require special molecules known as electron
mediators to help extract electrons from the cofactor to transfer to the final
target. Long molecular wires help eliminate the thermodynamic issue but
themselves create electron transport (kinetic) issues due to increased
resistance. Nature has found a way to circumvent the thermodynamic and kinetic
electron transport issues associated with redox enzymes by using an array of
unique molecules, the iron-sulfur complexes ([Fe-S]), to wire the enzyme
(apoenzyme and coenzyme) complex to the supporting surfaces (like those found in
biological electron transport chains). [Fe-S] complexes seem to have a unique
combination of properties that facilitate unimpeded electron transport in
biological systems.The objective of this project is to evaluate the reaction and
electron transport kinetics of enzymatic electrodes of which NAD and FAD based
enzyme systems are directly attached using common iron sulfides and select
[Fe-S] complexes (mimicking the critical iron-sulfur link(s) in biological
electron transport chains). The PI will evaluate the possibility of fabricating
a highly effective molecular wire for transporting electrons ex
vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major educational objective is to integrate
research into education via an undergraduate course and a graduate level course.
Research Experience for Academic Change (REACH) is a program in which students
who are academically at risk will be paired with academically successful
students and provided with research opportunities early in their undergraduate
program. The PI plans to evaluate whether their early exposure to practical
research helps resuscitate their excitement and confidence concerning their
engineering education and degree programs.