* 1511696
* Novel Ferromagnetic Domains and Quantum Criticality with Bose Condensates in a Shaken Optical Lattice
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Cheng Chin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 456,657.00

While atoms have been long recognized as the building blocks of the world we see
and the environment we live in, their behavior at low temperatures has never
ceased to surprise us. Examples include superfluids that flow without friction
and quantum magnetic materials that permit read, write and storage of ample
information. A recent work led by the principal investigator showed that both
superfluidity and ferromagnetism (the type of magnetism in bar magnets) manifest
simultaneously in atoms when shaken back and forth by laser beams, like ping-
pong balls riding the ripples on a lake. The intriguing dynamics of magnetic
domains observed in the atomic superfluids suggests new strategies to
efficiently store and process information in the quantum regime. The major
science goal of this project is to simulate and study a new type of 4-pole
magnet in a two-dimensional lattice, which promises much richer properties than
the 2-pole (south and north pole) magnetism in conventional materials. The
science program is complimented by an extensive outreach effort under the
S.M.A.R.T. (Science, Mathematics, And Research Training) project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed 4-pole magnetic phase will arise when an
atomic superfluid is transferred into a two-dimensional shaken optical lattice,
generated by overlapping two perpendicular optical standing waves. When the
shaking amplitude is carefully tuned above a critical value, the superfluid is
anticipated to split into 4 poles with ferromagnetic interactions. The formation
of the 4-pole domain will be detected and studied by direct in situ imaging of
the atomic sample. Compared to the conventional 2-pole magnets, the 4-pole
magnets offer novel domain and vertex structures and are uniquely related to the
four-color theorem in graph theory and the Potts model of statistical physics.
Furthermore the phase transition into the ferromagnetic phase is associated with
a variety of quantum phenomena, including Rashba superfluids, the Berezinskii-
Kosterlitz-Thouless transition, and the Kibble-Zurek mechanism. Exploration of
this quantum physics may have both academic and practical payoffs, including the
development of a theoretical framework to understand quantum critical dynamics,
simulations of N-pole ferromagnetic magnets, fabrication of programmable
magnetic materials, and potentially even quantum information storage and
processing.