* 1511357
* UNS:Metabolic Reprogramming of Colon Cancer Metastasis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Xiling Shen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,000.00

1511357&lt;br/&gt;Shen, Xiling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colon cancer is a leading
cause of cancer death. Current chemotherapies are rather ineffective once tumor
cells metastasize, spreading from colon to other organs. This study aims to
understand whether metastatic colon cancer cells are influenced by their new
environments, and whether they change their metabolic states when growing
outside the colon. The metabolic states of colon cancer cells in different
organs will be systematically characterized and compared. Regulatory pathways
involved in metabolic state alteration will be identified and further validated
by clinical data from colon cancer patients. These pathways will then be
targeted therapeutically to suppress metastatic tumor growth or sensitize them
to conventional chemotherapy. If successful, this study will contribute to
advancing national health and enable new therapies that are specifically against
colon cancer metastasis, and improve the survival and life quality of metastatic
colon cancer patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metastasis of cancer cells from
primary sites to distant organs is a major cause of cancer-related death, as
current chemotherapies are largely ineffective against metastases. However,
whether and how metastatic cancer cells might behave differently from primary
cancer cells remains largely unclear. This project aims to test whether
colorectal cancer (CRC) metastases undergo metabolic reprogramming and whether
altered metabolism may contribute to malignancy and chemoresistance of
metastatic tumors. This study will take advantage of innovative CRC models
developed by the PI's lab. The chemokine-targeting metastasis model (CTMM)
recapitulates the anatomical route of human CRC metastasis, while the
blastocyst-injection chimeric model (BICM) allows immunoproficient mice to grow
human CRC without immunorejection. Primary and metastatic tumors from those
models will be profiled by transcriptomics and metabolomics. Integrated network
analysis of the transcriptome and metabolome will identify altered pathways in
CRC metastases. The findings will be corroborated by a large CRC metastases
sample collection. Anti-metastasis therapy targeting metastatic reprogramming
will be evaluated. Enzymes and metabolites can be targeted by shRNA, small
molecule inhibitors, and dietary restrictions. This new strategy has the
potential to outperform or synergize with current frontline chemotherapy against
CRC metastasis. Furthermore, this proposal also addresses a roadblock for CRC
metastasis research and drug discovery, which is the lack of a model that
recapitulates human CRC. CTMM and BICM will allow researchers to study CRC and
test drugs in relevant microenvironments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-
funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biology.