* 1511016
* UNS:  Synthesis and Dynamics of Elastic Capsules with Controlled Interfacial Elasticity
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Shelley Anna, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 04/30/2019
* USD 364,613.00

CBET - 1511016&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shelley L. Anna&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capsules are
liquid drops or bubbles that have molecules or nanoparticles adsorbed onto their
outer surfaces, which gives them unique mechanical properties. Capsules are used
in a variety of products including drug delivery formulations, cosmetics,
paints, inks, and foodstuffs. This project will investigate how the distribution
of nanoparticles on the surface of a capsule affects the elasticity of the
capsule interface and the deformation of the capsule as a whole under precisely
controlled conditions. The results of the study will provide scientists and
engineers with information that will help them optimize capsule formulations for
use in a wide array of specialized products. Results from the project will also
be used to develop educational modules to engage K-12 students and course
content for university undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A microfluidic device will be used to adsorb a cationic surfactant-
nanoparticle complex onto the interface of a gaseous bubble as it translates
along a microchannel. The goal of the experiment is to show how the properties
of the capsule interface, especially its elasticity, are affected by the
concentration of adsorbed nanoparticle complexes and their spatial distribution
along the bubble surface, which will be determined using methods such as
electron microscopy. Dynamical properties of the capsule interfaces will be
investigated using a microtensiometer developed at Carnegie Mellon University.
The microtensiometer will be used to measure interfacial tension and interfacial
elasticity of the capsule and correlate it with interfacial coverage of the
surfactant-nanoparticle complexes. Finally, scale-up of capsule production to
obtain a sufficient number of capsules for rheological measurements of capsule
suspensions will be investigated by using parallel microfluidic channels and
complex microfluidic circuits. The results of the studies will be disseminated
directly to industrial counterparts through workshops and short courses
organized at Carnegie Mellon University.