* 1511761
* UNS: The Interaction of Coherent Structures in a Shear Layer with a Flexible Beam
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Byron Erath, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 284,996.00

1511761(Erath)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to investigate
experimentally and numerically the fluid structure interaction when fluid passes
around a flexible beam. This is a representative model of air flow past the
vocal cords. The study will focus not only on conditions representing healthy
vocal cords, but mainly on cases where the vocal cords are not healthy. Results
from the proposed research can, thus, impact speech rehabilitation and could be
felt by many people among the roughly 30% of the population of the US, who are
estimated to suffer voice pathology at some point in their
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the proposed research is to
identify the mechanisms by which a train of vortices advecting over a flexible
beam incite motion in the structure, and parametrically explore this fundamental
fluid- structure interaction problem. It is proposed to quantify how vortices
produced during speech impact vocal fold dynamics in both normal, as well as
pathological speech. Currently, there is incomplete understanding of the
interplay between the aerodynamic loading as air comes to the vocal cords and
the structural response of the tissue. This deficiency will be addressed by
experimentally and theoretically/numerically investigating vortex-beam
interactions that arise from coherent structures passing over a flexible beam.
The hypothesis is that the coherent vortical structures are formed from the
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability in the shear layer of the flow. The excitation of
the beam will be investigated over a range of nondimensional beam, fluid, and
geometrical parameters. The experimental results will validate the theoretical
flow model of vortex-beam interactions, which will then be used to extend and
explore the parameter space beyond the limitations of the experimental facility.
The theoretical model will ultimately be applied to a numerical model of voiced
speech to quantify the role of vortex-tissue interactions on vocal outcomes. The
fundamental problem of vortices interacting with a deformable surface also has
specific relevance to the topic of using deformable electroactive devices to
harvest energy from fluids. In addition to graduate and undergraduate student
education, a plan for K-12 outreach is proposed, where the PI will partner with
high school choir directors to provide classroom demonstrations relating voice
and singing to science.