* 1511151
* UNS: Intelligent Multi-Criteria Building Ventilation Control within Dynamic Urban Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jin Wen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,666.00

1511151 (Waring) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Americans spend 90% of our time indoors,
where poor indoor air quality (IAQ) is a top risk to human health and
productivity. Maintaining acceptable IAQ requires ventilation, or replacing
indoor with outdoor air, usually by mechanical systems. Ventilation rates are
set as minimum standards for commercial buildings (e.g. 8.5 L/s/person for
offices), though new research suggests that higher rates increase occupant
productivity and decrease absenteeism. However, increasing ventilation requires
energy to move and condition the air, can strain the electricity grid, and can
degrade IAQ in polluted urban areas. The current minimum ventilation rate
paradigm is simplistic, with no framework for evaluating most of these numerous
and competing positive and negative consequences. As such, many opportunities
are missed for promoting environmental sustainability, including increasing
occupant wellbeing, improving energy efficiency, and reducing greenhouse gas and
local pollutant emissions. The purpose of this project is to capitalize on these
opportunities by researching next-generation, intelligent ventilation strategies
for high performance green buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since elements such
as weather, pollution, and energy prices have diurnal and seasonal profiles,
large benefits may be realized at minimal energy costs with systems-level
strategies that capitalize on transient behaviors within a dynamic control
framework. This project will research dynamic, holistic, multi-criteria
ventilation control in green office buildings. It will: (1) Formalize a user-
oriented, multi-criteria decision-making framework with a comprehensive and
flexible utility function, and evaluate the impacts of intelligent ventilation
in a variety of settings with special attention to the influence of building and
location characteristics, and (2) Investigate self-learning, plug-and-play
dynamic ventilation control methods that can adapt to specific office buildings
and meet the unique challenges of the building industry. It will assess impacts
and develop control algorithms with detailed simulations, as well as validate
the work in a real building in Philadelphia that is already instrumented to
measure pollutants and energy use. Results will be disseminated to (i) the
public through a web display of the real-time state of the experimental
building; to (ii) the scientific community through conference and journal
publications and investigator affiliations with the Consortium for Building
Energy Innovation; and to (iii) industry through affiliations with technical
committees in the American Society for Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-
conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE).