* 1511733
* UNS:Adsorbed water on Transition metal oxide: Doping, Defects and Electrochemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Vidhya Chakrapani, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,975.00

Chakrapani, 1511733&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water is a ubiquitous participant or
bystander in many devices and both natural and man-made systems. Yet, its
interactions with surfaces are not well understood and are frequently
overlooked. This study provides detailed molecular-scale insight into the ways
that water interacts with transition metal oxide surfaces particularly as it
relates to the design and function of catalysts and electrochemical devices. The
PI also uses her knowledge of electrochemistry to engage students at all levels
in understanding sustainable technologies such as solar cells, environmental
remediation and smart windows.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal is
to understand the nature of interactions between water and metal oxide surfaces,
especially the role of defects in such interactions. A fourfold experimental
approach will be used to 1) determine if the interactions are electrochemical in
nature, 2) probe structural changes in hydrogen bonding of water adsorbed at the
solid interface, 3) understand how water-induced defects influence redox
couples, and 4) measure the changes in electrical properties associated with the
adsorption of water. Several advanced characterization techniques will be
employed, including high-resolution sum-frequency generation spectroscopy, in
situ photoluminescence spectroscopy, and UV photoelectron spectroscopy. The
resulting understanding will have application in areas as diverse as
astrophysics, mineralogy, hydrology, catalysis, and sustainable technologies.
With regard to the latter, the PI has developed a new course which teaches the
fundamental aspects of electrochemistry and solid-state physics related to
sustainable energy technologies, with simplified aspects made available to K-12
students via energy workshops, summer camps, and an interactive hands-on demo
module.