* 1511568
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Systematical Modeling and Control of Microbial Electrochemical Activities towards Efficient Electrical Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Jae-Do Park, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 171,712.00

PI: Park, Jae-Do / Ren, Zhiyong Proposal Number: 1511568 / 1510682

A microbial fuel cell contains special strains of bacteria that consume organic
matter in waste water to generate electricity and clean up the water. These
systems have been touted as a promising route for sustainable and "energy
positive" waste water treatment. However, microbial fuel cell systems have many
obstacles to overcome before widespread use is possible. Two of the major
problems are low power output and reliability. The goal of this project is to
adapt the principles of process control theory to microbial fuel cell systems to
address these two problems. The research plan will focus on developing a
scientific understanding of the interactions of the bacteria with electrical
power control systems, and from this understanding, develop models to control
the power output of a microbial fuel cell, improving reliability. It is also
hoped that tuning the process to peak power output using these models will
enrich the device with the bacterial strains that produce the most electric
current to further improve power output. As part of the educational activities
of this project, undergraduate students will participate in the research through
University of Colorado Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program. The project
will also work with University of Colorado Tech Transfer Office to help energy
companies who are interested in commercializing the research for specialized
waste water treatment applications.

Microbial fuel cells generate electricity though metabolism of dissolved organic
matter. The typical microbial fuel cell is two-compartment electrochemical cell
which contains a biofilm of electrochemically-active microorganisms in the anode
compartment that metabolizes dissolved organic materials to generate
electrochemical potential and transfer electrons to the anode surface, which is
harvested as current. Protons (H+) generated by this process transfer across an
ion-exchange membrane to the cathode compartment, where they are reduced to
water by dissolved oxygen on the cathode surface. The electrochemically active
microorganisms have the capacity to transport charge to the outer surface of the
cell through specialized membrane structures. The overall goal of this proposed
research is to develop a fundamental understanding of the interactions between
microbial electrochemical activities and externally-controlled electrical energy
harvesting systems designed for microbial fuel cells using process control and
systems theory. The central hypothesis of the proposed research is that if
microbial fuel cell operation can be put into a process control scheme and tuned
to maximum power input, then this process will put a selection pressure on the
microbial community growing within the anode biofilm to enrich the consortium
for the most electrochemically active microorganisms and ultimately improve
current generation and biofilm stability. Within this context, the research plan
has three objectives. The first objective is to develop an energy systems model
in terms of measurable and controllable variables to quantify the relationships
between inputs and electrical output for a single microbial fuel cell. Based on
this single cell model, the energy harvesting and control system model for a
multi-cell device stack will be developed. The second objective to understand
how the selective pressure created by the new pulse-type power extraction
stimulates bioelectrochemical activities within the microbial community,
including cell electron transfer metabolism shifts and dynamic microbial
community evolution. The third objective is to utilize electrical engineering
techniques such as resonant impedance matching, time- and frequency-domain
analysis, and transfer functions to analyze and improve the system performance
and controllability. If successful, the proposed research will culminate in
scalable and flexible real-time control scheme to capture and maintain the
maximum usable energy output from multiple microbial fuel cell devices under
different conditions to help enable system reliability and scale-up. Research
outcomes will also be integrated into several renewable energy and water
treatment course offerings at the University of Colorado Boulder and Denver
campuses.