* 1511615
* UNS:High Surface Free Energy Anchoring of Bimetallic Core Shell Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* John Monnier, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 483,000.00

Metallic catalysts for today's applications must be capable of stable operation
at extreme conditions of feed compositions and temperatures. Thus, catalyst
design and synthesis have become increasingly important to ensure catalyst
particles which efficiently use expensive metals such as platinum group metals,
and maintain an active surface at high temperatures and atypical feed
compositions.The proposed work will create bimetallic catalyst particles
dispersed on a carbon catalyst support that have improved resistance to particle
coarsening under reaction conditions compared to the active metal component
alone. The particle stabilization is achieved by depositing a surface shell of
the active (gold, Au) catalyst on a core of a higher surface free energy core
material (platinum (Pt), or various earth-abundant transition metals). The
concept will be tested in the Au-catalyzed selective hydrochlorination of
acetylene with gas-phase hydrochloric acid to produce vinyl chloride (an
important intermediate in bulk chemical production). Preliminary work has shown
dramatic stabilization of Au particles by depositing the Au on small Pt clusters
prepared by atomic layer deposition. In this study, the Pt(core)-Au(shell)
bimetallic particles will be further optimized and lower-cost earth-abundant
copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), and cobalt (Co) will be evaluated as stabilizing core
materials.

This is a hypothesis driven proposal based on the simple idea that a higher
surface free energy core material in a small core-shell particle can stabilize a
lower surface energy shell material that otherwise would sinter rapidly under
reaction conditions. The PIs have already obtained data indicating the concept
works for two-nanometer Pt(core) particles (prepared by strong electrostatic
adsorption) surface-coated with Au (prepared by atomic layer deposition). The
further work will compare homogeneous alloys to core-shell catalysts of the same
nominal composition, and will also examine the effects of shell thickness and
core particle size on acetylene hydrochlorination activity and durability. The
potential of nano-scale multi-metallic particles for improved catalytic
performance and selectivity is a growing area of interest in catalysis, as is
understanding of the working composition and structure of such catalysts. This
proposal takes important steps toward optimizing the structure of bimetallic
catalyst particles under reaction conditions with an eye toward ensuring long-
term catalyst stability in realistic high-temperature reaction environments.

Although much attention is being directed towards novel ways of creating
supported catalysts containing active metal nano-clusters, few studies have gone
beyond initial synthesis and testing to examine long-term stability under
reaction conditions. Thus, the present proposal is a welcome addition to
research in this area, with expected results that could impact a broad range of
catalyst systems beyond the specific ones addressed here. In addition, the
proposal offers a route to lower-cost catalysts based on sparing utilization of
expensive precious, or noble, active metal components by utilizing core
components that are low in cost such as Cu, Ni, and Co. The research will
provide opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students to
participate in research directed towards industrial applications utilizing
advanced synthesis techniques that can potentially enhance a broad range of
catalytic processes.