* 1511737
* UNS: Defect Engineering in Zinc-Blende-Type Absorbers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* David Mitzi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 312,800.00

PI: David Mitzi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1511737&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sun
represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on earth.
Solar cells for producing electricity require materials that absorb the sun's
energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process called photovoltaics.
While solar cells made from crystalline silicon currently have about 90 percent
of the worldwide solar photovoltaics (PV) market, alternative solar cells made
from very thin layers of non-silicon materials abundant in the earth's crust
offer a number of advantages. These include dramatically reduced materials
consumption and low-cost fabrication, as well as new form factors that are
flexible or foldable, ultralight in weight, and enable facile integration into
building structures. Unfortunately, new materials based on elements abundant in
the earth's crust cannot match the sunlight-to-electric power conversion
efficiency of rigid crystalline silicon-based materials, and so are presently
not competitive. This project seeks to gain fundamental understanding of the
power conversion performance one promising class of thin-film photovoltaic
materials based on zinc blends, which are made from a mixture of nontoxic
elements abundant in the earth's crust and are relatively inexpensive. The
research will focus on controlling the atomic level disorder within these
materials to ultimately provide a viable pathway to low-cost, scalable, high-
performance solar photovoltaics. The research will also engage and train a new
generation of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral scientists in the
important area of sustainable energy materials development. Results from the
research will also be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate level
materials science courses at Duke University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current thin
film solar photovoltaic materials in commercial use, including CIGS and Cd-Te
based materials, contain elements that are either costly or rare in the earth's
crust (e.g., indium, tellurium) or present toxicity issues (e.g., cadmium).
These sustainability issues potentially impose limits on future cost reduction
and market share. Recently, kesterite-based thin-film solar cells made of
(Cu)2-ZnSn-(S,Se)4-(CZTSSe), in which indium/gallium in CIGS-Se materials are
replaced by more readily available and lower-cost elements zinc/tin, have
achieved conversion efficiencies of up to 12.6%. However, this efficiency is
still only about one-half that of the best crystalline silicon or thin-film
commercial solar PV materials. The proposed research is based on the hypothesis
that anti-site structural disorder in current zinc-blende material matrices
(e.g., Cu on Zn, Zn on Cu) lead to electrical potential energy fluctuations and
band tailing that effectively limits the open-circuit voltage. The overall goals
of this research are to understand the nature of anti-site disorder in copper
chalcogenide based zinc-blende materials for solar PV, and to design new blende
materials in which the level of anti-site disorder can be controlled and reduced
through a combination of rational computational and experimental materials
design approaches. The research plan has three objectives. The first objective
is to computationally evaluate prospective zinc-blende-related materials for PV
absorbers, focusing on identifying the materials features that lead to more
benign recombination-based defects and grain boundaries. The second objective is
to design and synthesize stable CZTSSe analogs that have a lower propensity
towards anti-site disorder and band tailing. Finally, the third objective is to
study the impact of varying amounts of anti-site disorder on materials and their
device properties. Achievement of the project goals will provide a framework for
understanding defect control in complex energy harvesting materials and offer
one pathway to new scalable and high-efficiency solar PV devices.