* 1511619
* UNS:  Mechanisms of Surface Charging in Nonpolar Media
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* James Schneider, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2019
* USD 354,970.00

CBET - 1511619&lt;br/&gt;PI: Schneider, James&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many products
of technological importance involve suspensions of particles in liquids. This
project examines the mechanisms of electrical charge formation on particles
immersed in nonpolar liquids. The formation of charges on particles can create
electrostatic repulsions between the particles that inhibit their aggregation,
which leads to a stable suspension. Certain types of surfactants can be added to
the suspension as charging agents to help stabilize the suspension
electrostatically. The PI has developed a method to synthesize collections of
surfactants with systematic variations in their molecular structures. The
surface charging characteristics of these surfactants will be characterized by
using two instruments developed by the co-PIs. Results of the project will help
test theories of charging in nonpolar media and ultimately lead to the rational
design of improved surfactant materials for charging and particle stabilization
in nonpolars. Such systems are important in a variety of technologies, including
e-readers, oil-based toners for printing, and slow-release fertilizers. The
researchers will use the example of the e-reader to engage K-12 students in the
basic science underlying display technology and will develop a module for use in
university student instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
resolve long-standing questions concerning charge formation in nonpolar solvents
by creating libraries of high-purity, custom-synthesized surfactants and
studying their propensity to stabilize particles. The synthesis technique gives
full control of tail length, extent of branching, headgroup chemistry, and
counterion composition. Surface charging will be measured on test surfaces of
controlled chemistry using the ZetaSpin method, which makes zeta potential
measurements without concern for particle flocculation during the measurement.
Inter-particle potentials will be measured by the highly sensitive TIRM method.
Elucidation of interparticle potentials will determine if the Gouy-Chapman
theory or the counterion-only theory is a valid descriptor of charge screening
effects in different systems. The corresponding decay lengths will give a more
reliable measure of ionic strength than can be obtained from conductivity
measurements. This project will provide valuable insight into the rational
design of charging compounds and will help develop new theories to describe
inter-particle potentials in doped nonpolars.