* 1511792
* Actualizing STEM Potential in the Mississippi Delta
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2022
* Brenda Brand, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,641,313.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by investigating the
effectiveness of an existing collaborative robotics program. The program will
positively influence the engineering self-efficacy and orientation to STEM
majors with African American students living in an underserved region of the
United States, the Mississippi Delta. Students in this program are immersed in
engineering design activities requiring the application of science and
mathematics principles. The program model includes pre-engineering courses in
computer science, computer aided drafting, and electronics. These are designed
and facilitated by university faculty. Undergraduate seniors are trained by
faculty and then serve as mentors. Engineering design activities, career
orientation activities and robotics summer camps for elementary and middle
school students are facilitated by high school faculty. At the beginning of the
spring semester, students participate in an international robotics competition.
This robotics program is year-long and occurs after school, and halfway through
the year students enter their designs in a robotics competition. Beginning in
the freshmen year, students are allowed to remain in the program throughout
their years in high school. An understanding of the components that positively
influence the African American students' beliefs about their abilities in STEM
disciplines and their perceptions of their identification with STEM could be
useful for understanding and decreasing the gap in STEM majors that exists with
students from underserved populations in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This longitudinal mixed methods research study is designed
to investigate the influence of engineering design and career orientation
activities implemented in a collaborative robotics/pre-engineering program on
African American students' self-efficacy, and scientific identity, to better
understand factors influencing their achievement in STEM disciplines and
orientation to STEM majors. This is a four year study, allowing the researchers
to follow a group of students from freshman to the end of their senior year, so
that key factors influencing the students' learning and achievement in the
engineering course activities can be observed and documented during the peak
years of decision making for college majors and careers. This study is unique in
terms of its location and population of students, and because it is longitudinal
and utilizes a mixed methods approach. While this study investigates the
effectiveness of the program on the engineering self-efficacy, scientific
identity and achievement of program objectives for students in this program, the
findings of the study could also be valuable for informing initiatives devoted
to increasing the numbers of students from other marginalized groups majoring in
STEM fields. Quantitatively, this research employs pre and post measures to
determine changes in students engineering self-efficacy and scientific
identities. Qualitatively, field notes from classroom observations and
interviews with the high school students provide data on specific program
elements determined to be effective in positively influencing the African
American students' achievement of program objectives and decisions to pursue
STEM careers.