* 1511507
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Leading Edge Vortex Evolution on Compliant Biologically-Inspired Wings
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* David Willis, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,915.00

1511507(Willis) and 1510962(Jones)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative
proposal that will utilize experiments and computations to investigate the flow
field generated around a flexible wing. While a lot of research has been done to
understand how lift forces are generated around solid wings, it is important to
also understand why and how soft, flexible wings are used to generate lift.
Fundamental knowledge generated through this work can impact both biological
sciences as well as the autonomous drone industries (commercial and
military).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A lot of prior research work has been done on
rigid wings, showing that wing kinematics can alter the strength and position of
the shear layer that feeds the so-called leading edge vortices (LEVs) that are
responsible for the bulk of the lift forces. The vortex dynamics have been shown
to result in fluid dynamic forces. More recently, LEVs have been observed on
moderate Reynolds number, and in morphing and compliant wings during low speed
flight and maneuvering of insects. The proposed project will advance this area
of research by investigating wing compliance effects, by examining the vortices
generated at the leading edge at moderate Reynolds numbers (where the LEV is a
significant but not necessarily dominant source of lift) and by quantifying
importance of wing compliance and vortex dynamics to lift force production.
Furthermore, educational activities are proposed via integration of research
results into university courses as well as the development of several
instructional materials for local K-12 schools in both Massachusetts and
Maryland.