* 1511789
* UNS: Role of Reporter and Membrane Properties for the Sensitivity of Viral Nanoparticle Lateral Flow Assays
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Richard Willson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2020
* USD 329,620.00

CBET - 1511789 Conrad, Jacinta &lt;br/&gt;The investigators have shown that
significantly improved sensitivity can be achieved by using engineered bio-
active nanoparticles. The applications of the proposed method development, if
successful, will simplify pathogen detection in a variety of contexts, including
food, water and medical samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed research is to identify, understand, and ultimately engineer the
properties of phage reporters and membranes that provide sensitive response in
lateral flow assays (LFA). The hypothesis is tailoring the properties of phage
nanoparticles and LFA membranes will enhance phage transport and binding and as
a result reduce LFA limit of detection. The specific aims are to: (1) vary phage
morphology to understand phage performance as LFA reporters; (2) identify
membrane properties that enhance phage transport and adhesion onto the membrane;
and (3) select phage for superior performance using directed evolution. Phage
reporters of varied shape and size will be imaged with confocal microscopy as
they diffuse through and bind to LFA membranes. Using high-throughput image-
processing algorithms, phage orientation and dispersion, binding will be
correlated to membrane properties and pore size. Directed evolution will be used
to select phage with improved transport and specificity from libraries of
billions of candidates. Intellectual Merit: This project integrates the
expertise of the PI in imaging and confined transport with that of the co-PI in
chromatographic interactions and phage engineering to develop LFAs of increased
sensitivity. Phage reporters are potentially transformative as LFA reporters,
enabling fast, inexpensive and ultrasensitive detection with extremely low non-
specific binding. The proposed research will establish ultrasensitive LFAs as a
broadly-applicable platform technology. The transport of nonspherical
nanoparticles in porous media is under-investigated, and the proposed work will
use phage as a new model system in for studing dispersion in complex and
confined media. Finally, this proposal introduces phage evolution with
separation as a novel method to engineer bacteriophage for applications in the
emerging area of nanobiotechnology. Broader Impacts: Viral nanoparticle LFA
technology can be readily integrated with microfluidics and smartphone-based
fluorescence imaging to yield an inexpensive yet ultrasensitive point-of-use
diagnostic tool. Bioseparations dominate the cost and process complexity of
manufacturing of modern biopharmaceuticals; process analytical (PAT)
technologies that do not require trained investigators will immediately impact
this area. In addition, a field-portable analytical method may prove useful for
environmental contamination, food safety monitoring, and medical diagnostics.
The University of Houston is the second-most ethnically diverse research
university in the US and is designated as a Hispanic-serving Institution,
providing a fertile recruiting ground for broadening participation from
underrepresented groups. The PIs will continue ongoing outreach efforts aimed at
the local scientific community, by organizing the Texas Soft Matter Meeting for
academic and industrial scientists, and at society at large, by writing and
presenting popular science radio programs for The Academic Minute and Engines of
our Ingenuity.