* 1511937
* UNS: Collaborative research: the onset of turbulence in viscoelastic wall-bounded shear flows
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Tamer Zaki, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 209,688.00

The goal of the proposed study is to use a combination of theory and simulations
to understand the transition from laminar to turbulent flows in the case of non-
Newtonian fluids, like polymers and biological fluids. The work is motivated by
the fact that non Newtonian fluids are used in many industrial settings (e.g.,
polymer processing) where instability and transition could lead to manufacturing
defects. In addition, transition mechanisms in flows of complex fluids are very
important for the development of micro/nano-fluidic devices.

The ability to understand, predict, and control the transition to turbulence is
important for a multitude of technological applications and scientifically
important processes. This proposal is focused on exploring the physical
mechanism of transition to turbulence in the flow of viscoelastic fluids. While
in Newtonian fluids a lot of research, experiments, computations, and
theoretical analyses have been done over several years, transition in non-
Newtonian fluids is a new, vibrant area with tremendous technological impact
that needs to be explored. Preliminary results from the group of these PIs have
indicated that in viscous flows the transition to turbulence can occur at much
lower Reynolds number than for Newtonian fluids, and that another dimensionless
number, the Weissenberg number, is an important parameter. This number
characterizes the fluid relaxation time scale in relation to the characteristic
time scale of the flow. Previous work by the authors has focused on the linear
mechanism instability in viscoelastic flow. Streaks in the streamwise flow
direction have been identified as the transition structure that can be amplified
and lead to turbulence. The proposed work is focused on discerning the nonlinear
mechanisms involved in the later stages of the transition process. In the
proposed work, channel flow geometry will be used to examine the secondary
receptivity and instability of the most amplified linear disturbance. The final
stages of transition that lead to spectral broadening will be examined via
direct numerical simulation.