* 1511325
* UNS: multiphase-UQ: Uncertainty Quantification Framework for Multiphase Flow Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Mark Owkes, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 276,365.00

1511325(Owkes)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposal is to develop a
novel methodology to quantify the uncertainty of computational fluid dynamic
(CFD) simulations of gas-liquid multiphase flows. While a lot of effort has been
spent on developing more accurate numerical techniques for simulations, the
important question of the accuracy of computational results in the face of
unavoidable uncertainty about fluid properties, boundary and initial conditions,
which is present when real life engineering problems are simulated, has not been
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to build upon recent developments
for single-phase flows in order to couple uncertainty quantification and
multiphase flow numerical techniques and to create a rigorous methodology for
measuring output uncertainties from input uncertainties. Specifically, a
framework for representing a stochastic interface with associated
discontinuities will be developed. The PI will couple an interface capturing
methods (level set and Volume of Fluid) with intrusive Uncertainty
Quantification techniques to develop a stochastic level set method to represent
discontinuous gas-liquid interfaces. This framework will be applicable for
propagating uncertainty in other applications with discontinuities such as crack
propagation in solid mechanics and fluid-structure interactions and will have
the potential to change the way engineers study and predict these systems.
Applications of multiphase flow occur quite commonly in the process and
manufacturing industry. The simulations proposed can have applications to many
areas, since a myriad of engineering and environmental flows including fuel
injection, proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells, nuclear power generation,
concentrating-solar plants, biological flows, and wave energy harvesting devices
are affected by multiphase flows. A dedicated website hosted at Montana State
University will provide a central access point to the simulation parameters and
data. Numerical codes and results developed during this project will be
disseminated through the PI's website and through the library at Montana State
University which provides open-access dissemination services.