* 1511373
* UNS:  Microstructural determinants of ion transport in ion exchange fuel cell membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Andrew Spakowitz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 370,447.00

1511373 - Frank, Curtis; Spakowitz, Andrew; Toney,
Michael&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion exchange membrane (IEM) fuel cells constitute
an enticing alternative energy source whose operation generates water rather
than more harmful carbon-based emissions. Efficient operation of a fuel cell
hinges on developing a polymer membrane that permits ions to move quickly
between the electrodes in the fuel cell. This is typically accomplished using a
copolymer with hydrophobic and hydrophilic monomers that phase separate at
nanometer length scales. The resulting hydrophobic matrix confers mechanical
stability to the membrane, while the hydrophilic domains provide pathways for
ions to move between electrodes. Ion transport through the polymer membrane is
dictated by the organization of the phase-segregated domains at length scales
ranging from nanometers to microns. The rational design of an IEM requires a
clear connection between the chemical arrangement of monomers within the
copolymers and the resulting molecular-level organization of the ion-transport
domains. Such materials are crucial to our future energy utilization, and
establishing the structure-function relationship in polymer membranes is crucial
to improving fuel-cell performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
combines theoretical modeling, synthesis, and characterization of ion exchange
membranes (IEM). The PIs will use a combination of analytical theory and
computational modeling to predict the morphology of polymer membranes composed
of poly(ethylene oxide)-polyimide (PEO-PI) copolymer materials synthesized in
the collaboration, and test and validate the model to provide theoretical
guidance for optimizing the performance of IEM materials. The theoretical model,
which leverages and extends the existing approaches to modeling random
copolymers, will be capable of predicting microphase segregation in other
polymer membrane systems. Therefore, establishing this capability of theoretical
investigation and experimental testing enables the prediction of microphase
organization and material performance in a broad range of polymer membrane
materials for fuel cell and other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outreach efforts include the establishment of the LABScI program, which develops
and implements teaching modules for the education of high school students that
are being treated for childhood cancer. This program has made a major impact on
the education of high school students at the Hospital School at the Lucile
Packard Children's Hospital. Future outreach efforts aim to further expand our
program nationwide as a general laboratory science curriculum for hospital-
school education. The PIs will continue to pair with high-school teachers and
students during the summers to receive feedback on the ease of implementation,
consistency with high-school science standards, and student understanding of the
teaching modules.