* 1511148
* CI-EN: RUI: Collaborative Research:  TraceLab Community Infrastructure for Replication, Collaboration, and Innovation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Jane Huang, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 249,973.00

This is the second phase of the TraceLab project, which was initially funded
under an NSF Major Research Instrumentation grant. The goal of this project is
to deliver an instrument that facilitates reproducibility of Software
Engineering experiments, fosters comparative evaluation, and provides an
environment in which components can be easily shared across research groups. The
challenge of experimental reproducibility extends across almost every science
and engineering discipline. Recently, a widely reported study conducted by the
biotech firm "Amgen" revealed that of 53 previously published landmark papers,
only six were reproducible. Recent studies have unearthed similar problems
across a diverse set of Software Engineering domains, including, but not limited
to, software traceability, feature location, and compiler optimization.
Reproducibility is often undermined by lack of publicly available datasets,
obsolete and unavailable tools, insufficient details about the experiment, and
undocumented decisions about the way various metrics are computed. TraceLab
provides a plug-and-play experimental environment, as well as libraries of
shareable components and seminal experiments. As such, it is designed to address
these problems.

TraceLab introduces a radically different way of approaching empirical software
engineering research and paves the way for greater community collaboration, more
rigorous evaluation of results, and an easier entry-way for new researchers. It
is expected to lay the foundation for future advances in the field of empirical
software engineering, accelerate and shape future research directions, support
industrial pilot studies, and significantly reduce the cost and effort that
oftentimes discourages new researchers from entering the field. In addition, the
project will provide opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students, and will be used for educational purposes across various
software engineering courses.