* 1511862
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Describing Macromolecular Transport through Chemically-Tuned Nanoporous Membranes via Theory, Computation, and Experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Edward Maginn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2019
* USD 150,145.00

Collaborative Proposals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1511835 /
#1511862&lt;br/&gt;Boudouris, Bryan / Phillip,
William&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes are crucial in a number of separation
processes where desired products are isolated from undesired species. In
particular, many emerging pharmaceutical treatments require the purification of
active long-chain biomacromolecules as they leave the biopharmaceutical reactor.
These biomacromolecules recently have been approved for the treatment of a
variety of life-threatening diseases, including cancer and autoimmune diseases.
However, the high cost of large-scale production and purification of these
important materials, which is often transferred to the patient, has prevented
their widespread implementation in clinical practice. Here, we will evaluate how
macromolecules such as these important therapeutic agents are transported
through membrane materials. By combining experimental results with theoretical
predictions and computational simulations, we will be able to develop a complete
picture of how transport occurs through small pores. In this way, we will be
able to design better membranes. This opens the potential of generating more
cost-effective purification systems, which could lessen the costs of patient
treatment and open an economical means by which to treat a number of devastating
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transport of macromolecular species is of
fundamental import in a range of technologically-important membrane separations
applications (e.g., the separation of therapeutic proteins). However, the exact
mechanism of how a dissolved polymer chain traverses a membrane with pore sizes
comparable to or smaller than the hydrodynamic diameter of the chain at
thermodynamic equilibrium and without external stimuli (e.g., applied electric
fields) is not understood fully. As such, a critical need exists to establish
how pore size, pore chemistry, and the solution environment affect the
interfacial transport of macromolecules across well-structured membranes. Here,
we will utilize a combination of experimental techniques, thermodynamic theory,
and computational modeling in order to tie nanoscale phenomena to physical
observables at the macroscopic level. Our vision will result in a molecule-to-
membrane level understanding of chemically-selective macromolecular transport
through small pores; this understanding, which will be developed by connecting
continuum transport properties to molecular models through advanced materials
characterization methodologies, will enable us to develop the design principles
for the rational engineering of chemically-selective membranes in a number of
current and emerging separations platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generating
structure-property-performance relationships in the realm of size and
chemically-selective membranes will lead to improved membrane design. This, in
turn, will help decrease production costs and increase the energy efficiency of
many processes required for the production of common consumer goods and more
high-value products (e.g., therapeutic pharmaceuticals). As such, successful
completion of this work has the potential to impact current manufacturing
processes in a positive manner. Furthermore, the collaboration between Purdue
University and the University of Notre Dame will allow students from both
institutions to perform work at the partner institution. In this way, the
students will have a more diverse educational experience. In addition to
graduate students, undergraduate and high school students will perform research
on this project. In particular, the high school student will be part of the
American Chemical Society?s Project SEED program. In this program, high school
students from economically-disadvantaged families (i.e., the family income
cannot be greater than a factor of 2 above the poverty line) who show promise in
science and engineering are placed in university laboratories during the summer
in order to afford them a unique research experience. Therefore, this work has
the ability to advance fundamental membrane science and to impact a unique group
of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers with diverse socioeconomic and
educational backgrounds.