* 1511720
* UNS: Tunable and Scalable Protein Assemblies for Personalized Cancer Immunotherapy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Fei Wen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 340,000.00

1511720 (Wen)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is projected to cause well over half-
a-million deaths in the US in 2015, and is expected to surpass heart diseases as
the leading cause of death in the next few years. While T-cell-based
immunotherapy holds great potential to cure cancer, there are multiple
roadblocks including therapeutic effectiveness, patient individuality,
biomanufacturing, and cost. This proposal aims to tackle these limitations by
making nanoscale assemblies of proteins that can collectively program a
patient's own immune system to seek out and destroy the cancer cells. The
modular nature and the inexpensive production system of the protein assemblies
hold promise to make personalized cancer immunotherapy both effective and
affordable. The successful completion of this work will provide an enabling
strategy for developing personalized immunotherapy to treat cancer and help
define the metrics of effective anti-tumor immune cell
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T-cell based immunotherapy holds great promise
to treat cancer, as recognized by the recent approval of sipuleucel-T to treat
advanced prostate cancer. The key to a successful T-cell immunotherapy is to
elicit a potent anti-tumor response by presenting the right signals (i.e.
protein ligands) in the right spatial pattern to T cells as observed in the
immunological synapse. While artificial presenting systems represent an
affordable alternative to adoptive transfer of patient's own immune cells, their
existing designs lack the spatial control of the protein ligands, resulting in
limited beneficial clinical outcome. The investigator proposes a novel approach
of synthesizing tunable and scalable protein assemblies (TSPAs), which consist
of multiple T-cell-activating protein ligands of choice that self-assemble into
defined supramolecular patterns on an addressable scaffold. Coupled with high
dimensional single-cell phenotyping, the availability of the proposed TSPAs
opens up the possibility to engineer personalized and affordable immunotherapy.
Specifically, using breast cancer as a model system, the investigators will
establish the relationship between the composition of the T-cell-activating
ligands in the TSPA, the pattern of the ligands, and the anti-tumor activity of
the activated T cells. This will further enable the identification of the
optimal TSPA configuration to mount an effective anti-tumor T-cell response. The
successful completion of this work will provide an enabling strategy for
developing personalized immunotherapy to treat other types of cancer, and help
define the metrics of effective anti-tumor T-cell responses. The definition of
such a standard will significantly improve the ability to predict T-cell
therapeutic outcome and help provide guidelines for designing better cancer
therapeutics and vaccines. To generate a broader impact, protein and life
science research-based learning platform will be established at different
academic levels to foster students' interest in engineering and manufacturing
therapeutic molecules, increase their knowledge in the emerging field of
personalized medicine, and provide new opportunities for women and
underrepresented minorities to pursue careers in engineering and medicinal
science. These efforts will collectively help create a new generation of
engineers with a multi-disciplinary skillset ready to make an impact on human
health.