* 1511667
* Collaborative Research:  GOALI:  Sustainable phosphorus recovery from agricultural waste
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Lee Blaney, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 244,012.00

1512429 (Blaney) and 1511399 (Sengupta) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waste streams have
traditionally been considered as a source of pollutants to environmental
systems. Poultry litter has been a topic of recent interest due to high nutrient
loads in runoff from agricultural areas. Moving forward, a paradigm shift is
needed to reconsider waste streams from a resource recovery perspective. The
overall aim of this project is to investigate a hybrid technology that allows
for continuous-flow treatment of poultry litter and high recovery of phosphorus.
By shifting nutrient loading issues into potential resource/revenue streams,
progress in reducing nutrient loads to sensitive ecosystems can be accelerated.
This goal will be pursued through partnership with Triea Technologies, a company
focused on agricultural sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of
this research is that phosphorus can be sustainably recovered from concentrated
poultry litter slurries using a two-phase process. This process consists of a
Phosphorus Extraction and Recovery System (PEARS), which allows for phosphorus
release from poultry litter and subsequent precipitation as a high-value
product, and a hybrid ion exchange, Hydrated Ferric Oxide - Polymeric Ligand
Exchanger (HFO-PLE) unit that polishes PEARS effluent to ensure low-phosphorus
effluent. The hypothesis will be tested through study of the following specific
objectives: Objective 1: Optimize and model the process chemistry for PEARS to
produce struvite and potassium struvite from poultry litter. Objective 2:
Achieve additional phosphorus recovery from PEARS effluent using
specialty&lt;br/&gt;polymeric ligand exchangers impregnated with hydrated ferric
oxide. Objective 3: Determine the purity of the recovered phosphorus product and
explore the sustainable reuse of extraction and regeneration solutions.
Objective 4: Determine potential nutrient load reductions in the Chesapeake Bay
watershed and development a start-up program for a PEARS-HFO-PLE pilot. The
generation of high-value phosphorus-based fertilizers from poultry litter would
be an important advancement in the environmental-agricultural field. The
approach to coupling the PEARS and HFO-PLE systems will ensure process effluent
has low phosphorus content. The project will leverage ongoing relationships with
the Meyerhoff Scholars Programs, which primarily serves African American
students, to engage and mentor undergraduate students in research. The research
team will engage farmers and agricultural communities to describe the benefits
of phosphorus recovery.