* 1511853
* UNS: Developing Quantitative Models of SHP2-Mediated Signaling regulation in Glioma for Rational Identification of Improved Therapeutic Approaches.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Matthew Lazzara, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 324,956.00

1511853&lt;br/&gt;Lazzara, Matthew J. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) is the most common cancer of the brain, with an average
survival time of just 14 months. In this project a large data set will be
collected to probe how GBM cells respond to different therapeutics when the
protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 is present at normal or reduced levels.
Activation states of numerous signaling proteins will be measured in parallel.
These data will be used to generate a computational model to predict which
druggable proteins to inhibit in order to antagonize the aspects of SHP2
regulation in GBM tumors that promote tumor growth and therapeutic resistance.
Model predictions will be tested first in cell culture and ultimately in mouse
models of GBM. This approach has not been employed previously to study GBM and
will leverage the new understanding of how SHP2 impacts GBM tumor behaviors. The
research is anticipated to generate important new insights that may eventually
be leveraged to improve clinical outcomes for the 14,000 patients diagnosed with
GBM in the U.S. each year. The work will also validate the proposed approach to
translate information on the function of a non-druggable protein into
immediately actionable therapeutic strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) is the most common malignancy of the brain. GBM tumors are
resistant to chemotherapy, radiation, and targeted inhibitors of oncogenic
kinases, and new therapeutic approaches are desperately needed. Data from the
lab of the Principal Investigator (PI) show that the protein tyrosine
phosphatase SHP2 controls GBM cell signaling in ways that could potentially be
leveraged to design improved therapeutic approaches for GBM. However, the data
also suggest this will not be straightforward because SHP2 simultaneously exerts
positive and negative regulatory effects over proliferation and survival
signaling. The net effect is that SHP2 expression simultaneously drives cellular
proliferation but also promotes death in response to certain therapeutics in GBM
cell lines, effects which may seem to conflict with each other. Moreover, the
signaling processes regulated by SHP2 in GBM cells and tumors have not yet been
fully identified. Thus, the path forward is not simply to inhibit SHP2 and all
its functions broadly, but rather to systematically evaluate the signaling
pathways regulated by SHP2 in GBM and to quantitatively map the functions of
those pathways to GBM phenotypes of interest. Ultimately, this approach will
identify a subset of signaling pathways in the SHP2-regulated signaling network
whose selective inhibition will slow GBM tumor growth and augment response to
therapeutics. In this research, a partial least squares regression (PLSR)
computational modeling approach will be used to map multivariate signaling
events regulated by SHP2 to specific GBM cell and tumor phenotypes of interest.
PLSR is robust enough to capture the complexity and cell context-dependence of
the trends revealed by the preliminary data. PLSR has been successfully utilized
to dissect signaling/phenotype relationships in other cellular systems but has
never been applied to rationally identify a subset of useful druggable signaling
nodes downstream of a presently non-druggable protein such as SHP2 in GBM or
other cancers. Ultimately, this project will identify a new set of therapeutic
targets in glioblastoma, produce substantial new biological understanding about
the role of SHP2 in glioblastoma, and validate a general proposed method for
circumventing limitations that may exist for directly therapeutically targeting
a specific protein known to be important in disease. The project also includes a
set of integrated educational objectives to reach students from diverse
backgrounds by leveraging the PI's existing educational programs and outreach
efforts with high school students and science educational
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology.