* 1511825
* UNS:  Persistence of Molecular Markers Used in Fecal Source Tracking:  Metagenomic-Based Assessment of Microbial and Human DNA
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Konstantinos Konstantinidis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

1511825&lt;br/&gt;Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the relatively new molecular
biological tools, the identification of fecal contamination in the environment
increasingly makes use of rapid molecular assays to identify DNA sequences
specific to fecal indicator bacteria or DNA from host-specific cells such as
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) shed in stools. Unknowns persist, however, primarily
regarding the kinetic relationships between culture-dependent and culture-
independent assays, since time-since-contamination information is critical in
surveillance as a proxy for fecal pathogen survival and therefore public health
risk. The proposed work will elucidate the strengths and limitations of current
and novel molecular assays intended to identify fecal contamination in
environmental waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide new insights into these
issues, the research team will undertake fundamental work on degradation of
human mtDNA and human-specific microbial DNA-based targets in parallel with a
suite of commonly used culture and qPCR methods for fecal source-tracking
applications using laboratory-based mesocosms that simulate well natural surface
water and sediments. Mesocosms will be spiked with sources of fecal
contamination (healthy and diarrheal stools, primary effluent, isolates) and the
fate of the gut microbial community, autochthonous microbial community, and
pathogens (when present) will be followed over time (6 months) with advanced
metagenomics techniques. Metagenomic approaches can track changes to microbial
communities and pathogens with unprecedented accuracy and sensitivity. Hence,
the temporal metagenomic datasets will provide an ideal reference to benchmark
and compare the efficacy of currently used (fecal indicator bacteria test) and
proposed (e.g., human mtDNA) biomarkers for fecal pollution monitoring,
revealing comparative kinetic models and potentially new, robust targets for
fecal source tracking. Further, the project has the potential to identify
promising additional biomarkers for fecal contamination, resulting in
improvements in risk assessment tools used by water quality managers. Hence,
these studies will likely lead to the development of novel advanced techniques
for water quality monitoring as well. Results of this research will be broadly
disseminated to the public via a joint workshop with a local partner,
Chattahoochee River Keeper, and an interactive exhibit called the Microbe
Petting Zoo at the Georgia State Fair.