* 1511439
* UNS:  A Novel Algal-Bacterial Shortcut Nitrogen Removal Process for Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,04/30/2021
* Kathleen Scott, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 404,203.00

1511439&lt;br/&gt;Ergas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Management of the nitrogen cycle
was identified by the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) as one of the grand
challenges of the 21st century. High ammonia strength wastewaters, such as
anaerobic digestion effluents, are difficult and costly to treat in conventional
biological nitrogen removal systems due to their toxicity and high oxygen
requirements. The PIs overall goal is to investigate nitrogen metabolism in
algal-bacterial shortcut nitrogen removal and identify the optimum conditions
needed to sustain this novel process. The proposed research is significant
because it has the potential to reduce the costs, energy requirements and
greenhouse gas emissions associated with nitrogen removal from wastewaters. The
guiding hypothesis is that the close association of algae and bacteria and
light/dark cycles results in conditions within biological particles that favor
shortcut nitrogen removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through interdisciplinary and
international collaboration, the PIs propose to: 1) investigate the effects of
varying operating conditions and substrates on system kinetics and performance,
2) investigate the microbial consortium, which includes algae, ammonia oxidizing
bacteria, nitrite oxidizing bacteria, and denitrifying bacteria using molecular
tools, 3) optimize the system design through coupled process-optimization
modeling, and, 4) develop global competency in US students though an
international collaboration. The interrelationships between nitrogen loading,
light penetration and oxygen production will be studied using bench-scale SBPRs
operated at varying illumination, temperature and loading rates. The presence
and activities of algae nitrogen metabolizing microorganisms will be tracked via
measurements of key chemical constituents and by using molecular biological
tools to target functional genes encoding steps in the N cycle relevant to
nitrification/ denitrification. Additional experiments will investigate the use
of volatile fatty acids harvested from livestock waste fermentation as an
electron donor for denitrification and coupling of partial algal-bacterial
ammonia oxidation with anammox technology to improve system economics. A
framework that couples an algal-bacterial shortcut nitrogen process models and
an optimization models will be used to minimize system footprint with target
total nitrogen removal as a constraint. The optimization model will allow the
PIs to find the optimal operating conditions to minimize reactor footprint for
different geographic regions. The PIs have assembled a team of researchers in
the US and Netherlands with expertise in biological nitrogen removal and algae
production, autotrophic bacterial physiology, and wastewater process and
optimization modeling. Graduate and undergraduate students, secondary science
teachers and HS students will receive training in interdisciplinary, globalized
science and engineering research in developed and developing world contexts. We
will build on student exchanges between University of South Florida and UNESCO-
IHE in Delft, the Netherlands and University of South Florida's Peace Corps
Masters International Program to gain additional resources (students,
facilities, and research expertise), build developing world sustainable water
treatment capacity and continue co-development of the shortcut algal-bacterial
nitrogen removal process.