* 1511914
* UNS: Stem Cell Differentiation and Teratoma-forming Potential in hiPSC-derived Neural Cultures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Brian Kirby, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 334,917.00

PI: Kirby, Brian J. Proposal Number: 1511914

The investigators will develop techniques that allow human cells from patients
to be reprogrammed into neural cells that can be used to repair nerve damage or
neurodegenerative disease. Although techniques exist to reprogram cells, these
reprogramming techniques at present pose risks to the patient because some
reprogrammed cells can form tumors instead of serving a therapeutic purpose.
This work will process populations of reprogrammed cells to remove those with
the potential to form tumors. This work is broadly significant because, by
eliminating the potential for tumor formation, it will enable tissue
regeneration to be performed with therapeutic benefit and minimal risk of
harming the patient.

The long-term goal of this research is to enable efficient, teratoma-free
engineering of neuronal cells. The objective of the proposed work is to
delineate the relationships between adhesive mechanobiology, teratoma-related
markers and differentiation in neurally reprogrammed human induced pluripotent
stem cell (hiPSC) populations. The central hypotheses are that (a) neural
rosette cells will have an adhesive signature (i.e., integrins, focal adhesions,
and adhesive strength), distinct from contaminating cells, that will lead to
their selective removal using the micro stem cell high-efficiency adhesion-based
recovery (uSHEAR) platform, and (b) teratoma-forming cells will have a unique
expression pattern of integrins and glycans, including stage-specific embryonic
antigen (SSEA)-5, which will enable microfluidic-based selective capture of
teratoma-forming cells. This hypothesis has been formulated based on the
previous discovery of differential adhesiveness of hiPSCs and neural cells and
label-free isolation of hiPSCs for partially reprogrammed cultures, as well as
selective rare cell isolation with geometrically enhanced differential
immunocapture (GEDI) devices. The rationale of the proposed work is that the
relationships between adhesive mechanobiology, teratoma-related markers, and
differentiation are most directly applicable to contaminant-extraction
approaches that improve the time, yield, and purity of neural differentiation
and facilitate its direct application in regenerative medicine. This work will
determine relationships between adhesion signature, surface markers, and
teratoma formation through two specific aims, which determine the relationships
between teratoma-related markers, adhesive signature, and directed
differentiation of hiPSCs along the neural lineage, and determine the
relationship between SSEA5-based negative selection in differentiating cells and
removal of teratoma-forming risk in progenitor/neuron cultures. The proposed
work will determine relationships between surface expression and adhesion during
the differentiation process, and evaluate the potential for differentiation and
teratoma formation in immune-compromised mice. By exploiting the differences in
adhesive signature and molecular fingerprints of cells at different stages of
differentiation from hiPSC to neuron, immunocapture of SSEA5+ cells using
geometrically enhanced differential immunocapture will be used to eliminate
teratoma-forming cells and reduce teratoma formation in vivo. Flow cytometry,
immunostaining, and in vivo teratoma formation studies will be used to evaluate
the potential for negative selection to limit teratoma-forming risk and link
teratoma outcomes to surface markers in flowthrough and captured subpopulations,
and these results will allow (a) early purification of radially structured,
multipotent neural rosettes for accelerated and enhanced yield and purity of
neural differentiation, (b) purification of terminally differentiated neural
cell populations, and (c) enhanced characterization of teratoma-specific surface
markers. Taken together, the expected outcome of the specific aims is
identification of the links between adhesive signature of neural cells in
continuously differentiating hiPSC cultures, their surface expression of
integrins and SSEA5, and teratoma formation in SCID mice, quantified by
measurement of reduction of teratoma formation upon SSEA5-based negative cell
selection in a novel microfluidic device. The broad impact of this work is that
the knowledge gained will inform devices that use adhesion strength for hiPSC
isolation and immunocapture for isolation of rare populations of teratoma-
forming cells. The Investigators plan to broaden STEM participation through a
series of summer activities designed to use GEDI devices to explain cellular
transport to high school women as part of a Cornell leadership academy.