* 1511450
* UNS: Controlling mixing and segregation of granular media using unsteady flows
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Paul Umbanhowar, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2020
* USD 406,761.00

CBET - 1511450&lt;br/&gt;PI: Umbanhowar, Paul&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular
materials such as sand, snow, and salt consist of large numbers of solid
particles that interact with each other primarily through contact foces. Flowing
granular materials occur in natural phenomena, such as landslides and
avalanches, and in industrial processes, such as pharmaceutical manufacturing
and ore processing. When the particles differ from each other in size, density,
roughness or some other physical characteristic, they can segregate during flow,
which complicates processing and diminishes product quality. The goal of this
project is to discover ways to avoid or reduce segregation and improve mixing in
unsteady granular flows, i.e. flows that vary in time. The project involves
experiments to determine how flow modulation can best control segregation and
mixing for materials consisting of particles of various sizes. The experiments
will be complemented by modeling and computer simulation that can help interpret
the results and predict optimal modulation methods for controlling segregation.
Results will generate useful processing methods and modeling tools for
industrial practitioners. The project team will comprise a diverse group of
researchers and students, including students from underrepresented groups and
local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine the interplay
between unsteady kinematics and segregation to develop a continuum-based
framework to predict spatial particle segregation distributions for polydisperse
particles in bounded heap flow and rotating tumbler flow. The results will be
used to demonstrate how flow modulations, such as feed rate variations in heap
flow or rotational speed variations in tumbler flow, can inhibit segregation and
improve mixing. Findings from the project will guide industrial granular
materials processes and systems by providing methodologies that apply over a
wide range of operating conditions and that are supported by a continuum-based
model. The model will account for unsteady flow, segregation, and collisional
diffusion, all of which are important elements in a broad array of granular
processes. The combination of experiments and simulations will provide an
expanded and improved understanding of flow, segregation, mixing and pattern
formation in granular systems.