* 1511200
* UNS: Coupled Flow-Chemistry Modeling of Thrombogensis in Human Ventricles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Rajat Mittal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 290,005.00

1511200(Mittal)

The proposal is focused on the understanding of the flow of blood in the human
heart using computations. When blood flow in the heart is disturbed by
myocardial infraction, it is possible to create conditions that lead to blood
clotting. The novelty of the proposed work is in the use of computational models
that account not only for the flow, but also for the detailed biochemistry of
clot formation. Hundreds of thousands of Americans each year are found to suffer
from myocardial infraction and could potentially benefit from the results of
this research.

Despite many decades of research, the complex interplay between the ventricular
fluid dynamics and the chemistry of coagulation is not well understood. It is
proposed to take advantage of recent developments in medical imaging and
computational fluid dynamics to simulate blood flow in realistic models of the
heart, and to investigate the coupling between the flow and the chemistry
associated with left ventricle (LV) thrombogenesis. It is proposed to use
medical imaging to create a model of the LV to simulate blood flow. The
resulting flow field data will be used to model the convection, diffusion and
reaction of species known to be important in the coagulation cascade as well as
platelet dynamics and adhesion. The specific objectives of the project are: (1)
develop coupled flow-chemistry computational models of LV thrombus formation;
(2) validate computational hemodynamic results against in-vivo data; (3)
investigate the mechanisms of flow-mediated thrombogenesis; and (4) use
simulations to examine alternate coagulation pathways and the effectiveness of
anticoagulant therapies. This project will break new ground in flow-chemistry
coupling, imaging-to-model construction, hybrid (CPU-GPU) high performance
computing models, dual-time-stepping procedures for stiff coupled systems, and
new protocols for validating CFD results from in-vivo data. The coupled flow-
chemical modeling approach that will be developed is expected to advance the
state-of-the-art in this arena that has been limited to simple, stationary
vessel geometries and laminar flows.