* 1511835
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Describing Macromolecular Transport through Chemically-Tuned Nanoporous Membranes via Theory, Computation, and Experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* David Corti, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 164,716.00

Collaborative Proposals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1511835 /
#1511862&lt;br/&gt;Boudouris, Bryan / Phillip,
William&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes are crucial in a number of separation
processes where desired products are isolated from undesired species. In
particular, many emerging pharmaceutical treatments require the purification of
active long-chain biomacromolecules as they leave the biopharmaceutical reactor.
These biomacromolecules recently have been approved for the treatment of a
variety of life-threatening diseases, including cancer and autoimmune diseases.
However, the high cost of large-scale production and purification of these
important materials, which is often transferred to the patient, has prevented
their widespread implementation in clinical practice. This proposal will
evaluate how macromolecules such as these important therapeutic agents are
transported through membrane materials. By combining experimental results with
theoretical predictions and computational simulations, a complete picture of how
transport occurs through small pores will be developed. This opens the potential
of generating more cost-effective purification systems, which could lessen the
costs of patient treatment and open an economical means by which to treat a
number of devastating diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transport of
macromolecular species is of fundamental import in a range of technologically-
important membrane separations applications (e.g., the separation of therapeutic
proteins). However, the exact mechanism of how a dissolved polymer chain
traverses a membrane with pore sizes comparable to or smaller than the
hydrodynamic diameter of the chain at thermodynamic equilibrium and without
external stimuli (e.g., applied electric fields) is not understood fully. As
such, a critical need exists to establish how pore size, pore chemistry, and the
solution environment affect the interfacial transport of macromolecules across
well-structured membranes. Here, a combination of experimental techniques,
thermodynamic theory, and computational modeling is utilized in order to tie
nanoscale phenomena to physical observables at the macroscopic level. The vision
will result in a molecule-to-membrane level understanding of chemically-
selective macromolecular transport through small pores; this understanding,
which will be developed by connecting continuum transport properties to
molecular models through advanced materials characterization methodologies, will
enable the PIs to develop the design principles for the rational engineering of
chemically-selective membranes in a number of current and emerging separations
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generating structure-property-performance
relationships in the realm of size and chemically-selective membranes will lead
to improved membrane design. This, in turn, will help decrease production costs
and increase the energy efficiency of many processes required for the production
of common consumer goods and more high-value products (e.g., therapeutic
pharmaceuticals). As such, successful completion of this work has the potential
to impact current manufacturing processes in a positive manner. Furthermore, the
collaboration between Purdue University and the University of Notre Dame will
allow students from both institutions to perform work at the partner
institution. In this way, the students will have a more diverse educational
experience. In addition to graduate students, undergraduate and high school
students will perform research on this project. In particular, the high school
student will be part of the American Chemical Society's Project SEED program.
Therefore, this work has the ability to advance fundamental membrane science and
to impact a unique group of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers with
diverse socioeconomic and educational backgrounds.