* 1511787
* UNS: Dynamics and Rheology of Concentrated Suspensions of Rigid Rods: Effects of Confinement
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Jason Butler, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 301,678.00

CBET - 1511787 PI: Jason Butler

Fibers often are added to materials to provide extra strength and improve
lifetime. However, adding fibers to a material complicates processing, because
the fibers cause changes in the physical properties of the material during flow.
This project will conduct experiments and computer simulations of the flow
behavior of suspensions of rigid rods in a viscous liquid. The project will
examine concentrated suspensions where the rods interact with each other during
flow. Furthermore, the project will focus on the effects of nearby bounding
walls on the structure and physical properties of the suspension. Results of the
project will provide information that engineers who process fibrous materials
can use in process design to enhance material properties. The project will
provide research training for graduate students, research involvement for
interested undergraduates, and opportunities to enhance international
collaborations through established initiatives at the University of Florida.

The rheology of concentrated fiber suspensions will be studied experimentally in
a series of devices. To examine effects of confinement, the distance between
bounding walls in the devices will be varied. The effects of nearby walls on the
microstructure of the suspension will be determined by imaging the rods. Changes
in the microstructure due to confinement will be correlated with changes in
fluid rheology. Experimental measurements will be compared to simulations with
periodic boundary condition or with bounding walls to examine connections
between microstructure, confinement, and rheology. In addition to clarifying the
influence of confinement, the project will identify the physical mechanisms that
control structure and dynamics of concentrated suspensions of rods.