* 1511757
* SusChEM: Materials and Architectures for High Efficiency Organic Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Mark Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Mark E Thompson&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1511757&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells that use light-absorbing organic polymers to convert light to
electricity ? organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices - offer a potentially low-cost
route for renewable electricity production. However, in order to achieve parity
with other solar photovoltaic technologies, organic solar cells must increase
their power conversion efficiency past the current 10.5% world record. One
reason for this low efficiency is that OPV devices do not harness the light
energy in the infra-red range of the solar spectrum, which is beyond the visible
range of light. The overall goal of this project is to design new light
absorption materials for OPV that simultaneously increase infra-red light
absorption and improve the voltage output, leading to a potentially significant
incremental increase in solar energy conversion efficiency. Through this
research, fundamental scientific understanding on how to more rationally align
the energy conversion processes within OPV devices will be also gained. As part
of the educational activities associated with this project, students from a
community college in Los Angeles will participate in summer research on solar
energy, hosted through the laboratory of the principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed research is
to enhance the performance of organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices through the
development of new materials and device architectures that extend light
absorption and conversion into the near infra-red (near-IR) portion of the solar
spectrum, and concurrently increase the open circuit voltage towards its
theoretical limit. Towards this end, small molecules that absorb strongly into
the 950-1000 nm range will be used as part of single and multiple sensitization
strategies to achieve broadband absorption in the visible to near-IR spectral
range. Furthermore, intramolecular symmetry breaking charge transfer materials,
which contain both electron donors and acceptors, will be designed to narrow the
offset between the energies of the charge transfer state, exciton, and the open-
circuit voltage. In this context, the research plan has two primary objectives
that will be carried out interactively. The first objective is to prepare and
characterize the photophysical properties of new materials, and then second
objective to develop novel structures that utilize these new materials in OPV
devices. Theoretical models will be used to predict absorption energies for a
wide range of cyanine-like dyes for near-IR, and from these studies, the most
promising small molecule materials will be synthesized, characterized by
photophysical methods, and then tested in OPV devices. Synthetic and
photophysical characterization studies will also be carried out to determine the
parameters that control symmetry breaking charge transfer (SBCT) in strongly
absorbing materials. This fundamental understanding will be used to design OPV
device architectures to accommodate these SCBT materials. The device physics of
OPV devices containing SCBT materials will be then characterized to understand
the phenomena that could lead to increased open circuit voltage. Finally, all
dye targets will be designed to serve as suitable ligands for preparation of
zinc-dye complexes. These new zinc complexes are expected to promote symmetry
breaking charge transfer, making it possible to simultaneously increase near-IR
spectral response and increase open circuit voltage. If successful, these new
OPV materials will improve solar energy conversion efficiency through
synergistic design of light absorption and charge transfer processes.