* 1511689
* SusChEM: Rational Design of High Temperature Water-Gas Shift Catalysts with Non-Toxic Earth-Abundant Elements
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 388,940.00

The proposal seeks to understand and re-design high-temperature water-gas shift
(WGS) catalysts so as to avoid the use of chromium (an element with potential
environmental and health risks). Currently, chromium-containing catalysts are
used almost exclusively for this important reaction that generates hydrogen from
carbon monoxide and water, thereby contributing to a sustainable hydrogen-based
energy economy. The project will utilize state-of-the art catalyst
characterization and mechanistic tools to understand the detailed surface
reactions that occur under high-temperature water-gas shift reaction conditions,
and then propose new formulations based on known properties of potential low-
cost substitute materials. The study will examine both conventional and model
HT-WGS catalysts for both their bulk and surface chemical and physical states
under reaction conditions. The PI has many state-of-the-art characterization
tools at his disposal that should allow unprecedented insight into the mechanism
by which the current chromium-based catalyst functions. He will then attempt to
emulate the properties of chromium by using a novel "controlled synthesis"
method that will be employed with various earth-abundant candidate catalyst
materials. The fundamental understanding obtained on the commercial chromium-
containing catalyst should provide guidance on the structure, composition and
redox properties needed to match the chromium-containing catalyst. In additional
to a suite of spectroscopic tools, the PI will employ standard reactivity
testing methods and studies with isotopically labeled species to gain detailed
understanding of both the working catalyst composition and the WGS reaction
mechanism.

The proposed research, if successful in all aspects, could transform the
industrial process for HT-WGS while avoiding environmental and health issues
associated with the current use of chromium. The project would also contribute
to the realization of a sustainable hydrogen economy, which would improve U.S.
energy security and help ensure competitiveness of the U.S. chemical industry.
From an educational standpoint, the project will train one graduate student and
4-6 undergraduate students. In addition the PI will continue his longstanding
involvement in a number of educational outreach programs in the Lehigh Valley
area, including the Lehigh University CHOICES program that annually brings
middle-school female students to the campus for a day to interact with faculty
and students engaged in STEM activities.