* 1511528
* UNS: Three-Dimensional Porous Nanographene for Highly Efficient Energy Storage in Li-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Gang Wu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,998.00

PI: Gang Wu Proposal Number: 1511528

Rechargeable lithium ion batteries support the development of sustainable energy
systems by storing electricity generated by renewable resources such as wind and
solar energy, or by powering zero-emission electric vehicles charged by
electricity from renewable resources. However, the storage capacity, recharging
time, and power output from current lithium ion batteries must improve to enable
further market penetration for electric vehicles. The goal of this project is to
redesign the carbon electrode of the battery to make fundamental improvements in
performance. The new carbon electrode will be based on graphene, a form of
carbon that is ordered into sheets one atom thick. New methods will be developed
to form graphene into a three-dimensional structure designed through scientific
principles to provide high capacity, rapid recharge times, and stability during
repeated charging. The educational activities associated with this project
include summer research experiences for three undergraduate students from under-
represented groups in engineering, and hands-on outreach to elementary schools
in the Buffalo, New York area.

Nanostructured graphene has emerged as a potentially transformative material for
replacing porous carbon in the anode of rechargeable lithium ion batteries for
transportation applications because it offers the potential for high surface
area and electronic conductivity, leading to higher capacity and faster
charge/discharge rates. However, under repeated charge/discharge cycles, the
storage capacity fades rapidly because the graphene sheets restack. New
synthesis approaches for nanographene are needed to address this problem and to
extend the capabilities of graphene for use in lithium ion battery anodes. The
overall goals of this proposed research are to rationally design stable, three-
dimensional graphene anodes of defined structure and electronic properties for
lithium ion batteries through atomic level self-assembly and heteroatom
substitution, and then develop a fundamental understanding of lithium ion
insertion and extraction processes in this anode. The proposed research has
three objectives. The first objective is to develop new and scalable synthetic
protocols to prepare a series of structurally stable, nitrogen(N)-doped
nanographenes with functional linkers via Suzuki coupling and covalent
stabilization, and then fine-tune the lattice geometry and electronic properties
of the final three-dimensional structure through controlled d-lattice spacing
and N-doping level. Material properties will be characterized by
photoluminescence, nuclear magnetic resonance, and mass spectroscopies. The
second objective is to establish a fundamental understanding of lithium ion
adsorption, desorption, and diffusion kinetics on doped nanographene using
nanographene model systems of well-defined molecular size, structure, and
doping. Towards this end, in situ electrochemical neutron experiments
complimented by high-resolution transmission electron microscope imaging and
microanalysis techniques will be used to measure changes in composition,
structure, and thermodynamic processes of graphene anodes during lithium ion
insertion/extraction reactions. The lithium reaction mechanisms on nitrogen-
doped nanographene will be investigated computationally by Density Functional
Theory (DFT) and nanoscale dynamic simulation. The third objective is to design
and synthesize structured three-dimensional porous nanographene anode materials
with chemical and structural properties designed to optimize lithium capacity,
diffusion rate, and cyclic stability. Research outcomes will also be used to
develop instructional materials for a new course on advanced energy materials at
the University of Buffalo.