* 1511390
* UNS:EFFECT OF METAL OXIDE INTERACTIONS ON OXYGEN EVOLUTION REACTION FOR WATER ELECTROLYSIS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Prashant Kumta, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 380,682.00

Previous work by the principal investigator (PI) has identified a promising
catalyst formulation for the production of hydrogen via the oxygen evolution
reaction (OER) in highly-acidic electrocatalytic environments. The catalyst
partially substitutes lower-cost tin (Sn) for the expensive noble metals iridium
(Ir) and ruthenium (Ru). The goal of the present study is to further understand
the reasons for the high performance and stability of the the Sn-containing
catalysts as a guide for developing even better catalysts. The proposed work
will contribute to improved, lower cost, electrocatalysts for a variety of
energy applications and will develop creative educational tools for high school
students in addition to undergraduate and graduate opportunities for
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal expands
the PI's previous work with fluorine-doped mixed oxide SnIr catalysts to gain
fundamental understanding of the reasons for their high performance with reduced
noble metal loading. Both theoretical and experimental approaches will be
employed focusing on a range of SnIr catalysts with varying Sn-to-Ir ratio, and
with various levels of F-doping. By combining surface and bulk experimental
probes with Density Functional Theory (VASP code)computational methods, they
will obtain fundamental understanding of both the geometric and electronic
structures responsible for the stability and performance attributes of the
F-doped mixed oxide catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the
potential to broadly impact our understanding of water electrolysis as promoted
by catalysts containing reduced amounts of expensive precious metals compared to
current catalyst technology, thereby aiding progress in areas related to fuel
cells, hydrogen production, and overall energy sustainability. The research will
also provide education and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, including recruiting minority students from North Carolina Agriculture
and Technical State University. In addition, the PI will undertake an ambitious
program to engage high school students in the challenges and opportunities
around water hydrolysis including audio-visual animation and hands-on
demonstrations.