* 1511645
* UNS: Developing Rechargeable Li-Metal Electrodes by Controlling the Direction of Dendrite Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Jian Xie, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 310,732.00

PI: Jian Xie &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1511645&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rechargeable lithium ion batteries support the
development of sustainable energy systems by storing electricity generated by
renewable resources such as wind and solar energy, or by powering zero-emission
electric vehicles charged by electricity from renewable resources. A fundamental
reliability issue with experimental lithium ion batteries that use high-energy
density lithium metal electrodes is the formation of lithium metal whiskers
within the battery during recharging, which ultimately short out the battery,
creating a potential fire hazard and reducing battery life. The goal of this
project is to develop a new electrode design that controls this degradation
process and prolongs battery lifetime. The electrode design will be guided by
fundamental scientific investigation into the mechanisms of failure to improve
the reliability and safety of this experimental battery design, so that
commercial realization may be possible in the future. As part of the educational
activities associated with this project, undergraduate students from under-
represented groups in engineering will be given summer research experiences in a
multi-disciplinary context, with student recruiting coordinated through the
Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Research Institute at Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rechargeable lithium ion batteries
that use lithium metal as the anode have much higher electrochemical energy
storage capacity than carbon-based anodes currently in use. However,
imperfections on the metal surface serve as nucleation sites for the deposition
of lithium metal dendrites. These microscopic projections grow upon repeated
cycling and ultimately pierce the separator, touch the cathode, and short out
the device. The overall goal of the proposed research is to develop a new anode
design that confines dendrite growth and prolongs the lifetime of lithium ion
batteries that use lithium metal as the anode. In the proposed electrode design,
a thin lithium ion functionalized carbon coating on the separator facing the
lithium metal anode generates lithium dendrites in the direction opposite to
dendrite growth from the lithium metal anode. Therefore, dendrite growth along
the through-plane direction is ultimately stopped when dendrites growing from
opposing directions touch one another and short out. This promotes dendrite
growth in the in-plane direction, ultimately consolidating the dendrites into a
Li-metal layer. Controlling the growth direction is realized by zeroing the
potential difference using the carbon current collector on the separator. To
understand these processes and harness them to develop a long-lasting lithium
metal anode, the research plan has four objectives. The first objective is to
study the mechanism of lithium dendrite formation within the metal electrode
using both transmission electron microscopy and and in situ micro X-ray
diffraction. The second objective is to elucidate the capacity decay mechanism
of the metal electrode through cycle efficiency and micro-focused synchrotron
X-ray diffraction measurement techniques. The third objective is to optimize the
functionalized nanocarbon layer of the lithium metal electrode for highest
possible storage capacity and cycling durability, by comparing different coating
techniques and carbon types, and by optimizing nanocarbon morphology through ink
formulation. The fourth objective is to consider strategies to make the
compacted lithium metal dendrite layer an active component of the lithium metal
anode, and to characterize the electrochemical performance of the final anode
with different electrolyte systems. Research outcomes will also be used to
develop instructional materials for a course on Energy Storage Devices and
Systems for EV/HEV at the Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis.