* 1511139
* UNS: Optimal Adaptive Control Methods for a Hybrid Exoskeleton
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Nitin Sharma, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 266,209.00

Restoration of walking and standing function is one of the most desired
interventions that would improve quality of life of persons with paraplegia.
Evidence supports that the users of walking devices experience fewer secondary
medical complications than wheelchair users. To restore walking and standing
function, a hybrid exoskeleton that combines functional electrical stimulation
(FES) with a powered exoskeleton can be more advantageous than an FES-based
walking system or a powered exoskeleton alone. Little research has gone into the
design and evaluation of control methods for a hybrid exoskeleton. Using FES and
an electric motor, the proposed research will investigate an automatic control
method to produce shared or cooperative force at a limb joint. The proposed
algorithm will be able to maintain cooperation between FES and the electric
motor even when FES-induced muscle fatigue sets in. Advances in shared control
imply that smaller and light weight exoskeletons can be designed because FES can
be additionally used to exploit a user's inherent muscle power. The use of FES
in the hybrid neuroprosthesis will also provide therapeutic benefits; e.g.,
application of FES improves cardiovascular fitness, motor-skill relearning, and
increased muscle mass and fatigue resistance. Thus, the proposed study will
provide substantial benefits to society by improving quality of life of
individuals with mobility impairments and increasing their community
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate
cutting-edge control methods that are based on reinforcement learning (RL)
principles for simultaneously controlling FES and an electric motor. The current
ad hoc techniques used to control both FES and an active orthosis together in a
hybrid device do not necessarily adapt with muscle fatigue - a major limiting
factor in an FES-based technology. Moreover, the dissimilar dynamics of FES and
the electric motor can cause instability during walking, which can potentially
lead to injury due to falling. The new RL control techniques will compute
approximate optimal solutions in real-time and will be applicable to dynamic
systems that are driven by multiple actuators with dissimilar dynamics. The
specific aims of the proposal are to investigate and evaluate RL-based actor-
critic control methods on a hybrid leg extension machine and a hybrid walking
device. The proposed experiments will measure any reduction in the overall power
requirement of the hybrid system and its dependence on the muscle fatigue. The
research will also result in a phenomenological model of common peroneal nerve
(CPN) stimulation, which is used to elicit hip flexion during walking. This
model will build an understanding on habituation and elicitation characteristics
of the CPN stimulation. In collaboration with a physiatrist, experiments will be
conducted on able-bodied subjects and a participant with spinal cord injury.