* 1511830
* UNS: Understanding protein adsorption in polysaccaride brushes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Matthew Kipper, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

#1511830 Kipper, Matthew J.

Many applications in medicine and biotechnology involve foreign surfaces that
contact blood. Some applications involve long-term exposure to blood, such as
heart valve replacements and stents. Other applications require intermediate-
term or short-term contact. These include applications such as blood storage and
medical procedures like dialysis and blood oxygenation. The materials used in
these applications induce undesirable (and potentially catastrophic) blood-
material interactions, such as blood clotting and inflammation. In fact, the
only known surface that is compatible with flowing whole blood for long-term
contact is the inside surfaces of blood vessels. This work will develop new
surfaces that have chemical and structural features designed to mimic the inside
surfaces of blood vessels. We will also study how the chemistry and structure of
these new surfaces can be tuned to control interactions with important blood
proteins that regulate blood-material interactions, like clotting. This will
enable us to better design materials for blood-contacting applications.

This work will prepare dense polymer brushes containing glycosaminoglycans,
which are the polyanionic polysaccharides in the endothelial glycocalyx
presented by the cells lining blood vessel walls. The interactions of important
blood proteins with these glycocalyx mimics will be investigated by single-
molecule fluorescence microscopy experiments. These experiments will be used to
test new hypotheses about how blood-compatibility is determined by protein-
surface interactions and protein-protein interactions at surfaces. Finally we
will demonstrate that glycocalyx mimics result in reduced platelet adhesion and
activation, and decrease the propensity for blood to clot.

This work will lead to better understanding of the mechanisms whereby
interactions of blood components with blood vessel walls prevent blood clotting.
By understanding how the blood vessel wall prevents clotting we can better
design blood-contacting surfaces for many applications in cardiovascular
medicine and biotechnology. The findings from this research could also lead to
advances in handling other complex protein mixtures in applications such as
protein separation for the food and biopharmaceutical industries. Our education
and outreach activities will include a one-week summer short course for middle
school students, a symposium for a middle school students at a charter school
that serves low-income and minority students, and contributions to a new
textbook being authored by a co-PI.