* 1512266
* UNS:  Fast Focus-scanning Microscopy Using Micron-thick phase Plates Based on High-index Meta-structures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Andrei Faraon, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Faraon&lt;br/&gt;1512266&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
how the brain works is one of the main scientific challenges of this generation.
Optical techniques for neural imaging, excitation and recording play a crucial
role in deconstructing the neural circuitry. Optical modulation and recording
from sets of neurons is enabled by optogenetics and genetically encoded voltage
sensors. To fully use this capability, the PI proposes to develop a fast and
slim device capable of focusing light in a volume on the same order of magnitude
as a cortical column at speeds faster than an action potential and spatial
resolution smaller than a neuronal cell body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enabling
technology is the recent invention of dielectric meta-surfaces, structures
thinner than a wavelength that allow for unprecedented control of free-space
propagating light. The uniqueness of the technology stems from the capability to
lithographically place the phase plates in very close proximity (tens of
microns) and to actuate them at high speeds using electrostatic forces like in
micro electro-mechanical devices (MEMS). If successful, this project will enable
devices that could scan many neurons in a cortical column with single action
potential temporal resolution, thus resulting in deconstruction of neural
circuitry in that column.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project
will provide the opportunity to train a graduate student in nano-photonics and
biomicroscopy. The student will simulate and fabricate the devices, will develop
a complex microscope setup, and will do two-photon microscopy measurements on
brain samples. In addition to graduate student education, undergraduate students
will contribute to the project through the SURF program at Caltech. The PI and
the graduate student will be involved in an outreach activity with the Navajo
Preparatory High School, a native American high school located in Farmington,
New Mexico. The activity will consist in travelling to Farmington to teach
science lessons, describing the research, and setting up demonstrations for high
school students visiting Caltech.