* 1512616
* UNS:  Mechanisms of UV inactivation of viruses for tailored disinfection applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Karl Linden, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 329,997.00

1512616&lt;br/&gt;Rodriguez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
gain fundamental insights into the action of ultraviolet light on viruses. The
study will examine the molecular level viral responses to ultraviolet
irradiation to improve current ultraviolet light disinfection and design of
future ultraviolet light technologies. The research aims to answer a number of
fundamental questions around virus inactivation with ultraviolet light that can
inform engineering practice, public health, and subsequent regulatory policy and
thus has broad reaching impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will
advance knowledge in a number of key areas. New fundamental knowledge will be
developed into the molecular-level response of viruses to ultraviolet light
irradiation during disinfection practice. Specifically, in addition to
adenoviruses, new studies will be performed on another double stranded DNA virus
- JC polyomavirus - to test the generalizability of the findings with
adenoviruses in response to low-pressure and medium-pressure ultraviolet light.
This research will move beyond the traditional evaluations of laboratory strains
of adenoviruses and isolate and test environmental strains to determine if there
are any differences in the ultraviolet light -response that may be related to
acclimated responses (such as DNA repair) from repeated exposure to and
propagation in laboratory cell culture lines. A number of new areas in molecular
microbiology methods, some of which we have developed, will be exploited
including early stage infection inhibition due to specific ultraviolet light
wavelengths, DNA repair from trans-lesion synthesis, protein damage assessment
using electrophoresis and mass spectrometry techniques, and DNA damage using a
new long range PCR technique we recently published. These fundamental findings
will be used to develop a tailored wavelength ultraviolet-LED based energy
efficient irradiation system to optimize disinfection at lower cost than
conventional ultraviolet sources. The work proposed herein will: (1) evaluate
inactivation kinetics and wavelength sensitivity of two double stranded DNA
viruses, (2) extend the adenovirus studies to adenoviruses isolated from the
environment, (3) evaluate the fundamental role of DNA repair in the cell culture
infectivity outcomes, (4) incorporate newly developed molecular biology-based
assays to assess DNA damage and protein damage from ultraviolet light
irradiation at varying wavelengths, and, (5) understand the implications for
disinfection using tailored wavelength approaches made possible by the
development of nanometer-specific ultraviolet light emitting diodes (LEDs).
Regulators and public health officials need information to help make sound
decisions for the public sector. The issue of virus disinfection for small
systems is currently contentious as the Groundwater Rule specifically forbids
the use of UV for any virus inactivation credit due to the high doses required
for adenovirus inactivation that cannot currently be field-validated in UV
reactors. Therefore, the timing of this research is critical if UV disinfection
is going to play any role for virus disinfection in groundwater. Thus, small-
systems wanting to use UV for protection of public health, may needlessly
suffer.