* 1512787
* UNS:  Coupled Hybrid Anaerobic Reactors to Generate Energy (CHARGE)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Linda Figueroa, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 334,695.00

1512787&lt;br/&gt;Figueroa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Domestic wastewater typically
contains calorific energy which represents five times the energy required for
treatment. Municipal wastewater treatment plants have the potential to capture
most of the energy present in the waste organic matter, but smaller utilities
treating less than 10 million gallons per day, which account for 97% of the
wastewater treatment systems in the US, are often reluctant to adopt complex and
often costly resource recovery systems. A treatment paradigm using anaerobic
mainstream wastewater treatment for primary and secondary treatment can meet
secondary standards, harvest the energy from organic matter and eliminate
separate sludge digestion. The anaerobic baffled reactors - expanded granular
sludge bed - microscreen system represents a transformational change in the
wastewater treatment paradigm from multiple separate capital-intensive energy-
consuming unit processes to fewer simpler unit processes that maximize energy
productivity and payback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advantage of the proposed
coupled hybrid anaerobic reactor system lies in the advancement of knowledge
regarding the factors that control the microbial and solids dynamics to meet the
performance goals of a low complexity energy-neutral system at ambient
wastewater conditions. The hypothesis is that a hybrid anaerobic baffled
reactors - expanded granular sludge bed - microscreen can treat raw wastewater
to meet secondary standards and produce stoichiometric amounts of methane. The
supporting objectives are to: 1) optimize the hybrid anaerobic reactor system
with real wastewater at bench- to demonstration-scale to produce secondary
treatment quality, 2) generate stoichiometric amounts of methane from BOD
removal, 3) develop a process model to predict anaerobic baffled reactors -
expanded granular sludge bed - microscreen performance, and, 4) evaluate the
life cycle impacts of the hybrid system by characterizing details needed to add
the linked expanded granular sludge bed and microscreen to an existing anaerobic
baffled reactors life cycle assessment. The expected outcome is increased
process understanding for design and implementation of a low complexity hybrid
anaerobic system that will generate energy while conditioning the water for
autotrophic nitrogen removal and phosphorus recovery. The team brings decades of
experience in microbial process modeling, microbial ecology, environmental
engineering, wastewater plant and utility operations. The research will
facilitate state and federal regulatory acceptance and industry adoption of new
energy positive technology for full-scale applications. The expected
transformative results will be disseminated via numerous avenues including
workshops at regional council meetings and national conferences, as well as a
technology diffusion workshop that will engage change agents from the wastewater
treatment industry. The proposed project will also broaden participation in
STEM, as the PIs will continue their extensive history in this area by
recruiting as researchers undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups, as well as low-income first-generation community
college students via our partnership with a local community college. The
investigators will also translate conceptual content from these studies into
established pre-college outreach efforts to inspire interest in STEM fields in
local disadvantaged and predominantly minority school districts.