* 1512099
* GOALI:  Collaborative Research: Integrated Biomimetic Block Copolymer Composite Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Manish Kumar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2018
* USD 194,695.00

1512089/1512099 Phillip/Kumar Notre Dame/Penn State

Mimicking biological membranes, which have developed innovative transport
mechanisms through millennia of evolution, has gained increasing interest in
recent years. In particular, biological membranes have embedded proteins that
are capable of transporting chemical species into and out of cells efficiently
and with exceptional selectivity. As such, developing membrane platforms that
mimic the exquisite processes of biology provides a route toward performing many
chemical separations that are critical to modern society (e.g., purification of
drinking water). In order for these advanced membranes to make an impact on the
chemical and biological separations the development of robust, high performance,
composite membranes is required. These composite membranes comprise a biomimetic
active layer containing membrane proteins supported mechanically by a highly-
porous and permeable support layer. The generation of robust composite
membranes, which realize the full potential of membrane proteins, requires that
the active and support layers are integrated synergistically.

The goal of the proposed research project is to identify the key materials
relationships that control the interplay between the nanostructures and
chemistries of the copolymer supports and the biomimetic active layers in order
to optimize the separations performance of composite biomimetic-block copolymer
membranes (BBCMs). This novel class of membranes comprises a selective layer
made from 2D crystals of membrane proteins and a support layer made from self-
assembled copolymers.

The successful execution of this research project will deliver a transformative
technology platform through an enhanced understanding of how to combine two
self-assembled materials into a composite membrane relevant to a diversity of
separations. Beyond the technical impact, a new generation of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students will be trained in a multi-disciplinary
and collaborative setting. A summer camp for middle school students focused on
water treatment will provide opportunities to bring this important application
of membranes to a wider audience.