* 1512217
* UNS: Advancing Environmental Sustainability through Innovative Design and Operation of Digital Manufacturing Equipment
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2021
* John Sutherland, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 499,999.00

1512217 (Sutherland). The overarching objective of this research is to generate
knowledge needed to establish a new framework for the design and operation of
digital manufacturing equipment for increased resource/energy efficiency and
enhanced environmental sustainability. Research will be conducted in the
following four thrusts: 1) Machine-level energy flow characterization, analysis,
and optimization; 2) Energy conscious production planning and control on a
digitalized shop floor; 3). Retrofitting and remanufacturing of Computer
Numerical Controlled (CNC) machines; and 4) Sustainable design of CNC machines.
The research will be jointly pursued by a highly qualified team consisting of
researchers from both China and the United States. Professor Sutherland from
Purdue University, a pioneer in the area of sustainable manufacturing, will lead
the U.S. part of the team. Professor Shao from Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, a renowned expert in digital manufacturing, will lead the
Chinese part of the team in partnership with Harbin Institute of Technology and
Hefei University of Technology. The team members expertise complements perfectly
with each other to pursue seamless integration of sustainable manufacturing and
digital manufacturing. Working together it is expected that the knowledge and
technologies generated in this project will be disseminated to industry in a
very timely manner. The data/information enabled sustainable manufacturing
approach to be developed will enhance productivity, efficiency, and
sustainability, a key for both the China and U.S. machine tool industries and
their respective manufacturing sectors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
represents one of the first efforts to take advantage of the emerging digital
manufacturing paradigm with the goal of advancing environmental sustainability.
The project will enhance understanding of resource and energy flows over the
entire life cycle of digital manufacturing equipment, from design, manufacture,
operation, maintenance, to remanufacturing, which in turn offers insight into
the design and operation of this equipment for improved environmental
performance. In particular, characterizing and modeling energy flows at both the
machine and shop floor levels make it possible to develop dynamic scheduling
procedures for better energy and power efficiency when facing uncertainties and
within smart grid scenarios. Data mining-enabled automated LCA could lead to a
completely new and highly efficient approach for conducting LCA on complicated
products. This project will significantly improve the resource and energy
efficiency of digital manufacturing equipment over its entire life cycle. This,
in turn, will lead to significant cost saving and carbon emission reduction. In
addition, the research findings will be infused into multiple courses within the
industrial, mechanical, and environmental and ecological engineering curricula
at Purdue, as well as corresponding schools/departments in partnering Chinese
universities. These activities will increase the amount of sustainability-
related educational materials in these curricula. During this project, the PIs
will continue their efforts to recruit students from under-represented groups
into engineering. Students working on this project will be encouraged to share
their experiences via social media to generate interests in conducting research
among their peers. By communicating with their counterparts in the other
country, students are also expected to gain exposure to a different culture. To
reach an even broader audience, all the findings, case studies, and teaching
materials will be made available on
manufacturingHUB.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is co-funded by the Global
Venture Fund (GVF) of NSF's International Science and Engineering section (ISE),
the CMMI Manufacturing Machines and Equipment program, and the CBET/ENG
Environmental Sustainability program.