* 1512449
* UNS:  Direct Computation of Capillary Force Constitutive Relations for Nanosuspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Edmund Webb III, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2018
* USD 309,965.00

CBET - 1512449&lt;br/&gt;PI: Webb III, Edmund&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
deposition of nanoparticles onto a solid surface is an important operation in
the assembly of nanoparticles to form new materials for a variety of
technological applications. This project will carry out atomic scale simulations
of the spreading of water droplets on both pure and chemically modified silicon
surfaces when the droplets contain nanoparticles of gallium nitride. Simulations
will be conducted for sessile drops and for drops that impact the silicon
surface. Patterning of gallium nitride nanoparticles on the silicon surface will
be examined. Understanding the forces that determine the spreading of the drop
and the deposition of the nanoparticles is essential to design a bottom up
approach to manufacturing new materials for optoelectronic applications. The
project will also engage undergraduate and masters students in research projects
that will make connections between the atomic scale simulations and larger scale
descriptions of droplet and nanoparticle
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations will be conducted to discover how
wetting kinetics and capillary forces depend on the interactions between
particle and solvent, between particle and solid surface, and between solvent
and solid surface. Forces acting on suspended nanoparticles will be directly
computed from simulations and correlated with drop morphology and the
environment near a given particles, such as proximity to an advancing contact
line or proximity to other particles. Additional simulations will explore
effects of particle size and concentration on particle patterning and forces
computed during wetting and spreading. Force data extracted from the simulations
will help validate and optimize analytical descriptions of the driving forces in
nano-suspension wetting. The project will provide new insights into non-
equilibrium thermodynamics and its manifestations in nanoscale systems by
connecting interaction affinity to suspension wetting kinetics and particle
behavior.