* 1512868
* Next Step Learning: Bridging Science Education and Cleantech Careers with Innovative Technologies
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Charles Xie, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,187,365.00

This project will create a science and engineering technology enhanced learning
pathway from school to home that focuses on home energy efficiency. Students
will have multiple opportunities to use what they learn about science and
engineering in school to solve authentic real-world energy efficiency problems
at home that could potentially lead to cleantech careers. A deeper understanding
of science and engineering practices and learning how to apply what is learned
in new settings contribute to energy efficiency, sustain power to millions of
people, and help clean up the planet. Eight curriculum units will be jointly
developed by school educators and industry partners to integrate science and
engineering activities into existing school standards, instruction, and
assessments. To help teachers prepare to implement these units, professional
development will be designed to prepare teachers to actively guide students in
the use of infrared cameras, sensors, simulations, and mixed-reality
technologies. These technologies will help students visualize, investigate, and
design invisible heat and mass flows in real and virtual worlds in real time as
they make decisions about ways to conserve energy.

This strategies project will advance efforts to better understand and promote
practices that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers
in fields of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics through the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers program. More than
60 teachers and 2000 students from 10 socioeconomically diverse middle and high
schools in Massachusetts will participate in the project. A mixed-methods
research design will capture data about teacher adoption and use, showcase
student learning and application, and highlight industry roles and
responsibilities in the school to home learning pathway model. These data will
measure the effectiveness of the model for improving learning outcomes about
home energy efficiency as well as promote student interest and motivation in
cleantech careers. This project will serve as a technology-enhanced model of an
education and industry collaboration transferable to other communities and
states.