* 1512405
* UNS: Mechanistic Approach to Design Robust Composite Polymer Cathodes for Potassium-Air Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Vishnu Baba Sundaresan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Vishnu-Baba Sundaresan Proposal Number: 1512405

Rechargeable batteries support the development of sustainable energy systems by
storing electricity generated by renewable resources such as wind and solar
energy, or by powering zero-emission electric vehicles charged by electricity
from renewable resources. However, lithium ion batteries now in use have
relatively low energy storage capacity. Metal-air batteries offer the potential
for much higher energy storage capacity than lithium-ion batteries because they
store electrical charge by a different process that uses oxygen in air to help
transfer electrons. But this process can also increase charging times. Of the
metal-air batteries, the potassium-air system is among the fastest, but is prone
to failure. The goal of this project is develop a fundamental understanding of
the mechanism of failure, and then use this understanding to develop a new
cathode design based on conducting polymers that provides better control of
oxygen atom transport. In this way, potassium-air battery systems can move
forward towards eventual commercial application. As part of this research,
graduate and undergraduate students will be given the skills to further develop
metal-air battery systems. The principal investigators will also organize
workshops on energy storage materials and smart materials to promote STEM
education among middle and high school age students in greater Columbus, Ohio
area.

Metal-air batteries offer the potential for high electrochemical energy storage
capacity that exceeds that of comparable metal ion batteries. Of the metal-air
batteries, the potassium-air system uses a one-electron redox process between
oxygen and superoxide to improve upon the low rates of oxygen
reduction/evolution associated with other metal-air battery systems. However,
the fundamental limitation of potassium-air batteries is the crossover of
molecular oxygen from the cathode to potassium anode, leading to the formation
of potassium superoxide on the anode surface. This process causes self-discharge
and reduces the availability of metal that can participate in energy storage.
The goal of the proposed research is to investigate the feasibility of a
composite cathode formed from conducting polymers and carbon support materials
to regulate the oxygen reduction reaction in the cathode and prevent the
diffusion of molecular oxygen to the anode. The conducting polymer is a
functionally graded, nanostructured polypyrrole membrane with an optimized
density of redox sites, and the carbon support material is reduced graphene
oxide. An electropolymerization process will be used to make the membrane so
that the porosity of the cathode gradually decreases across the thickness of the
membrane. It is hypothesized that the graded porous structure will block
molecular oxygen crossover, thereby enhancing the performance lifetime of the
potassium-air battery. The proposed research plan will develop a mechanistic
understanding of charge storage of the conducting polymers within the composite
cathode that accounts for mechanical stress, diffusion of gases, and
electrochemical reduction reactions during faradaic processes. As part of this
plan, the chemo-mechanical coefficients that relate volumetric stress generated
in conducting polymers and well as their application for increasing the energy
density and specific power of potassium-air batteries will be quantified. The
research plan has four specific tasks: 1) electrochemical synthesis of the
functionally graded, nanostructured polypyrrole membrane; 2) characterization of
this membrane as the cathode for a potassium-air electrochemical cell; 3)
construction of potassium-air battery containing the conducting polymer
composite cathode, and 4) battery performance measurements (capacity, power,
cycling). The research outcomes will advance a more generic and mechanistic
understanding of energy storage and conversion in conducting polymers for metal-
air battery systems, and concepts derived from the research will be introduced
into an energy storage materials course.