* 1512285
* UNS: Engineering protein sensors to detect epigenetic changes during stem cell culture
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Julie Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1512285 Yuan, Chongli &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA methylation is important in
regulating gene activity , and in a cell population cells may have exhibit
different levels of methylation, which results in behaviors that vary from the
population average. Understanding the methylation level changes in individual
cells is important in many biological applications. In this project the
researchers will develop a novel method which will enable measurement of
methylation at a single-cell level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Current detection approaches for quantifying DNA methylation are limited because
they preclude single-cell analysis and real-time monitoring of epigenetic
changes. The researchers propose to design a probe by combining protein
engineering principles and modern fluorescence detection techniques. Three
objectives will be pursued: engineer and validate molecular sensors that detect
methylated DNA near a gene locus, optimize the probes for use with cell
extracts, and evaluate the genetically-encoded probe within live cells.
Additionally, methylation level changes during stem cell passaging will also be
measured. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed probe has the
capability to significantly improve detecting DNA methylation levels at a single
cell and potentially enable monitoring of dynamic changes. The research project
provides a multidisciplinary training opportunity for engineers. The PIs will
involve undergraduate students in research and encourage the participation of
minority and female students. This proposal will also support the continued
collaboration with the Women in Engineering Program and develop a new laboratory
module for engaging students with the concept of fluorescence-based detection
techniques.