* 1512745
* UNS: Effects of Nanostructure on the Performance of Nucleic Acid-Based Electrochemical Biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Erkin Seker, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 06/30/2019
* USD 305,270.00

CBET - 1512745 Seker, Erkin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project the
researchers will fabricate novel electrodes with nanofeatures to understand how
nanoscale features on the electrodes enhance sensitive measurement of DNA. The
fundamental studies is likely to develop more sensitive electrochemical
biosensors for DNA. If successful, potential applications include food safety,
water quality and medical diagnostics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit -The central goal is to
conduct fundamental studies to relate nanostructure features on working
electrode and nucleic acid-based sensor performance on both biomolecular and
electrochemical levels. The PI will use bottom-up and top-down fabrication
approaches to create multiple electrode arrays (MEAs) that are composed of
building blocks of gold nano-pillars and nano-wells. The MEA-based libraries
with individually addressable nanostructured sensor elements will allow for
systematic high-throughput studies of structure-property relationships. The
scientific goal will be on understanding how nanostructure geometry influences
(a) electrochemical activity of common redox reporters, (b) DNA probe grafting
density and orientation, and (c) sensor performance by determining detection
limit, dynamic range, and selectivity in complex media of target DNA. In
addition, nanoporous gold will be used to determine the structure-property
relationships in a more complex nanostructured model system. The expected
outcome is to reveal a set of design rules for the development of nanostructured
electrochemical sensor elements. Broader Impacts : The broader impact of this
project encompasses societal benefits and educational opportunities. The MEA-
based nanostructure library will be broadly available to the scientific
community as a versatile tool for studying structure-property relationships in
numerous fields, including biomedical device coatings, catalytic fuel cells, and
nano-scale basic science phenomena. On educational and outreach aspects, through
an established collaboration with the Designated Emphasis in Biotechnology
Program at UC Davis, the PI will prototype an online course that merges micro-
and nano-fabrication with life sciences targeted broadly at
undergraduate/graduate students and industrial participants. The focus will be
in designing practical online assignments that tap into fresh data on
nanostructure-sensor performance relationships produced by the research efforts.
Through a competitive arrangement undergraduate students will be encouraged to
write short research proposals for obtaining a summer internship at the PI's
laboratory. Undergraduate students will be employed on customized projects that
are consistent with the scientific goals of this proposal.