* 1512164
* UNS:Nanoporous Membranes Based on Uniform Sub-Nanometer Pores
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Bing Gong, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1512164&lt;br/&gt;Gong&lt;br/&gt;SUNY at Buffulo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to create porous membranes having sub-nanometer (&lt; 1 nm) sized
pores that are aligned along the same direction, have a uniform diameter, and
pack in unprecedentedly high pore densities. In this project, one series of
ring-like molecules will be prepared in larger (multi-gram) quantities. These
cyclic molecules have been found to strongly stack into tube-like structures
containing long inner pores. A major objective will be to realize the parallel
packing of the corresponding tube-like structures into large-area or membranes.
Such a membrane, which contains sub-nanometer pores of a uniform diameters and
unprecedentedly high pore density, may offer the next-generation nanoporous
materials. These membranes, with their extremely densely packed pores of sub-
nanomer sizes, will then be employed to address to a major challenges in
separation science: the separation of water molecules from most other ions. If
successful, this research may provide a new technology for the desalination of
sea water and the purification of polluted water, resulting in major social,
economical, and environmental impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this work is to fabricate large-area membranes by homeotropically aligning
nanotubular assemblies, and to realize practically useful separation of
molecules and ions using such membranes. The central hypothesis is that
nantoubular assemblies of rigid macrocycles tend to pack parallel and can be
aligned into bulk materials. The rationale for this research is that, once the
factors responsible for the alignment of tubular assemblies are elucidated,
precise control of the structure of nanopores - which is made possible by
synthetically modifying rigid macrocycles will enable the revelation of novel
mass-transporting properties of sub-nm pores packed in the bulk phase. The PI
proposes to test the central hypothesis by pursuing three specific aims: (1) To
design, synthesize and assemble one class of macrocyclic building blocks having
an aromatic, tetraurea backbone and an inner cavity of ~5Ã… across; (2) to
fabricate membranes consisting of homeotropically aligned arrays of hydrophilic
sub-nm pores; (3) to start to explore the rejection of most ions from aqueous
solution using the fabricated membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team proposes
to build a focused and sustainable outreach program by developing lecture
materials and demonstrations on the science of organic nanopores and their
higher assemblies, which will be used by the PI and his graduate students to
participate in an existing outreach program in the Buffalo area that spans
grades kindergarten through the 12th in local school districts.