* 1512670
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Characterizing pyrogenic soil organic matter as a source of nitrogenous disinfection byproducts
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Thomas Borch, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/28/2019
* USD 85,129.00

1512705 / 1512670 &lt;br/&gt;Rosario-Ortiz / Young &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the increasing frequency and extent of wildfires, understanding the effect of
wildfires on disinfection byproduct formation potential will provide a
foundation for drinking water utilities to adapt to changes in affected
watersheds. Wildfires chemically transform soil organic matter, and mountainous
slopes are more prone to erosion after wildfires. Increased sediment transport
can lead to increased deposition and accumulation of pyrogenic soil organic
matter in surface waters (i.e., rivers and lakes), and the concern is that
dissolved organic matter characteristics from wildfires affects the formation of
disinfection byproducts. The results from this research will provide beneficial
information for utility operators, managers, researchers, and
regulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfires in forested watersheds transform
ecosystems and affect surface water quality. Previous work by the principal
investigator (PI)demonstrated that leachates from sediments in wildfire-impacted
areas have a greater potential (i.e., increased yield of disinfection
byproducts) to form haloacetonitriles after chlorination. Haloacetonitriles,
along with other nitrogenous disinfection byproducts, are an emerging area of
concern. Although not yet regulated by the USEPA, haloacetonitriles and
haloacetamides are more toxic than regulated carbonaceous disinfection
byproducts. The proposed study investigates the effect of thermal processes on
the formation of nitrogenous disinfection byproducts (haloacetonitriles and
haloacetamides) from soil organic matter. Soil organic matter is nitrogen-rich,
containing peptide-like material from in situ microbial processes. Soil organic
nitrogen is transformed into cyclic dipeptides and heterocyclic aromatic
compounds by thermal processes. The objectives are to simulate the
transformation of organic matter due to thermal processes, leaching into surface
water, and the formation of disinfection byproducts during disinfection
processes. Samples will be collected from burned and unburned locations within a
wildfire-impacted watershed. Organic nitrogen characterization (i.e., amino acid
and NMR analysis) will be used to elucidate which organic nitrogen
characteristics are associated with increased haloacetonitriles and
haloacetamide formation. In addition to high quality publications, the students
involved in this research will have the opportunity to operate the analytical
equipment required to produce the needed data during the new Laboratory class
that will be designed as an outcome of this project. This will enhance the
quality of the teaching and training derived from this proposal. Additionally,
the PIs committed to promote the dissemination of these research results through
several organizations, such as the Front Range Drinking Water Consortium and the
Water Research Foundation.