* 1512755
* UNS:Integrating nanoparticle design and in vivo testing to proactively reduce environmental impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* James Hutchison, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Title: Integrating nanoparticle design and in vivo testing to proactively reduce
environmental impacts PI: Tanguay, Robert L. and Hutchison, James E.
Institution: Oregon State University and the University of Oregon

There has been progress in recent years in developing basic design principles
for safer nanoparticles (NPs). Although we now understand that material
composition plays an important role in governing the toxicity of some materials,
there is increased awareness that surface properties are particularly important
when considering biocompatibility. It remains unclear how the identity of the
functional groups and ligand density influence toxicity. This project will
systematically explore the role of adjusting the composition, diversity and
density of ligand shells in governing biocompatibility. The impact of the
proposed work will be many fold. First, the products of the research will enable
researchers to employ the discovered guidelines for molecular-level design as a
foundation to advance materials design. The precision libraries will serve as
new reference materials for the nanoEHS research community, thereby leveraging
the activities of basic and applied researchers across disciplines. Society will
benefit from the reduction in negative consequences of future products on health
and the environment. Finally, the research team will use the integrated nature
of this project to provide undergraduate and graduate students with a dynamic
multidisciplinary educational experience. The co-PIs and students will
communicate not only with colleagues, but also with members of the broader
public. The latter goal will be achieved via hands-on and online demonstrations
targeting K-12 audiences.

The PIs will develop precision engineered NP libraries that are designed
specifically to define the importance of the NP surface on biocompatibility. To
improve the relevance and sensitivity of biocompatibility measures, they will
use the high throughput multi-dimensional embryonic zebrafish system.
Determining the relationship between avidity and toxicity will inform the use of
the mixtures of ligands likely to appear in next generation applications.