* 1512113
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Non-Membrane, Low Temperature and Low Emission Water Desalination Using Directional Solvent
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Jindal Shah, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 108,748.00

1510826/1512113 &lt;br/&gt;Luo / Shah &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Overview:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water scarcity is among the most serious challenges faced
by the world today. Desalination has emerged as a potential solution. This
collaborative project will examine a novel water desalination technology which
does not use membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current water desalination
technologies are either evaporation-based or membrane-based, and they are costly
and energy intensive, and also contribute to global-warming CO2 emissions. The
proposed research will be driven by the hypothesis that the water solubility in
directional solvents can be tuned by varying their molecular structures. Monte
Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations will be performed to calculate the
phase-equilibria of directional solvents with salt and water as a function of
temperature. The knowledge of interactions, obtained from the simulations,
between the functional groups and water will form the basis of a correlation
between the chemical structure and directionality of water and salt solubilities
in the solvent, enabling rational design of high-performance directional
solvents. According to the extracted trend, high throughput experimental
screening of promising directional solvents will be performed to identify highly
efficient directional solvents. Based on the directional solvents, a lab-scale
continuous desalination system will be designed and demonstrated.