* 1512172
* UNS: Earth Abundant Membrane Reactors for Efficient Chemical Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2019
* J. Douglas Way, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2019
* USD 335,614.00

Wolden, 1512172

Membrane reactors integrate reaction and separation into a single unit operation
where product is removed continuously, driving the reaction to completion while
simultaneously performing product purification. The critical element in such
reactors is the membrane, which is often a metal impregnated with a catalyst.
Such membrane reactors, comprised of dense metal membranes that are selective to
hydrogen, have great potential in numerous applications such as steam reforming
of natural gas to produce hydrogen (which can then be used in alternate energy
systems such as fuel cells). Palladium (Pd) and its alloys are the most widely
used hydrogen membrane materials due to their ability to both dissociate
hydrogen and because they have a high permeability to hydrogen across a wide
range of temperatures. But, such membranes are too costly for practical
applications. This project is aimed at finding replacement membrane materials
that are cheaper yet usable in such processes. Earth abundant body centered
cubic (BCC) metals such as Niobium (Nb), Tantalum (Ta), and Vanadium (V) and
related alloys have the necessary hydrogen permeability but they lack the
catalytic activity of Pd. The PIs plan to use nanostructured transition metal
carbide thin films as effective and stable catalyst layers to enable the use of
BCC membrane reactors in various practical chemical processes. They plan to test
their reactor for both ammonia (NH3) decomposition and synthesis.

Intellectual Merit In this project the PIs will develop BCC metal membranes for
use in membrane reactors. In dense metal membranes hydrogen is dissociated into
atomic hydrogen, and they will exploit the untapped chemical potential of this
reagent to enable hydrogenation chemistries such as ammonia synthesis, which
normally requires very high pressure. Asymmetric membranes, BCC metal foils with
different catalyst layers, applied to the feed and permeate side, will be used.
First, asymmetric structures will be used to discern and quantify the steps that
control H2 permeation through BCC composite membranes. A critical materials
challenge with the BCC metals is their proclivity to lose ductility when the
hydrogen solubility exceeds a critical value. Asymmetric design concepts will be
employed to gate the H2 flux at the high pressure feed side and quickly release
it from the permeate surface. Such designs will be engineered to maximize
permeance without sacrificing mechanical integrity. Lastly, asymmetric membranes
with unique catalysts designed for reactant decomposition and product formation
will be used to maximize the potential of membrane reactors for chemical
synthesis.

Broader Impacts Membrane reactors have potential to impact a range of
industrially important processes from steam reforming to various
de/hydrogenation chemistries. Steam reforming of methane can be driven to
completion in a membrane reactor while simultaneously reducing operating
temperatures from 900 to 500 Â°C, which could save >2 x 10^14 BTU/year over
conventional processing in the US alone. The PIs will integrate an experimental
module based on membrane reactor decomposition of NH3 into the senior transport
and reactor engineering curricula. They plan to engage undergraduate researchers
in this research. In addition two annual events will be held in partnership with
the Boys and Girls Clubs of Metro Denver. These events will bring together low-
income K - 12 students and undergraduates to engage in hands-on science
activities with the themes of engineering and chemistry.