* 1512564
* UNS: GARDE: Research to Quantify the Health and Development of Children with Disabilities Around the Clock
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Steven Warren, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2019
* USD 399,962.00

1512564(Warren)

Autism is the fastest growing developmental disability in the U.S., with a
prevalence rate now estimated to be 1 in 68 individuals. Little is understood
about the sleep habits of children with severe autism (who often exhibit
additional disabilities) and how their sleep quality correlates with daytime
well-being and development. Sensible tools to track sleep dynamics in these
children are lacking, and they do not generally have the cognitive and/or
physical means to describe the restfulness and duration of a night's sleep.
Multi-parameter polysomnographs (PSGs) are typically used to evaluate sleep
quality in adults and children, but PSG intrusiveness due to the required
collection of sensors and wires can affect the ability of even neurotypical
subjects to sleep. Such tools are intolerable for severely autistic children and
therefore do not lend these systems well to either short- or long-term sleep
studies that would purport to correlate sleep quality with daytime well-being
and development in this population. Further, mechanisms to provide daytime
information on the well-being of children with severe disabilities are generally
labor-intensive, limiting the amount of data available for night/day correlation
studies. The overall goal of this collaboration between Kansas State University
(Manhattan, KS) and Heartspring (Wichita, KS) is to develop and evaluate a
toolset to track the well-being of children with disabilities around the clock,
offering clinicians and caregivers better means to assess and therefore
accelerate the development of these children during their early years. The
centerpiece of this toolset will be a sensor-laden bed that will gather multiple
types of nighttime physiological and environmental data from a child without
their knowledge. These data will then be aggregated into sleep-quality metrics
that can be compared against daytime well-being and development parameters
consistent with the child's individualized education plan. Anyone that works
with children with disabilities will affirm that a positive change in their life
leads to emotional, physical, and financial relief for their extended families
and caregivers. This effort offers the potential for accelerated development
during a time in a severely disabled child's life when the resulting life-long
benefits for their family and community are the greatest in terms of quality of
life and cost savings. Further, unobtrusive nighttime and daytime monitoring
tools offer benefits for other populations, including neurotypical children and
children/adults suffering from sleep apnea and other nighttime conditions. Such
tools can be seen as "outcomes force multipliers" that address fundamental
problems facing special education and, by extension, the disability services
community by reducing the disproportionate cost of special education, increasing
the base of resources available to meet the growing need, and providing
solutions of scale that can be implemented and deployed quickly.

The overall goal of this collaboration between Kansas State University
(Manhattan, KS) and Heartspring (Wichita, KS) is to develop and evaluate a
toolset to track the well-being of children with disabilities around the clock.
Four research aims support this goal, which include elucidate the sleep habits
of severely disabled children given data acquired from a new unobtrusive sensor
suite and develop sleep-quality metrics based upon these data; acquire
parameters to assess child daytime health/development using various modalities;
develop statistical models linking sleep quality with daytime performance
parameters to identify important relationships between sleep quality, learning,
and development in severely disabled children; and share lessons learned with
the broader disability research and services community. The nighttime monitoring
system will be an unobtrusive, multi-parameter bed sensor suite populated with
sensing devices that provide parameters such as heart rate, respiration rate,
surface body temperature, movement, in/out of bed activity, seizure occurrence,
sound, bedwetting frequency/timing, and ambient noise, temperature, humidity,
pressure, and light levels. This parameter set can then be correlated with
daytime biomedical, behavioral, and educational-performance metrics indicative
of child well-being and development consistent with outcomes-based therapies
employed by clinicians and paraeducators that work with these children. NSF
GARDE funding will support hardware/software development, efficacy assessments
involving Heartspring children, randomized nighttime studies with correlative
daytime analyses, and salary support for KSU and Heartspring staff and students.
These data-gathering mechanisms offer the potential for transformative
improvements in terms of (a) quantifying the health and development of severely
disabled children, many of whom are nonverbal, (b) understanding sleep quality
as it relates to child well-being and development, (c) data that can inform and
accelerate individualized education plan updates and positive changes in therapy
and medication, (d) reduced burden of care, and (e) improved quality of life for
severely disabled children and their care providers.