* 1512059
* UNS: Computational Design of Generic Underwater Adhesives based on Conjugating DOPA-Containing Polymers and Amyloid-Forming Peptides
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 285,000.00

#1512058 Hall, Carol K.

Generic adhesives capable of sticking to surfaces in water or in high moisture
conditions are in demand for applications ranging from marine coatings to
medical devices to underwater sensors. One way to develop such adhesives is to
learn from nature. Analysis of the adhesive substances employed by mussels,
barnacles, algae and yeasts reveals two common factors that seem to contribute
to their ability to attach to a wide range of surfaces in water: 3,
4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) and amyloid-forming peptides. A new class of
generic underwater adhesives will be developed by combining synthetic DOPA-
containing polymers and amyloid-forming peptides. Synthetic materials will be
deployed, instead of the naturally-occurring proteins favored by other
investigators, because they should be easier to tailor and to produce in large
scale. A computationally-driven program of research will be conducted to better
the understanding of how the peptide sequences and DOPA-containing polymers in a
peptide-polymer conjugate can be engineered to function synergistically, thereby
providing superior adhesion to surfaces in water.

Atomistic and coarse-grained molecular simulations will be used to develop a set
of molecular-level principles that can guide the design of DOPA-peptide
conjugates. Such materials, which are inspired by naturally-occurring materials
including mussels and barnacles, are expected to form the basis of a new
generation of underwater adhesives capable of binding to a wide range of
surfaces. Five short peptide sequences taken from the amyloid forming regions of
the glues employed by yeast cells have been identified as good starting
sequences. Four surfaces will be considered: graphite, graphite coated with OH
groups, gold, and titanium oxide. The specific aims of this project are to: 1)
identify the roles played by each amino-acid residue on naturally-derived
peptides in forming amyloid structure; 2) develop a set of principles for
designing polymer-peptide conjugates such that the peptides can form amyloid
structures without associating with the polymers; and 3) investigate the
behavior of conjugates near four model surfaces to assess their ability to
attach nonspecifically in water. The DOPA-peptide conjugates that show the most
promise will be synthesized by an experimentalist collaborator, and tested to
see if they form amyloid structures and if they adhere strongly to the four
surfaces.

The proposed project could impact research in the areas of interfacial
phenomena, sensing, coating, surface modification and drug delivery where
material adherence to surfaces in water is critical. The computational design
strategy, which draws initial inspiration from natural products and then
iterates back and forth between atomistic and coarse-grained simulations to home
in on promising molecular architectures, could point the way to the systematic
design and discovery of other new materials that are tailored for specific
applications. In addition to training a Ph.D. student, research and education
will be fostered by: (1) using the computational design of the new materials as
the basis for examples developed for the PI's undergraduate chemical engineering
thermodynamics course, (2) creating a power-point presentation describing the
basics of computational materials design and distributing via the web, and (3)
making a video presentation targeted for general audiences that shows how
molecular-level computer simulation can be used to design materials with special
functionality. The PI will continue her considerable, but informal, nationwide
activities to broaden the opportunities for women in STEM fields and will
introduce a brown bag lunch series for women graduate students and postdocs in
her department at NCSU to discuss topics of common interest.