* 1512610
* UNS:  Organophosphates and Phthalates in Sleep Microenvironments: Emission, Transport, and Infants' Exposure
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Richard Corsi, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 350,834.00

1512610&lt;br/&gt;Xu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern indoor environments contain a
vast array of manufactured products, many of which emit toxic contaminants that
can harm children. Of special concern are crib mattresses, as infants spend most
of their time sleeping, with their breathing zone and skin in close proximity
to, or touching, the source, and thus are likely to be exposed to elevated
concentrations of released chemicals, including organophosphates and phthalates.
Although the adverse health effects associated with exposure to these semi-
volatile organic compounds have been extensively demonstrated, accurate
evaluation of infants' exposure and the subsequent health effect remain
hamstrung by a poor understanding of the emission and fate of these semi-
volatile organic compounds in sleep microenvironments. The goal of this research
is to explicitly elucidate the fundamental mechanisms governing emission,
transport, and infants' exposure associated with organophosphates and phthalates
in sleep microenvironments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate the
fundamental mechanisms that govern the release of organophosphates and
phthalates from crib mattresses and incorporate these mechanisms into a new
transport and exposure model. The PI will be the first to develop a general and
rapid method for measuring key parameters that control semi-volatile organic
emissions, which is urgently needed for rapid screening of products for semi-
volatile organic additives that are most harmful to children's health. The PI
will also accurately measure semi-volatile organic gas/particle partitioning
using an innovative direct approach. This research will, for the first time,
connect the mechanistic understanding of emissions to the previously-overlooked
strong sorption by airborne particles, bedding materials, and skin, and to the
subsequent impacts on inhalation and dermal exposures. It will significantly
advance the ability to predict emission, fate and transport, and exposures for a
range of chemicals in sleep microenvironments and other similar
microenvironments (e.g., infants' incubators), which have not been extensively
researched with respect to exposure to toxic chemicals. The specific research
objectives are to: 1) develop a novel, rapid method to characterize the
emissions of organophosphates and phthalates from crib mattresses; 2) determine
the sorptive interactions of the target semi-volatile organic compounds with
particles and surfaces (e.g., bedding and clothing) through systematic
laboratory studies; 3) develop an innovative combined emission, transport, and
exposure model to predict the spatial and temporal distributions of pollutants
in the vicinity of sleeping infants and subsequent exposures; and 4) conduct a
series of controlled tests in a room-sized chamber with a breathing, thermal
manikin of an infant to validate the model and to investigate the influences of
various environmental factors on infants' exposures. The project will benefit
from collaboration with the Children's Environmental Health Institute, with
commitment for co-organizing a symposium that will involve the transfer of the
project findings to a large base of health researchers and practitioners.