* 1512611
* SHF: Medium: Fiat: Correct-by-Construction and Mostly Automated Derivation of Programs with an Interactive Theorem Prover
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Adam Chlipala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2020
* USD 816,016.00

Title: SHF: Medium: Fiat: Correct-by-Construction and Mostly Automated
Derivation of Programs with an Interactive Theorem Prover

To scale to ambitious software-development tasks, programming languages must
provide features for abstraction and modularity. Large advances in programming
productivity have often come via new features of that kind. This project
investigates new program-structuring ideas based fundamentally on machine-
checked mathematical proofs. More specifically, through the design of a
prototype system Fiat within the Coq proof assistant, the project studies how to
derive efficient programs automatically from logical specifications. Programmers
may package new notations and associated styles of automation as libraries, and
a single program may mix notations, automatically benefiting from the
combination of all of their associated automation for deriving efficient
programs. In this way, Fiat makes it possible to split a program into parts for
functionality and performance, with strong guarantees that bugs in the
performance parts can never violate the requirements in the functionality parts.
The intellectual merits are widely applicable new ideas in modular program
structuring, with strong formal guarantees of correctness. The project's broader
significance and importance are based on the potential to improve programmer
productivity dramatically, for software projects in a wide variety of contexts;
and the project also studies how the idea of mostly automated refinement from
specifications can be integrated into introductory programming and discrete-math
classes, to drive home the value of logical notation in programming.

The primary case-study domain in the project is practical Internet servers, such
as for domain-name lookup or delivery of electronic mail. The goal is to develop
Fiat versions of these key services, deriving efficient executable code
automatically. Past work on deriving data layers from specifications in the
style of SQL is being extended, in addition to exploration of other domains for
specification and automated derivation, such as synthesis of parsers from
grammars, to use for the protocols that servers speak, the configuration files
that they read, etc. Beyond studying how such new libraries may be constructed
and composed, the project also investigates how to push the synthesis process to
lower abstraction levels than in our prototype implementation, which generates
functional programs. The improved Fiat system will derive assembly programs,
enabling choice of more effective optimizations thanks to more direct control of
machine resources, integrating with the Bedrock Coq library for verified
multilanguage programming.