* 1512551
* SusChEM: Solar Energy Storage via Photoredox Chemistry at Single Crystal and Porous Semiconductor Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Bruce Parkinson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Bruce A. Parkinson Proposal Number: 1512551

The production of electricity by solar energy is inherently an intermittent
process because solar cells do not generate electricity at night. Therefore, at
some point, grid-scale energy storage systems will be needed to collect some of
the solar energy and convert it to a form that can be converted back to
electricity at night. One way is to use a portion of the electricity generated
by solar cells to re-charge batteries, which are discharged at night. This
project will develop and study the performance a novel solar-driven storage
device that will convert the sun?s photons directly to electrochemical energy.
This battery uses a flowing electrolyte which stores light energy in the form of
electrochemical energy using one type of electrode during the day, and then
reverses the flow to regenerate the electrolyte and generate electricity using a
different type of electrode at night. By this process, the need for extra solar
cells to generate electricity for re-charging the batteries, as well as the
battery itself, is eliminated. As part of the education and outreach activities
of this project, the principal investigator will expand the successful Solar
Hydrogen Activity Research Kit (SHARK) program, where undergraduates and high
school students are recruited to help discover new electrode materials that
could be useful for the light-driven electrolysis of water to hydrogen gas or
for use in the device described above.

This project describes a new concept to collect and store solar energy as
electrochemical energy in a flow battery configuration ? the solar driven redox
flow battery. The goal of this proposed research is to characterize the behavior
of semiconductor/redox electrolyte interfaces in the dark and under illumination
to optimize photo-driven redox reactions. Single crystal n- and p-type
semiconductor electrodes such as Si, GaAs, GaP and InP will be investigated for
their ability to photo-oxidize highly oxidizing (n-type) or photo-reduce highly
reducing (p-type) redox species. The use of n- and p-type semiconductors in a
tandem configuration enables light energy to be stored as electrochemical
potential energy that can be recovered by operating the same electrodes under
accumulation with the complementary redox couple. These electrode materials are
usually unstable when illuminated in aqueous solution, and so atomic layer
deposition (ALD) will be used to coat their surface with thin layers of titanium
dioxide. The current voltage behavior of these stabilized semiconductors will be
measured using both cyclic voltammetry and hydrodynamic methods in the dark and
under illumination and with a series of redox electrolytes. These experiments
will elucidate the electron transfer kinetics as well as light flux and mass
transport limitations of photocurrent generation. The behavior of the dark
electrode reactions with redox couples will also be investigated. The light and
dark behavior will then be compared to the physical models developed for these
processes.