* 1512796
* GOALI: Nanoparticle Luminescence Thermometry with 10 nm Resolution for Challenging Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Chris Dames, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2019
* USD 319,974.00

The principal investigator proposes to solve an issue that arises from a
critical need in the success of the next-generation hard drive. The issue
involves a technique for measuring temperature at nano-scales on the hard drive,
where failure occurs, that has so far not been done. The research partnership
involves researchers from industry (Seagate Corporation), University of
California - Berkeley's Mechanical Engineering Department and Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory. Engagement with the Students for Environmental Energy
Development (SEED) group at UC-Berkeley and local high schools will be conducted
using the existing program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI project proposes to
use photoluminescence nanoparticles to measure temperature at around 10 nm
spatial resolutions. Such a high spatial resolution is inspired by the
industry's (Seagate) need in a new generation hard drive technology called HAMR
(heat-assisted magnetic recording) where the device failure has to do with
temperature at nanoscale regions. Preliminary results have demonstrated the
potential of the photoluminescence technique for temperature measurement. The
spectral shape and lifetime of photoluminescence emission will be correlated as
a function of local temperature. Experiments along with modeling will be used to
understand HAMR being developed by Seagate, the industrial partner. Although
targeting Seagate's HAMR application, these capabilities would be broadly
applicable to all sorts of thermal measurement challenges at the nanoscale,
including thermal characterization inside a single cell, and of other commercial
nanoscale devices such as transistors, memory, or optoelectronics.