* 1512839
* CI-NEW: Collaborative Research: DialPort: Enabling Spoken Dialog Research with Real Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Traum, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,999.00

New interest in spoken dialog research has recently been generated by the advent
of SIRI(TM). This application ignited the imagination of many who have begun to
believe that speaking to automatic assistants is possible and useful. Soon
everyone will need to use speech to communicate with technology, such as smart
watches, which can't use a keyboard. Using speech will also give wider access to
technology, for example to the elderly and the disabled. It will serve as an
economic motivator, spurring new technology and technology-based products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of the Dialog Portal project and community
infrrastructure, DialPort, is that it will serve the spoken dialog community by
being a central portal that will attract real users to existing dialog systems
while also sparking the creation of new streams of spoken dialog data. It will
distribute data and software and educate researchers about both, thus making it
easier for new colleagues to access this domain. DialPort will link high school
and undergraduate students (who have lived with the technology all of their
lives, and can imagine how they would like to talk to technology), with
technology experts who can help them implement their ideas. DialPort will enable
the spoken dialog community to access an unprecedented amount of speech data,
which is essential in creating successful dialog systems, as it is used to
retrain them (adding data makes the statistical representations more precise)
and to assess them (comparing systems helps find which novel techniques improve
the systems) and to create new ones. In this manner, the contribution of
DialPort will lead to both higher quality research and to widespread use of
speech technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the DialPort
project and community infrastructure is providing real users' speech in many
different domains that will generate data and research platforms for the
community. As a central portal it will attract the real users to spoken dialog
systems that are linked to it. DialPort will relate high school and
undergraduate students' ideas for novel, transformational applications of speech
technology with the current spoken dialog community's technology. The resulting
real applications will provide the streams of data from real users who are
interested in repeatedly using an application because it helps them in some way
(solving some task, or entertaining them). This will allow researchers to make
their systems more robust. DialPort will also provide access to spoken dialog
software and data and educate members of the community in their
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unsolved basic research issues in spoken dialog
include: signal processing in noise, recognition of groups of "difficult" users
(like the elderly and non-native speakers), management of complex dialogs (i.e.
in meetings and with agents), and the automatic use of meta-linguistic
information such as prosody. DialPort will spark new applications that can be
used as research platforms where these and other issues can be explored. One
such platform has been provided in the past for bus information in Pittsburgh.
Since then, research has evolved, necessitating real dialog systems in more
challenging areas and on more devices. One site cannot create and run all of
them. DialPort will help the community to create these systems, insuring that
they meet their needs and obtaining consensus on a unified infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DialPort project includes: (1) providing a central
portal where real users can go to be connected to many spoken dialog systems,
thus generating large amounts of real user speech; (2) conducting the yearly
REAL Challenge to spark ideas for ways that speech will be used in the future,
addressing high school and undergraduate students and educating them about
spoken dialog systems; and (3) gathering tools that the community can use,
ensuring their documentation and teaching researchers about their use.