* 1512544
* UNS:  Fractionation, purification, and analysis of gases in microbubbles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Amar Basu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2021
* USD 300,293.00

1512544&lt;br/&gt;Basu&lt;br/&gt;Wayne State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical separation, fractionation, and assay
comprise an integral analytical workflow in life sciences research. When
executing such workflows with liquid samples, conventional fraction collection
tools such as pipettors, test tubes, and trays can be used. With gases, however,
these basic operations are more challenging since gases are not easily
contained. The objective of this proposal is to create a platform technology
which can separate gases using gas chromatography (GC), and then and encapsulate
them into bubbles so that they can be analyzed or manipulated offline. If
successful, the proposed multiphase system would enable new workflows for gas
purification and analysis analogous to their liquid counterparts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the perspective of separation science, the
encapsulation technique can encapsulate thousands of gas fractions at time
resolution of &lt;10ms and fraction volumes &lt;1nL, roughly 1000X better than
commercial preparatory-GC systems, which rely on cryogenic traps. This can can
have transformative impact on prep-GC and multidimensional GC, where the
resolution and scalability of fraction collection is critical. This platform
would also provide a way to screen the reactivity of gas fractions by using
chemical reagent assays which operate on samples in the bubble format. The
proposed work will explore fundamental issues, including the containment of
gases in a carrier fluid, and methods to analyze encapsulated gasses. From a
broader perspective, this proposed system may substantially impact
multidimensional gas analysis, a common workflow in environmental monitoring,
homeland security, and food analysis. The outreach plan will deploy low-cost
"jello" microfluidic kits at the Michigan Science center (MSC), with the goal of
increasing interest in STEM-related disciplines in the Detroit area. Scientific
knowledge from the proposed research will be integrated into the PI's graduate
level BioMEMS and microfluidics course.