* 1512250
* SusChEM:Characterization of oxidative stress response to improve microalgae-based biofuel production in wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Annaliese Franz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,813.00

PI: Annaliese Franz&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1512250&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microalgae are single-celled photosynthetic
organisms that grow on atmospheric carbon dioxide, sunlight, and dissolved
mineral nutrients. Under the proper conditions, microalgae also produce fatty
acids stored as lipids, which can be readily converted to biofuel such as
biodiesel. To reduce the costs of algal biofuel production processes and at the
same time improve sustainable reuse of water, algae can be grown on dissolved
mineral nutrients in various types of waste water. However, the use of waste
water as nutrient source may put stress on the growth and metabolism of the
organism. This project will study the possible link between oxidative stress and
lipid production in industrially-relevant strains of microalgae using techniques
of molecular biology. The outcomes of the research may suggest ways to minimally
treat waste water to make it more amenable for use in algal biofuel production.
The educational aspects of this project focus on mentoring middle school girls
to stimulate their interest in science and engineering using bioenergy modules
developed for this purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
research is to characterize oxidative stress response and regulation of gene
expression in industrially-relevant microalgae strains in order to identify
improved conditions for coupling biofuel production with wastewater remediation.
The overall approach is to correlate relevant phenotypes with metabolomic and
transcriptomic studies for lipid producing strains of microalgae to understand
global metabolism and lipid pathway changes under conditions that promote
oxidative stress response, including kinetic and concentration effects of
treated cultures with a primary focus on algae cultivation in wastewater. High
lipid producing strains (P. tricornutum, C. sorokiniana and N. salina) will be
selected for study based on their industrial and scientific relevance as well as
availability of genomic information. The research plan has three objectives. The
first objective is to characterize oxidative stress response and regulation of
gene expression in lipid producing microalgae, including kinetic and
concentration effects for two scenarios - peroxide-induced lipid accumulation
and cultivation on dairy wastewater. The second objective is to evaluate
application of antioxidants to improve oxidative stress tolerance in high-oil-
producing microalgae. Finally, the third objective is to evaluate effect of
peroxide- and antioxidant treatment as variables to improve biomass and lipid
production of microalgae cultured in wastewater. The education and outreach
activities of this project focus on bioenergy topics, and are designed to
broaden participation of women and under-represented students in STEM through
existing programs at the University of California at Davis, particularly for
middle school girls. A bioenergy module focusing on renewable energy and
environmental sustainability will be developed to help deliver these education
and outreach programs.