* 1512957
* Innovative Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics Strategy Project
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Willie Rockward, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,198,404.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.

The Innovative Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics Strategies Project
of Morehouse College is designed to provide underrepresented minority students
with science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) challenging
technological learning experiences that will increase the students' exposure to
innovation and creativity in the STEM disciplines. The project will explore the
influence of these challenging opportunities on student's interest by 1)
Increasing student awareness and knowledge of educational opportunities and
careers in STEM disciplines; 2) Increasing student knowledge, skills and
practices in STEM application; and 3) Increasing participation of
underrepresented populations in STEM careers. This project will address these
potential educational needs for minority students at a critical stage of their
educational development by having students begin the program in grades 7-9 and
supporting their development for a three (3) year period. The students will be
engaged in a long-term (3 year) STEM technology program that will include a
4-week summer program, hands-on field experience, laboratory/project-based
entrepreneurship tasks and mentorship, and parental involvement.

A mixed-methods approach to project evaluation will be applied using both
quantitative and qualitative measures design for a panel of formative and
summative assessment instruments including project implementation, content
knowledge, process knowledge, and attitudes. Whenever feasible, baseline date
will be included. A database will be developed for milestones including
dissemination efforts. Evaluation of the program will include both descriptive
statistics and outcome analysis. The research questions are: (1) What sets of
experiences effectively and efficiently support student competency, motivation,
and persistence for productive participation in the STEM and STEM cognate
workforce in the future? (2) What roles might industry workforce members play in
motivating students to become aware of, interested in, and prepared for careers
in STEM and STEM cognate workforce? (3) What strategies might parents,
caregivers, and mentors adopt in the modern digital and computer age that
develop student understanding of and appreciation for the scientific, technical,
mathematical, and engineering basis of technological developments? and (4) Given
the shifting demographics reflected in our current classrooms and in our
country, what are effective and productive ways to ensure broadening
participation by engaging diverse underrepresented populations in STEM programs
and careers?