* 1512517
* UNS: Interfacial Behavior and Thermodynamics of Block Copolymer Directed Self-Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Clifford Henderson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 348,882.00

1512517 - Henderson

A special form of polymer that can be tailored to have very unique properties is
commonly referred to as a block copolymer. Block copolymers are made by simply
joining two different types of polymer chains together. Since different types of
polymers do not like to mix, much like oil and water separate, the two different
polymer chains or blocks also try to separate from one another but can only move
apart at distances comparable to the length scale of the polymer molecules since
they are bonded together. This naturally gives rise to materials possessing
structure and order at nanometer length scales. These phase separated and
ordered block copolymers can have very unique properties because of this micro-
and nanostructure. One interesting and important application for such ordered
block copolymers is as templates for making the nanometer scale features used to
build microchips. This project will develop the fundamental knowledge about the
self-assembly process that occurs in such block copolymers to allow materials
and processes to be designed for manufacturing next generation microchips and
other ordered nanostructured materials.

The use of block copolymer micro-phase separation to form polymer thin films
with controlled nanoscale morphologies offers potential solutions to problems in
diverse fields, including semiconductor manufacturing, fuel cells and batteries,
and solar energy. Directed self-assembly (DSA) methods offer the possibility to
use the interaction of a block copolymer thin film with heterogenous patterned
interfaces to guide assembly of the block copolymer microphases into desired
orientations with long range order. While most work to date has focused on
"symmetric" block copolymers with similar block properties (e.g. PS-b-PMMA),
block copolymers that possess large differences in their cohesive energy
differences (i.e. high polymer Flory-Huggins chi values) are of interest to
achieve micro-phase separated morphologies with smaller feature sizes. Such
"asymmetric" block copolymers and their phase behavior are not yet well
understood. In this project, a new meso-scale molecular dynamics model that can
accurately reproduce the properties and behavior of realistic block copolymers
possessing asymmetric block interactions will be used to understand the bulk and
thin film behavior of such materials, particularly with respect to DSA
applications. This modeling work will be validated by comparison of model
results with experimental data from high chi block copolymer thin film DSA
systems. The intellectual merits of the proposed work can broadly be defined as:
(1) establishment of fast and efficient tools for predicting behavior of block
copolymer films, (2) elucidation of the impact of factors such as polymer
composition and block energetics, interface composition and structure, and film
thickness on the morphology and properties of microphase separated block
copolymer thin films.

The broader societal impacts of this activity include: (1) forming the
foundation of methods and data that enable general design of block copolymer
thin film materials for a range of fields from water separation to organic
photovoltaics, (2) advancing the development of DSA patterning methods for
fabrication of next generation integrated circuits, (3) developing computational
material modeling tools for block copolymers, (4) enhancing under-represented
minority education in science and engineering at the undergraduate and graduate
level, (5) training of K-12 science teachers, and (6) STEM education K-12
students through the Cub Scout and Boy Scout NOVA program.