* 1512946
* Transcription and Translation Dynamics in Live Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* James Weisshaar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

This project uses state-of-the-art live cell microscopy to unravel fundamental
mechanisms that control how quickly bacterial cells grow. The resulting better
understanding of the inner workings of bacterial cells not only advances
important basic knowledge but may also eventually lead to novel therapies for
bacterial infections. Graduate students engaged in this interdisciplinary work
will learn bacterial genetics and biochemistry and develop strong quantitative
skills in biophysical measurement and data analysis.

The transfer of genomic information from DNA to protein occurs via an mRNA
intermediate. In bacterial cells, efficient cell growth requires close coupling
of the processes of RNA synthesis (transcription) and protein synthesis
(translation). However, the mechanisms that control how transcription and
translation are coordinated in time and space are not clear. Recently developed
fluorescence microscopy methods have made it possible to track the molecules
responsible for transcription (RNA polymerase) and translation (ribosome) in
live Escherichia coli cells. This research will take advantage of this new
technology to determine how genes, RNA polymerase molecules, and ribosomes are
distributed within the cytoplasm and how they move over time, with spatial
precision of about 30 nanometers and time resolution of about 10 milliseconds.
The data will be used to generate new biophysical and biochemical models of how
transcription and translation are synchronized to facilitate rapid bacterial
growth. Moreover, the results are anticipated to provide generalizable insights
into how three-dimensional spatial and temporal organization can optimize
cellular outputs from distinct biochemical processes.