* 1512932
* RAPID: Modeling Ebola Spread and Developing Decision Support System Using Big Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Borko Furht, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

This project aims to help address urgent public health problems (specifically
the spread of the Ebola virus) of national and global significance by advancing
the state of the art in computer science, big data analytics, data visualization
techniques, and decision support systems. Specifically, the effort, developing
computational models to predict the spread of Ebola utilizing both 'forward
simulation' from a given patient and the propagation of the infection into the
community and backwards, aims to trace a number of the verified infections to
patient 'zero.' The work utilizes big data analytic techniques, data about
underlying personal relationships, health center locations, and the known
mechanisms for the spread of the Ebola virus.

The project connects directly to the Florida International University (FIU)?s
TerraFly system, a web-enabled system designed to aid in the visualization of
spatial and remotely sensed data. The system allows users to ?fly? with fine
resolution over the surface of the earth to explore various kinds of data (e.g.,
local information, street maps, aerial photography, satellite imagery, etc.).
The Ebola spread patterns are then fed into a Decision Support System (DDS).
These inputs also consist of information about social groups or individual
persons. Based on spread patterns, the DSS will then calculate probabilities for
a social group or a given person to get infected with Ebola. The system will be
able to present data mashups to operators responding to hotline calls and field
workers encountering patients and deciding about triage. The data will also be
presented in report form to responsible government agencies. This time-sensitive
project necessitates prompt collection and analysis of the spread of the Ebola
virus in order to enable the development of the correct models.