* 1512126
* SusChEM: Electrocatalytic Hydrogenation of Biorenewable Feedstock to Fuels and Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Wenzhen Li, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Jean-Philippe Tessonnier Proposal Number: 1512126

Plant biomass represents an abundant, cheap, and renewable feedstock for the
production of liquid transportation fuels and chemicals. The highly selective
chemical conversion of biomass to specific biofuels and chemicals requires
catalysts. However, to be cost-effective and truly sustainable, biomass
conversion processes that use catalysts based on materials abundant in the
Earths crust must be developed. Furthermore, if these new catalysts can be used
within an electrochemical process, the combined electrocatalytic process offers
a whole new route to selectively tailor the conversion of biomass into fuels and
useful chemicals, particularly through a process called hydrogenation. This
project will develop a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms involved in
these reactions to rationally design more efficient and selective biomass
conversion processes. Educational activities offered by the project focus on the
development of a series of short videos on renewables and nanotechnology that
primarily targets middle and high school teachers, as they are in a unique
position to generate excitement and curiosity for science in a large body of
students.

The goal of this research is to explore new electrocatalysts and
electrocatalytic pathways to hydrogenate biorenewable molecules into biofuels
and chemicals in aqueous phase reaction medium at ambient temperatures.
Bimetallic catalysts based on non-noble metals will be rationally designed to
suppress the hydrogen evolution reaction on nanostructured carbon electrodes in
order to increase hydrogen availability on the catalyst surface. The proposed
research will seek to gain fundamental understanding of the electrocatalytic
hydrogenation of C=C and C=O bonds in various compounds derived from
biorenewable sources, particularly levulinic and muconic acid, in water under
ambient conditions. This information will be then used to rationally design
electrocatalysts with improved activity and selectivity towards target products
in scalable electrolysis reactors. The interdisciplinary nature of this research
will provide students at the graduate and undergraduate levels with training in
electrochemical engineering, catalytic reactions, biorenewables, and biofuels.
Outreach activities involve the professional development of K-12 teachers and
the translation of their research experience into their curricula and
classrooms, which will involve the development of short videos on broad
challenges in energy, climate change, renewables, and nanotechnology.