* 1512667
* GOALI: Balancing flocs and granules for activated sludge process intensification: Stoke's vs Fick's Laws
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Belinda Sturm, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 330,061.00

1512667&lt;br/&gt;Sturm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Municipal wastewater treatment
plants are under increasing pressure to meet low discharge limits for nitrogen
and phosphorus, while aging infrastructure and changing precipitation patterns
causes a wet weather burden. A new process, referred to as granular sludge
applications, offers a solution to these challenges since slow-growing microbial
populations capable of nutrient removal are maintained in dense particles that
can be retained under high loading and flow conditions. In the proposed
research, settling of the particles will be determined for an optimum granule
diameter and density will be investigated and criteria to select for desired
particles will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, granular sludge units
have been pioneered in Europe using column-type sequencing batch reactors that
utilize a fast settling time and continuous washout of biomass in order to
maintain granular sludge, typically resulting in high effluent suspended solids.
This reactor geometry and dependence on internal settling selection limits the
adoption of granular technology by existing wastewater treatment plants, which
have a tremendous infrastructure already built that should be utilized as plants
expand. This proposal is framing sludge particle formation and selection in
terms of balancing Fick?s and Stoke?s Law. The PIs hypothesize that low-strength
municipal wastewater can supply a minimum organic surface loading of readily-
biodegradable substrate required for extracellular polymeric substances and
granule formation, as well as the selection of phosphorus accumulating
organisms, when a fermentation pretreatment is performed. While current research
on granular formation focuses on selecting granular sludge and out-selecting
flocs, the PIs hypothesize that: 1) balancing the two sludge structures will
provide the maximum reactor performance, and 2) the application of external
settling selectors to preferentially retain good settling biomass and PAOs will
alleviate the high effluent suspended solids burden typical of column-type
granular reactors, and stabilize biological phosphorus removal. The research has
the potential to transform the US water sector by developing approaches for
granular sludge within existing infrastructure. The proposed project will center
on promoting industry-utility-university partnerships to the wastewater
profession. DC Water and Hampton Roads Sanitation District have been early
adopters of granular sludge technology within the United States, having
performed anammox granule pilot research for the past five years at their
wastewater treatment plants. The Co-PIs will develop a Water Environment
Federation workshop that promotes utility-university partnerships, highlighting
how these hasten new technology adoption.