* 1512893
* Collaborative Research:  Generalized Fiducial Inference for Massive Data and High Dimensional Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jan Hannig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

R. A. Fisher, the father of modern statistics, proposed the idea of Fiducial
Inference in the 1930s. While his proposal led to some interesting methods for
quantifying uncertainty, other prominent statisticians of the time did not
accept Fisher's approach because it went against the ideas of statistical
inference of the time. Beginning around the year 2000, the PIs and collaborators
started to re-investigate the ideas of fiducial inference and discovered that
Fisher's approach, when properly generalized, would open doors to solve many
important and difficult problems of uncertainty quantification. The PIs termed
their generalization of Fisher's ideas as generalized fiducial inference. After
many years of preliminary investigations, the PIs developed a coherent, well
thought out plan for a systematic research program in this area. A large part of
this project develops practical solutions for different modeling problems that
have natural applications in diverse fields. Finance (volatility estimation) and
measurement science (calibration of measurements from different government labs,
for example, US NIST) are two primary examples, while others include gene
expression data, climate problems, recommender systems, and computer
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the success of
generalized fiducial inference (GFI) as introduced by the PIs as a
generalization of Fisher's fiducial argument. The PIs are now working towards
scaling up their GFI methodology to handle big data problems and other difficult
problems that have emerged due to our ability to collect massive amounts of data
rapidly. In particular the PIs plan to conduct research into the following
topics: (i) a thorough investigation of fundamental issues of GFI including
connection with Approximate Bayesian Calculations and higher order asymptotics;
(ii) sparse covariance estimation using GFI in the "large p small n" context;
(iii) development of the idea of Fiducial Selector so that a sparsity of the
fiducial distribution is induced as a natural outcome of a minimization problem;
(iv) uncertainty quantification for the matrix completion problem using GFI, and
(v) applications of GFI to a wide variety of practical problems, such as
volatility estimation in finance and international key comparison experiments in
measurement science.