* 1512505
* UNS:Novel Photocatalysts based on TiO2-Passivated III-V Compounds for CO2 Reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 335,853.00

1512505(Cronin)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will address photocatalytic
reduction of carbon dioxide, which is an exciting reaction system with the
ability to convert an abundant greenhouse gas to combustible hydrocarbon fuels
using sunlight. The proposed study will enable increased efficiency in carbon
dioxide photoreduction through fundamental understanding of the photocatalytic
reaction mechanisms. Direct solar-to-electrical energy conversion has reached
very high efficiencies and low enough costs to compete with combustion of fossil
fuels. As such, large scale implementation of gigawatt solar power plants have
now become a reality. The main problem that remains, however, is that currently
there is no way of storing this large amount of electricity for use during the
night, winter months, or cloudy days, when the sun is not shining.
Photocatalysis provides a way to store the sun's energy in chemical bonds that
can later be released in a carbon neutral
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposal is aimed at developing a
fundamental understanding of photocatalytic processes on novel photocatalysts
based on TiO2-passivated III-V compound semiconductors. Here, photocorrosion of
the III-V compound surfaces is prevented by the TiO2 passivation layer. In order
to establish the extent of photochemical robustness, the study will evaluate the
stability of these photocatalysts over weeks and months for a wide range of TiO2
thicknesses and deposition conditions. The study will also investigate the
reaction intermediates obtained in non-aqueous (and partially-aqueous) ionic
liquid electrolytes (e.g., [EMIM]BF4), which suppress the formation of hydrogen,
reduce the energy of the reaction intermediates, and enable the application of
higher overpotentials. To separate the effects of the semiconductor substrate
from the photoexcited carriers in the metal nanoparticles, experiments will also
be carried out utilizing metal nanoparticles on non-semiconducting substrates,
such as monolayer graphene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators
will also continue and expand educational and outreach activities in the Los
Angeles and southern California area, including workshops for high school
teachers from disadvantaged schools with added participation by their students,
and with the development of photocatalysis related lab kits and demo units that
will be given to the teachers to take back to their classrooms.