* 1512017
* UNS: Performance Optimized Intermediate Band Photovoltaic Devices based on Type-II Quantum Dots
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Igor Kuskovsky, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2020
* USD 310,800.00

PI: Igor L Kuskovsky&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1512017&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells made from thin films of nanometer-sized crystals called
quantum dots are potentially less expensive and more efficient than crystalline
silicon solar cells currently in commercial use. The goal of this project is to
engineer the composition and size of the quantum dots to enhance the collection
of solar energy in the ultraviolet and infrared wavelengths of the solar
spectrum, resulting in potentially high solar energy conversion efficiency and
power output. The quantum dots will be made from mixtures of the elements zinc,
selenium, cadmium, and tellurium as model compounds for scientific study. The
composition of these mixtures will be guided by computer simulations. The
proposed research may lead to the discovery of new quantum mechanical processes
for solar energy conversion. As part of the educational activities associated
with the project, the principal investigator will mentor high school students
through Queens College Summer Science Program on nanotechnology related projects
for science fair competitions in the state of New York.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed research is to develop Type-II
quantum-dot photovoltaic (PV) semiconductor materials that enable the absorption
of light below the band gap of the host material, leading to higher solar energy
conversion efficiency. Toward this end, Type-II quantum dots will be imbedded
into a wide band-gap semiconductor host to make an intermediate band gap
material with photon absorption characteristics mapped to the solar spectrum in
the ultraviolet to infrared range, using material systems and synthesis
approaches that lead to increase of photocurrent without loss of open circuit
voltage. Toward this end, the research plan will integrate material synthesis,
band gap calculations, and PV device simulation to identify ideal intermediate
band gap PV materials. The candidate material systems consist of a
p-ZnSeTe/Zn(Cd)Te-ZnCdSe/n-ZnCdSe structure with embedded Zn(Cd)Te-ZnCdSe type-
II quantum dots. The barriers, latticed matched to the InP substrate, have the
bandgaps of about 2.1 eV, while the quantum dots have a valence band offset of
0.8-1.0 eV. These parameters will be achieved by controlling quantum dot size
and chemical composition. To accomplish effective partial filling of the
intermediate band, a structure with alternatively doped quantum dot layers will
be engineered. Film growth will be designed to avoid formation of a wetting
layer that can lower the open circuit voltage of the final material. This
process will also allow for the deposition of several hundred defect-free
quantum dot layers for improved light absorption. Device-level simulation will
characterize the interplay between device configuration and recombination
processes associated with these intermediate band gap materials. Based on the
research, instructional material will be developed on the topic of fabrication
of Type-II quantum dots for solar cell applications, and will be used in courses
for a professional Master's degree program in Photonics at Queens College, The
City College of New York.