* 1512417
* UNS : Nanoplasmonic interferometric sensor array for dynamic multiplexed functional assay of white blood cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Filbert Bartoli, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1512417 Bartoli, Filbert J.

The researchers will fabricate a new sensor array that will analyze secretory
function of immune cells at a single cell. It is believed by scientists that
such understanding is important in understanding an important part of human
physiology, the immune response. The impact of a successful complete of the
project will be new data on how immune cells behave, and that could potentially
be used in understanding diseases.

This research will develop a sensing platform that possesses the temporal and
spatial resolution required for dynamic, multiplexed sensing of secretory
function of immune cells at the single-cell level. Intellectual Merit:
Nanoplasmonic interferometric sensor arrays will be designed and fabricateed at
predefined locations in a microfluidic platform, with careful alignment of
functionalized surfaces for multiplexed biomolecular detection and for dynamic
multiplexed sensing of single cells. Nanoplasmonic interferometric sensors is
expected to exhibit two orders of magnitude greater spatial resolution than
currentmethods, and two orders of magnitude lower detection limit than nanohole
array plasmonic sensors with comparable spatial resolution. The microfluidic
biosensing platform will be integrated with the interferometric sensor arrays
for monitoring the single cell dynamic secretion pattern of three cytokines
(IL-10, MMP-9 and IFN-gamma) from sixteen LPS-stimulated macrophages. These data
are useful in the understanding of the dynamics and heterogeneity of immune
response. It will advance the fundamental understanding of immunological
function, and potentially impact development of new diagnostics and therapeutics
for infection, inflammation, and autoimmune disease. Broader Impacts:
Integration of research and education is a high priority of the proposed
research, which will provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
student training, giving them access to new entirely instrumentation for
interdisciplinary laboratory experiences. The research will contribute to new
course development and directly impact the undergraduate curriculum. The
investigators will actively participate in ongoing K-12 outreach programs
focused on underrepresented groups.