* 1512740
* UNS: Localized Distributed Power Generation: Economically Robust, Demand-Optimized Placement of Urban Energy Production Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Eric Pardyjak, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2019
* USD 309,909.00

1512740&lt;br/&gt;Pardyjak, Eric &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More American cities are
considering adopting various distributed power generation strategies to minimize
transmission losses, reduce emissions and increase overall energy system
resilience. While substantial knowledge exists on individual generation
technologies, less is understood regarding the place-specific impacts of these
technologies on the urban environment. To address this, this project will
develop an integrated building simulation and optimization framework to study
the interaction between distributed power generation installations and the built
environment in cities. The framework will be used to understand feedback
mechanism associated with changing supply and demand mixtures in real cities.
Specifically, an understanding will be gained on how urban infrastructure and
microclimate affect energy demands and how effectively and economically a simple
local generation system can meet those demands. The focus will be on two
commonly used and technologically mature prime movers, solar photovoltaic arrays
and natural gas turbine-generator sets. Four U.S. cities, representing a range
of climate types and average electricity prices, will be used as case studies to
test the system: Atlanta, Minneapolis, Phoenix, and Salt Lake City.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need to understand the complex
interactions and tradeoffs between demand moderating urban form options, and
distributed power generation opportunities. The hypothesis of this research is
that a site-specific optimal mix of distributed power generation and microscale
building demand reduction strategies exists that can minimize both internal and
external costs resulting in more sustainable cities. Previous work using the
QUIC-EnvSim package has demonstrated the importance of considering the built
environment together with its local, natural environment for calculating energy
and mass fluxes in the urban environment. Similarly, meeting the energy demands
of a building should depend on consideration of the building's environment and
neighboring buildings. EnergyPlus is a well known tool capable of performing
detailed individual building simulations, available from the DOE. In this
project, the two simulation packages will be dynamically coupled in such a way
that building simulations conducted in EnergyPlus will use QUIC-EnvSim
environmental data, and building performance calculations from EnergyPlus will
inform the QUIC simulations. The coupled system will be integrated within a
decision making framework to enable hypothesis testing regarding site-specific
optimal mixes of distributed power generation. These simulation tools will be
developed in a Multi-criteria Decision Making environment designed to aid urban
planners, engineers and architects in designing buildings and surrounding
landscaping in ways that integrate best with distributed generation capacity.
Through workshops, stakeholder's input will be directly integrated into the
project, enabling a more fluid integration with practitioners. The understanding
gained from this project will guide utility companies and public utility
planners in developing plans for expanding power generation in urban areas while
reducing the investment risk associated with additional central generation
capacity. Further, the knowledge gained from this project will help communities
and developers in placing distributed power generation within existing groups of
buildings in a way that provides an economic benefit to the power consumers.
Simulation data results for the cities and scenarios will be made available in
an archival form to researchers, and the modified EnergyPlus-QUIC-EnvSim model
will be released upon request, along with the custom power generation packages
and instructions for developing and incorporating other types of DG. This
project will provide interdisciplinary training in engineering, computer
science, economics, urban planning, and energy policy for graduate students
directly via involvement in the project, as well as more broadly to engineering
students through a new Energy Systems course that will be developed. A summer
outreach program will also be developed to target underrepresented groups.