* 1512695
* UNS:A Multi-Element ICP-MS Approach for Detection of Engineered Nanoparticles in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2020
* James Ranville, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2020
* USD 312,210.00

#1512695 Ranville, James F.

Water, soil, and air all contain ultrafine particles, nanoparticles, that are
far smaller than the width of a human hair. Nature creates nanoparticles
constantly, and we may now be adding to this background of tiny particles by our
development of nanotechnology. We put highly engineered nanoparticles in our
medicines, foods, textiles, sunscreens, and many other products. This project
seeks to use highly-developed analytical methods, along with developments in
sampling of waters and sediments, to detect and quantify the nanoparticles
released from nanotechnology and discriminate them from those created naturally.

This project will utilize recent developments in new nanometrologies to overcome
the challenges (e.g. small size, low concentration, interfering natural NPs
(NNPs)) for quantifying engineered nanoparticles (ENPs) in aquatic systems.
Several new approaches to single-particle ICP-MS (spICP-MS) analysis, which have
the capability to detect multiple elements on a particle-by-particle basis, will
provide new data that will allow significant progress in risk assessment of
nanotechnology. The analytical approach utilizes elemental composition
differences, which exist between ENPs and the interfering NNPs, to provide ENP
identification and quantification. The detection of multiple elements in NNPs
will distinguish them from the simpler (single) element detection events
characteristic of ENPs. The current "background" surface water NP concentrations
(particle number, mass) and NP characteristics (e.g. size distribution,
composition) will be determined. Heteroaggregation experiments, facilitated by
multi-element spICP-MS analysis, will also be performed to establish how it
effects the proposed nanometrologies and will also provide needed information on
ENP fate in surface water. Collectively, this information is currently missing
but critically important for determining the environmental health and safety
effects of ENPs.

The research will be a collaboration with two established groups in research
(USGS) and in public education (RiverWatch). Information acquired is expected to
(i) reduce uncertainty in risk assessment of nanotechnology, (ii) provide the
framework for performing ENP analysis within the USGS sampling network, with the
ultimate goal of incorporating methodology from QUANT-Nano into routine water
quality monitoring, (iii) through summer research experiences at CSM and field-
trips we will train a diverse group of K-12 students and high school science
teachers to "see the invisible" by developing simple experiments that educate
about small particles in water. We will involve these students and educators in
the monitoring of their local water resources, and (iv) educate the public on
the importance of environmental monitoring to facilitate safe development of
nanotechnology,