* 1512545
* The 12th Brauer Group Meeting
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Eric Brussel, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2016
* USD 22,200.00

The 12th Brauer Group Meeting will be held Monday - Friday, June 8 -12, 2015 at
the Pingree Park campus of Colorado State University. This location is
approximately one hour outside of Ft. Collins, CO, USA. At the 12th Brauer group
meeting formal talks will be given by senior level researchers as well as by
young researchers, including graduate students, post-docs and young faculty. The
primary goal of this conference is to bring together established and beginning
researchers to collaborate and share insights on problems of interest involving
the Brauer group in its many forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Brauer
group is an abstract algebraic group studied by mathematicians with a wide
variety of interests. Algebraists often study the Brauer group in its role as a
directory of division algebras over a field, ultimately with the goal of
understanding arithmetic complexity in fields. Open questions relate to
simplicity of description, expression in terms of cyclic classes, and the search
for a reasonable definition of dimension for fields and for algebraic groups
such as PGLn. Algebraic geometers study the Brauer group as an important
invariant of a scheme arising from etale cohomology. This point of view goes
back to the 1960's and Grothendieck, who suggested problems that are still
actively being investigated. Recently deep connections have arisen between
Brauer groups of schemes and stack theory, and these are being used not only to
attack some longstanding open problems, but to serve as inspiration for new
problems and approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more information see the
conference web-site: http://torsor.github.io/brauer/