* 1512224
* UNS:Designing Metal-Exchanged Zeolites with Improved Activity, Selectivity and Stability for Non-Oxidative Methane Upgrade
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Rimer, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 412,152.00

1512224(Rimer)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study addresses a critical area of
catalysis research - upgrading of methane to higher value products - brought on
by the emergence of large quantities of shale gas resources in the United
States, along with both commercial and environmental incentives to avoid gas
flaring and instead convert the gas to higher value, transportable, fuel and
chemical products. Zeolite catalysis represents a potential path to methane
upgrading. The study will focus on the design of new zeolite catalysts with
improved capability, utilizing both experimental methods and theoretical tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work brings together expertise in zeolite
synthesis and characterization, kinetic studies, and density functional theory
calculations to design metal-exchanged zeolites with improved product yield and
durability for non-oxidative methane upgrading via two processes: non-oxidative
coupling and dehydroaromtization. To this end the work will focus on 4 specific
aims related to Lewis acidity (associated with different exchanged metals),
confinement effects, choice of zeolite framework, and a theory-guided screening
protocol for mixed metal zeolites. Given the complexity of the reactions and the
reaction environment within the zeolite structures, the linkage between
synthesis, characterization and theory is especially needed for significant
advances to be made in zeolite-based methane upgrading.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of large quantities of shale gas has
dramatically changed the commercial and environmental landscape for natural gas
resources. Much of the remote gas is presently flared with the production of
large quantities of carbon dioxide - a major contributor to the greenhouse gas
inventory. Direct processes for converting methane to higher value liquid fuel
and chemical products are sorely needed. Yet the catalytic challenge is
daunting. This proposal will address the current gap in technology and will
provide a theoretical basis for future research in the area of zeolite-based
methane conversion processes. To this end, it has potential to significantly
advance our understanding of both the challenges associated with direct
catalytic methane upgrading and the potential utility of zeolite-based catalysis
for overcoming those challenges. The PIs will also conduct education and
outreach programs to students at all levels to raise awareness of the role of
STEM disciplines in addressing energy-related issues.