* 1512214
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Spectral Energy Transfer in Turbulent Flames: From its Characterization to Subgrid Scale Models
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Fokion Egolfopoulos, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 06/30/2018
* USD 177,000.00

1512214 / Egolfopoulos, Fokion N.&lt;br/&gt;1512771 / Blanquart,
Guillaume&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators propose to
investigate how fluid flows (typical in devices such as combustor in engines and
power plants) can be better modelled by using the state-of-art computer
simulation techniques with the help of advanced laser-based measurements. The
potential benefits of the study include better understanding and design of
combustors and higher efficiency and lower pollutant emissions. Both graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved in the research and be prepared as
future researchers and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on
fundamental investigation of the effects of heat release on small scale
turbulent structure and aims to provide insight and mechanisms for developing
physics-based turbulent reacting models, rather than based on ad-hoc
assumptions. The experimental components include novel velocity measurements,
adopting an approach similar to tomography in that the velocity measurements
cover the depth of the field instead of the traditional two-dimensional section
in truly three-dimensional flows. Some insight will also be shed on whether
Kolmogorov's equilibrium assumption for turbulent kinetic energy cascade is
valid and, if not, to what extent and in what manner the assumption should be
modified by the heat-releasing reactions. The measurements span over a broader
dynamic range of scales than is normally addressed using PIV. The proposed
direct numerical simulations (DNS) and analysis are well focused on questions of
the effects of heat release on turbulent energy spectra and energy transfer
between different scales.