* 1512764
* UNS: Engineering Infection-Free Implants for Skeletal Reconstruction
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Huinan Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 405,845.00

More than 50 million people per year worldwide need synthetic implants to help
recover from bone loss or injury resulting from trauma or disease. This project
seeks to develop a new class of materials that, for the first time, has all of
the properties of an ideal implant: it should support body weight and mechanical
stress, suppress infection, enhance bone healing, and ultimately dissolve
harmlessly as bone tissue grows back. While more than 100 synthetic bone grafts
are approved for clinical use, none of them has all of these properties. This
research not only addresses the challenges in treating critical-sized large bone
defects to restore mobility and independent life of patients, but also
significantly reduces the clinical dependence on antibiotics and expensive
growth factors, thus reducing associated side effects (e.g., antibiotic
resistance) and health care costs. The outcome of this research will lead to the
next-generation implants that have the combined advantages of current metallic
and polymeric implants while eliminating their problems. More broadly, this
project will open up new avenues of research in smart resorbable materials,
build the foundation for practical design guidelines, benefit millions of
patients with skeletal injuries or diseases, and attract significant interests
of implant industry for technology transfer. These, in turn, will increase the
competitiveness of U.S. companies in the global medical device market. The
integrated research and education plans will also have broader impacts on
graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college education as well as public awareness
about engineering solutions that benefit health care. In collaboration with the
existing programs at the University of California, Riverside, the Principal
Investigator will attract underrepresented minority students and students with
disabilities, motivate pre-college students through fun biomaterial modules with
ALPHA center and MESA Schools Programs, and educate the public through
collaborative events with Bourns Science and Engineering Day.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to engineer a
novel resorbable antibacterial osteoinductive implant (RAOI) that will bear
weight and resist bending and torsion. Specifically, the RAOI consists of
bioresorbable, biocompatible and mechanically strong magnesium alloys as the
bulk substrate and engineered nanostructures on the surface to prevent infection
and enhance bone regeneration. The novelty of RAOI design lies in its integrated
multifunctionality that can potentially meet ALL criteria for an ideal implant
for the first time. To unlock the full potential of magnesium alloys, we must
address the critical scientific and engineering challenge of controlling their
degradation rate. Our novel approach is to create engineered nanostructures on
the surface of magnesium alloys to achieve the three key functions
simultaneously: (1) modulate degradation rate of bulk magnesium substrates, (2)
reduce adhesion and viability of pathogenic bacteria, and (3) enhance adhesion
and osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells for
faster bone healing.