* 1512379
* UNS: Sustainable Energy-Intensive Manufacturing via Demand Response Process Operations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Baldea, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 268,935.00

Baldea, 1512379&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy generation in the United States and
across the world is shifting, with the contribution of renewable sources
tripling in the past decade. But, renewable sources are inherently variable and
their generation rates fluctuate in time due to factors such as wind speed,
insolation and cloud cover. Grid energy consumption varies as well, typically
reaching a daily peak in the late hours of the afternoon and a minimum in the
early morning. To meet this peak demand, grid operators must turn on additional
generation facilities (referred to as "peaking plants"), which are typically
less efficient and more polluting than base load generators. Balancing
fluctuating energy resources and consumers is one of the central motivators
behind current efforts to develop and deploy the smart grid, which is predicated
on a close integration and synchronization of electricity generation and
electricity use. Demand response (DR) strategies, defined by the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) as "Changes in electric usage by demand-side
resources from their normal consumption patterns [in response to economic
incentives and dynamic pricing structures] at times of high wholesale market
prices or when system reliability is jeopardized" will play a key role in
coordinating energy generation and consumption in the smart grid. DR is expected
to reduce net peak power demand in the US by about 5% (or about 50GW) over the
next ten years, with significant sustainability benefits related to eliminating
the need for new peaking plants and reducing the use of and emissions from
existing ones. This project is aimed at applying DR strategies in an industrial
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Energy-intensive chemical
manufacturing processes (e.g., air separation, ammonia, alumina, chlor-alkali)
account for about 10% of industrial&lt;br/&gt;electricity consumption. They are
ideally suited for DR initiatives due to their turndown capacity and ability to
store energy intensive products. DR requires processes to transition rapidly and
remain efficient across a broad operating envelope, in the presence of
fluctuations in feedstock quality, product demand and ambient conditions. While
the production scheduling problem associated with DR operation has been
extensively addressed, the dynamic and control aspects of implementing the
resulting schedules have received much less attention. Therefore, the present
project aims to i) establish a novel framework for modeling, analyzing and
optimizing the dynamics and control of process systems operating under DR and,
ii) develop a computationally efficient implementation of the proposed
algorithms and validate it on industrially relevant processes (air separation,
combined heat and power). These results will be applicable to the analysis and
mitigation of dynamic bottlenecks in existing facilities, as well as to new
projects. The optimization of the dynamics and control of processes operating
involved in DR will be formulated as a dynamic optimization under uncertainty,
and solved using an approach inspired by nonlinear systems identification
theory. THe approach eschews the traditional use of scenarios to capture
uncertainty. Rather, the fluctuations of the uncertain variables will be
described as pseudo-random multi-level signals with precisely tuned frequency
content, which will be imposed on the process model during the iterations of a
dynamic optimization. In this manner, the relevant dynamic modes of the system
are selectively excited ("identified") and can be optimally modulated to
minimize the expected value of the objective
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:Through an ongoing partnership
with the University of Texas Equal Opportunity in Engineering program, the PI
will recruit undergraduate researchers from underrepresented groups, who will
acquire valuable experience towards future graduate studies. The concepts
developed in the proposal will be incorporated in a course on Mathematical
Modeling of Engineered Systems prepared by the PI. A new outreach initiative to
provide real-life engineering experiences for middle-school student and parent
teams from low-income, minority families is proposed, with the aim of supporting
the students? efforts to become first-generation college graduates.