* 1512598
* UNS:ADVANCING CELL-PRESERVING SEPARATION VIA DETACHABLE CELL ANCHORING &amp; SPIRAL MICRO-MIXING
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Princess Imoukhuede, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2018
* USD 371,845.00

1512598&lt;br/&gt;Imoukhuede&lt;br/&gt;Uof Ill Urbana-
Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell separation is especially necessary to
advance personalized cancer medicine, because tumors contain a diverse mix of
cells with different biomarkers that makes them difficult to treat. If different
tumor cell types can be separated and analyzed the promise of tailoring drugs to
the unique characteristics of a patient's tumor may be analyzed. The proposed
research aims to engineer a fast and gentle cell separation system on a
microscale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to capture cells onto a surface
and release by targeting a secondary moiety within the anchor would enable
gentler, cell separation. As such, the proposed research aims to combine spiral
micro-mixing with cell anchoring and secondary moiety targeted cell release to
enable a cell separation from blood that is also receptor-preserving. The
specific research goals are as follows: (1) identify the optimum conditions for
detachable cell-anchoring; (2) determine the spiral micro-mixer design
parameters enabling detachable cell-anchoring; (3) develop the microfluidic
platform that will separate circulating endothelial cells, immune cells, and
tumor cells from blood samples while preserving surface receptors on isolated
cells. The proposed work may develop innovative technology that advances science
while championing a high-impact, educational mission.