* 1512265
* UNS:Intergrating novel nutrient feeding strategies with computational glycosylation models to improve production of complex biotherapeutics from mammalian factories
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 362,000.00

1512265&lt;br/&gt;Betenbaugh, Michael J.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biopharmaceuticals such as recombinant erythropoietin
(rEPO) have transformed the lives of millions of patients in the US and around
the world by enabling the recipients to address chronic renal failure or other
illnesses. Unfortunately, the costs of providing these drugs are often
prohibitive, limiting the availability and affordability of biotherapeutic
treatments for patients that need them. This project will address both cost and
efficacy challenges by transforming biomanufacturing with novel media additives.
The quality of rEPO and other drugs will be enhanced by altering the properties
of biopharmaceuticals in ways that endow these products with longer circulatory
lifetimes, allowing patients to take lower doses at longer intervals. Likewise,
this project will lower the costs of manufacturing by incorporating novel
inexpensive nutrients that improve the capacity of producer cells to generate
high quality drugs. In tandem, advanced computational models will be implemented
in order to determine the optimal media formulations for generating high quality
biopharmaceuticals. In addition, students from the high school to the post-
graduate level will be educated and engaged in important bioprocessing
techniques including mammalian cell culture, media design, and pharmaceutical
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve these goals, an
experimental and computational systems biotechnology approach will be
implemented in which the media will be designed to optimize the glycosylation
profile of biotherapeutics such as recombinant erythropoietin (rEPO) produced in
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. CHO cells have emerged as a major cell
factory for generating glycoprotein biotherapeutics. The structure and nature of
the oligosaccharide (or glycan) component of a glycoprotein therapeutic is
extremely important to the quality, efficacy, and value of the products.
Biosynthetically, glycan structure is dictated by two factors: levels of
glycosylation enyzmes and availability of nucleotide sugar substrates. This
project will integrate experimental and computational methods to manipulate
nutrient components to enhance the levels of these critical nucleotide sugar
substrates and improve glycosylation. A series of novel sugar analogs will be
investigated for their capacity to increase the nucleotide sugar pool and
improve quality of rEPO and other biological products. These novel sugar
analogs, which are simple and inexpensive to produce, contain chemical
modifications on specific carbon groups that facilitate crossing the cell
membrane for efficient channeling into pathways for nucleotide sugar synthesis.
In order to elucidate the impact of these and other nutrients, these media
components will be incorporated into a computational model of N-linked
glycosylation that currently is based only on glycosylation enzyme transferase
activity. The model will be extended to predict the influence on final glycan
structures of nucleotide sugar biosynthesis from nutrients or supplements in the
media. Such an expansion of the current glycoinformatics suite will enable users
to design optimal media compositions for a desirable N-glycan profile present on
glycoprotein biotherapeutics. By including the effect of nutrients on metabolism
and linking that to the final glycan structure, this modeling tool will have
significant versatility and power for rapidly and cost-effectively improving
biotherapeutic product quality. As a result, novel nutrients will be
incorporated into the bioprocessing media formulation of mammalian cell cultures
with the assistance of comptutational algorithms in order to increase production
and yield of desirable complex high quality biotherapeutics and reduce the need
for time consuming and expensive experimental investigation. This approach may
have a broad impact across a number of bioprocesses and biological
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of CBET is co-funded by the Biomaterials Program of the
Division of Materials Research.