* 1512630
* UNS: Heat Transfer in Granular Flows: Understanding Similarities and Differences with Molecular Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Christine Hrenya, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 320,000.00

The proposed study aims at understanding why particles in fluid might or might
not enhance heat transfer for surfaces. The investigator will examine results
from models and experiments to shed lights on existing conflicting work. Part of
the proposed plan is to engage undergraduates and high school students in
separate, small research projects aimed at the magazine Annals of Improbable
Research (AIR) with an editorial board that includes several Nobel Prize
winners. AIR has a tagline "research that makes people laugh and then think,"
designed to motivate a broader range of students to gain experience in
scientific research, as well as a means for making science more accessible and
exciting for the greater public.

The PI proposes to develop numerical models and experimentally validate the
numerical models (and the associated hypotheses) for application of granular
flows in enhancing heat transfer during two-phase flows. The existing
experimental results in the literature perplexedly indicates heat flux does not
scaling monotonously with Peclet number. The proposed research aims at resolving
such a contradiction and is thus intriguing. This work builds on recent research
involving multi-phase flows but adds complex approaches involving granules with
different shapes, surface roughness, slip velocities, and flow instabilities.
The hypotheses to be tested are: (1) the discrepancy in existing data sets in
the literature for macro-level quantities (heat transfer coefficient) can be
traced to micro-level characteristics, such as surface roughness and tomography;
(2) an increase in particle mobility can lead to reduced heat transfer due to
reduced contact time with boundary; (3) the presence of flow instabilities may
attenuate heat transfer due to increased particle mobility and thus decreased
contact.