* 1512106
* UNS: Rare Earth Oxides for Hybrid Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Bruce Alphenaar, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,997.00

PI: Bruce Alphenaar&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1512106&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells made from thin films of nanometer sized crystals of titanium
oxide are potentially much less expensive that crystalline silicon materials
currently used in commercial solar cells, but suffer from low solar energy
conversion efficiencies. The goal of this project is to determine how the
addition of rare earth materials into the titanium oxide layer can improve solar
energy conversion efficiency. The research plan will focus on neodymium oxide as
model rare earth material. The fundamental science gained in this research may
also lead to the discovery of new quantum mechanical processes for enhancing
current production from solar cells. As part of this project, students at the
University of Louisville will collaborate with a world-renowned solar energy
research facility at the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells
containing titanium oxide nanocrystal thin films which act as the acceptor for
photoexcited electrons offer low-cost fabrication relative to doped crystalline
silicon materials, but solar energy conversion efficiencies are still below 20%.
The overall goal of the proposed research is to understand how the incorporation
of rare earth oxides into the titanium oxide layer of perovskite and dye-
sensitized photovoltaic materials can be optimally realized to increase solar
energy conversion efficiency. The incorporation rare earth oxides into the
titanium oxide layer can potentially enhance short circuit current densities
exceeding the Shockley-Queisser limit by three possible mechanisms. First, the
coupling of optical transitions between the rare earth and the sensitizer
provides the opportunity for carrier multiplication effects. Second, exchange
interactions between the spin moment of the f-state electrons in the rare earth
and the sensitizer causes mixing between the triplet and singlet excitons,
leading to enhanced optical absorbance. Third, the low electron affinity and
high dielectric constant of rare earth oxides enable efficient hole transport.
The research plan will elucidate the efficiency enhancement mechanisms through
correlation of the optical and electronic properties with the composition and
morphology of the rare-earth oxide doped films using electron and scanning probe
microscopy, spatial photoelectrochemical measurements, scanning energy
dispersive X-ray elemental mapping, and Raman chemical mapping. This knowledge
will then be used to develop, fabricate, and test rare-earth oxide / perovskite
hybrid solar cells using neodymium oxide as the model rare earth oxide material.
At the most fundamental level, these studies could lead to the discovery of new
mechanisms for photocurrent enhancement involving electro-optic and electron
spin interactions which can potentially be applied to other types of
photovoltaic materials. The analytical and materials synthesis methods used in
the research will be adapted for use in nanotechnology instructional modules at
the undergraduate level. Outreach and broadening participation activities will
be coordinated through the Technology Fellows Program and the Conn Center for
Renewable Energy Research at the University of Louisville.