* 1512071
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Role of Bristled Wings for Flying and Swimming at Low Reynolds Numbers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Arvind Santhanakrishnan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 236,150.00

1512071(Santhanakrishnan) &amp; 1511427(Miller)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus
of the proposed project is to explore the fluid dynamic principles that enable
small insects to generate lift and produce thrust. When the wings of small
insects clap together during the flapping motion and then fling apart, there is
the expectation that flight would not be efficient, but it is. Resolving this
paradox can have a significant scientific and technological impact, because we
could also design machinery that takes advantage of such phenomena like small
robotic vehicles that move across fluid-air interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is focused on the understanding of the phenomena involved when bristled
wings, like those of small insects generate lift. Although the aerodynamic
principles of insect flight at the scale of fruit flies and above are reasonably
well understood, the fluid dynamic mechanisms that enable very tiny insects to
generate lift or thrust remain unclear. When the wings clap together at the end
of the upstroke of the flapping motion and fling apart at the start of the
downstroke, there are novel phenomena that take place. The fundamental
investigation in this work will be focused on a particularly intriguing paradox:
why is there a noted biological preference in almost all tiny insects to employ
interacting bristled wings under highly viscous conditions that would require
large forces to peel the wings apart? It is proposed to develop 3D poroelastic
models to study locomotion using bristled appendages. Two types of insects will
be examined (thrips and parasitoid wasps), which are capable of flying in air
and swimming in water. The experiments in this proposal will also use robotic
wing-wing interaction platforms with dynamically scaled bristled wing models
informed by high-speed videos of tiny insects. Wing design and kinematics for
flapping propulsion at low Re will be identified through numerical simulations
of experimentally validated poroelastic wing models implemented in an immersed
boundary method framework. Graduate and undergraduate student involvement in the
research is proposed. Minority student participation will be pursued through the
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program at both
institutions. Outreach activities for high school students and teachers
participating in the Oklahoma State University National Lab Day annual event are
also described.