* 1512996
* An Integrated Approach to Creating STEM Career Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Laura Foote, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,197,756.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing a six-year sequence of courses and summer events designed to prepare
low-income youth for the local area workforce. The project will recruit, retain,
and prepare students from underrepresented populations in STEM-related fields.
While in the program, students will learn: a) science concepts related to
hydroponics; b) how to develop hydroponics systems that are powered by
alternative energy sources; c) how to build and program robotic arms to plant
and harvest produce; d) how to automate the operation and monitoring of
hydroponic systems; and e) how to build and program telepresence robots while
earning college credits. Midway through the program, beginning in grade 10,
participating students will also benefit from a Web-based mentoring program that
will facilitate interactions with STEM professionals, program alumni, and each
other. The project is collaborative effort involving a school district, a
community college, a university, and a mentoring organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the multi-year program of activities, courses,
and mentoring strategies will be studied through a mixed-methods research
approach based on a combination of survey data and participant interviews. The
theoretical framework for the project is grounded in social cognitive career
theory, career construction theory, and the relational theory of working. The
work will be guided by four research questions: 1. To what extent does the
seeding-the-future intervention foster progress in students' intentions to
pursue further STEM educational options and to consider STEM careers? 2. To what
extent does the intervention enhance students' career adaptability, as defined
by academic resilience? 3. What role does relational support, as exemplified by
the virtual mentoring program, support from family members, teachers, and other
important people in the students' lives, play in self-efficacy development,
interest formation, resilience, and intentionality to pursue STEM courses and
fields? And, 4. How do youth understandings of complex scientific and
technological systems change over time, and what aspects of the program support
youth system thinking? Constructs being measured include social support,
academic support, academic resilience, mathematics and science outcome
expectancy, mathematics and science intent, mathematics and science self-
efficacy, and science interest.