* 1512401
* UNS: Establishing Elementary Mechanisms of Biomass and Hemicellulose Torrefaction
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Phillip Westmoreland, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2018
* USD 309,550.00

PI: Phillip R. Westmoreland Proposal Number: 1512401

The transportation of woody biomass to a central processing facility for
conversion into useful liquid fuels can be costly, particularly in sparsely
populated rural areas. Torrefaction is process that reduces the weight and
volume of plant biomass to a form which can be transported more easily. In
torrefaction, harvested biomass is heated in the absence of air at 200 to 300
degrees Celsius to create a dense bio-oil rich feedstock. However, this material
is not very well characterized and contains a wide variety of compounds in gas,
liquid, and solid forms. This project will develop a comprehensive mathematical
model for the torrefaction of biomass that will predict the energy requirements
and final product mixture, using knowledge of the detailed reaction processes.
This model will then be used to develop torrefaction processes that can be
tailored to make an energy-dense, low-oxygen material from woody biomass.
Research results will be used to provide examples in engineering classes at
undergraduate and graduate levels, and to enable the development of classroom
materials on biofuel topics for high school students through the involvement of
high school teachers in research.

The goal of this research is to develop a comprehensive model for the elementary
reactions and kinetics during the torrefaction of the hemicellulose fraction of
woody biomass. In torrefaction, the biomass is heated in an inert atmosphere at
200 to 300 degrees C. It is hypothesized that pericyclic reactions, which are
known to describe cellulose pyrolysis accurately, also describe the torrefaction
of hemicellulose. The model will be developed using reaction kinetics
experiments, computational quantum chemistry, and reaction theory.
Thermogravimetric analyses will provide instantaneous heats of pyrolysis.
Product gases and vapors will be profiled in real time by two-dimensional gas
chromatography with time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GCxGC-TOFMS). These
experiments will be carried out with solid samples of woody biomass (loblolly
pine), the hemicellulose biopolymers xylan and galactoglucomannan, and
hemicellulose monomers xylose, arabinose, mannose, and galactose. The reaction
processes for the flash pyrolysis of the torrefied solids will be studied by
online GCxGC-TOFMS analysis of the bio-oil product vapors, complimented by
analysis of the residual solid structures using solid-state nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR). Quantum-chemistry analyses of monomer torrefaction will be
expected to yield additional mechanistic insights. The full model will predict
reaction kinetics and products of the torrefaction of cellulose and
hemicellulose fractions of woody biomass. Educational activities based on the
research include mentoring of an undergraduate process design team on the design
of a thermochemical biomass processing plant, development of course materials
for reaction kinetics and transport courses at the undergraduate and graduate
levels, and research experiences for undergraduates and high school teachers.