* 1512664
* UNS: Translation of nano-biorecognition into macroscopic counting for attomolar detection of biomolecules
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Chuanbin Mao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1512664 Mao, Chuanbin &lt;br/&gt;There is growing evidence that microRNAs, a
type of a biomolecule in body fluids can be used as non-invasive biomarkers
diseases. At present, detection and quantification of them is by current methods
yields poor reproducibility and low accuracy when the concentration is very low.
This research will develop a new novel approach called plaque counting (PC)
method, which is likely to yield superior results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MicroRNAs (miRNAs) in body fluids are a class of non-
invasive Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers. At present their detection and
quantification is by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR),
which has inherent limitations such as poor reproducibility. In the proposed
study, a plaque counting (PC) approach is proposed, which uses T7 phage to
establish a one-to-one correspondence among target miRNA, T7 phages, and phage-
developed viral plaques. A gold NP (AuNP)-probe dually functionalized with a
recombinant AuNP-binding fluorescent T7 phage and an oligonucleotide (ONT)
capable of hybridizing with one segment of the target miRNA and a magnetic
microparticle (MMP)-probe functionalized with another ONT capable of hybridizing
with a segment of the same miRNA co-capture the target miRNA to form a sandwich
complex. T7 phages are then released from the complex by competitive binding of
a reported gold-binding peptide and plated to develop fluorescent plaques. The
number of fluorescent T7 phages is equal to not only that of the target miRNAs
but also to that of the developed fluorescent plaques. Two aims are: Aim 1:
Understand how the solution and probe conditions influence the accuracy and
sensitivity of the PC method for quantifying single and multiple AD-associated
miRNAs. The PC method will be used to quantify AD biomarker miRNAs (miR-9,
miR-29a, and miR-137) with a series of dilutions in water to identify the
detection limit of the method. The PI will then examine how the background RNAs,
the sizes of MMPs and AuNPs, and the concentrations of saline influence both
single and multiplexed quantifications of the three target miRNAs. Aim 2:
Validate the use of the PC strategy for quantifying single and multiple miRNAs
in human serum. MMPs capable of capturing target miRNAs will be first used to
magnetically remove the pre-existing target miRNAs from the commercial human
serum, which is then used to make serum samples with known concentrations of
target miRNAs, followed by the quantification tests described in Aim 1.
Intellectual Merit : This project will develop and optimize a new facile method
for quantifying circulating miRNAs with high sensitivity, accuracy, and
reproducibility. It overcomes some of the disadvantages of qRT-PCR technique and
thus advances the fields of miRNA-based diagnosis. Broader Impacts : The results
of this study is likely to improve detection limit of microRNA in body fluids;
and therefore, disease diagnosis. Broader impact activities include: (1) A
curriculum on bionanotechnology (BNT) will be strengthened to educate a new
generation of scientists; (2) community college and high school students will be
motivated to learn hands-on skills in BNT and choose to pursue higher education;
(3) A Native American Nanotechnology Outreach (NANO) program will be solidified
in Oklahoma to help Native Americans become interested in scientific careers and
be more competitive on job markets; (4) Public awareness of BNT will be
increased in Oklahoma statewide.