* 1512297
* UNS:Relaxation Dynamics of Particles and Polymers in Soft Glassy Suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Lynden Archer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1512297(Archer)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to
study particle dynamics and relaxation in so-called soft glassy materials. Such
materials are printable functional inks for additive manufacturing, fluids for
batteries and fuel cells, and pharmaceutical formulations. Successful completion
of this study could lead to the manufacturing of new types of fluids with
properties tailored to specific engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to develop a general framework
for understanding how particle dynamics in jammed suspensions (nanoparticles in
polymers) impact the transition from diffusive to hyperdiffusive dynamics.
Recent reports on terminal relaxations in soft glasses have found that they are
invariably and surprisingly hyperdiffusive. Hyperdiffusive relaxations are in
fact now thought to be a characteristic of the soft glassy state and to reflect
a material's out-of-equilibrium response to internal stresses, which are either
built in at the glass transition or build up due to a variety of reasons. The PI
and his group have recently discovered a class of soft glasses comprised of
hairy nanoparticles that manifest a series of contradictory traits: (i) they are
jammed and glassy; (ii) they manifest an accessible Newtonian flow regime and
are able to reach equilibrium; (iii) they show little signs of aging; and (iv)
they exhibit hyperdiffusive relaxations on long length and time scales. However,
it is argued that the contradictory behavior is only superficial, and the
dynamics of the system can reveal the fundamental behavior leading to these
traits. They plan to use hairy nanoparticles as model systems, and a battery of
experiments (photon correlation spectroscopies, small-angle X-ray scattering,
mechanical rheometry, dielectric relaxation) and theory to shed light on the
fundamental origins of hyperdiffusive relaxations in soft glasses. What makes
this work exciting is that it goes after general models for dynamics of soft
glasses, i.e., it looks to relate findings from experiments performed on limited
time scales to dynamics in soft glasses on extended timescales. In addition to
graduate education, plans to reach out to K-12 students and their teachers are
laid out.