* 1512163
* UNS: Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Thin Film Evaporation in Superhydrophobic-Superhydrophilic Hybrid Micro\Nanotextures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2015
* Jiangtao Cheng, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 271,985.00

Because liquid evaporation takes away a large amount of heat from a surface,
rapid evaporation is desirable. The research team will fabricate new types of
surfaces from which thin liquid films can evaporate faster than in a typical
boiling process. As a consequence, these surfaces enable removing heat at very
high rates which is demanded in many industrial applications. Not only graduate
students but also K-12 students from the Dallas area will be involved in this
project.

Thin film evaporation in capillary wicking structures can potentially yield
higher heat transfer rates as compared to those of nucleate boiling. To further
enhance the film evaporation heat transfer, the PI proposes to explore a novel
avenue with the help of electro-wetting on dielectric (EWOD) to initiate and
sustain thin film evaporation in micro/nano porous bi-wick structures decorated
on hot spot surfaces. The PI will first develop multi-scale textured surfaces
with micro- and nano-scale structures with treatments to make them super-
hydrophobic or super-hydrophilic. The EWOD fluidic operations will be used to
generate precisely controlled liquid volume on the surface. The project will be
concentrated on detecting fluid meniscus distributions and wetting flow
dynamics, using micro-PIV (particle imaging velocimetry) on different surface
structures to determine the interdependency of the surface texturing on the
wicking dynamics and thin film thickness in the presence of high heat fluxes and
the effect of surface texturing on heat transfer rates.