* 1512759
* UNS:Nanoporous Platinum -- Atomistic Structure and Catalytic Properties Via Computational Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* William Goddard, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 359,178.00

Goddard (1512759)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will utilize theoretical
tools to obtain insight into structure-function relationships in fuel cell
related catalysis by nanoporous metals. The nanoporous materials are not readily
accessible by experimental probes due to the small spatial scale involved, their
inherent complexity and disorder, and their high ratio of surface- to bulk-atom
characteristics. The work will be directed at understanding a poorly understood,
yet remarkable, experimental observation that nanoporous platinum obtained by
electrochemical dealloying of Ni-Pt particles produces a dramatic optimum
activity for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the Ni7Pt3 composition
despite the observed lack of Ni near the surface of the active catalyst. The
proposed work will contribute to the development of improved fuel cells for
transportation and power applications. It will also provide educational
opportunities related to fuel cell catalysis and methods of theoretical
simulation of materials properties. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposal will
elucidate the structure-property relationships in the Ni-Pt and other bimetallic
particles via first-principles-based theory, reactive molecular dynamics
simulations (RMD) and global optimization techniques. The proposal is ambitious
in scope, but the PI is a well-established computational scientist with a
history of developing refined theoretical techniques and applying them
successfully to important problems in catalysis and materials science. The
proposal has the potential to be transformative in regards to its ability to
gain insight into the properties of nanoscale alloy particles at levels not
easily assessed by experimental methods. Novel features of the work include
development of a computational method for modeling ORR under electrochemical
potential and a plan to extract finite-sized clusters from the complete
nanoparticles and subject them to deeper theoretical analysis of the surface
properties with respect to adsorption and reaction processes involved in the
ORR. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although the specific focus of the proposal is on
understanding nanoporous multimetallic particles as they relate to
electrocatalysis and use the understanding to design more efficient, durable,
and lower-cost fuel cells, the potential impact of the work extends to many
areas of nanoparticle application in the general areas of materials science and
engineering. These include energy, sustainability, environmental factors, and
economic considerations (e.g., non-noble metal materials). The PI is a leader in
fuel cell catalysis. As Director of the Materials and Process Simulation Center
at Caltech, he has access to a strong team of researchers at all levels to
address the complicated interplay between the various components of fuel cell
systems - namely catalysts, carbon supports, and polymer membranes. The PI will
continue to make software developed in his lab available as open-source packages
(i.e. LAMMPS). The PI also has a good track record of incorporating his research
into learning oppportunities for minority underrepresented groups and has
developed a course related to atomistic modeling of materials.