* 1512170
* UNS: Brain-on-a-chip for Traumatic Brain Injury Drug Discovery
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Martin Yarmush, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2020
* USD 422,697.00

PI: Yarmush, Martin L. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1512170&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traumatic brain injuries (TBI) are the leading
cause of disability each year in the US and are also a major risk factor for
epilepsy in both injured civilian and military populations. TBI dramatically
reduces quality of life in affected patients and there are significant direct
and indirect costs associated with TBI. While some drug TBI treatment protocols
are under clinical review, none has been identified which can significantly
attenuate the progression of events leading to neurological impairment. Improved
in vitro screening methods are critical to expedite drug identification and
development. Animal studies are both expensive and time consuming, but most in
vitro approaches fail to recapitulate in vivo central nervous system inter-
cellular connections and responses. Therefore, the goal of the proposed studies
is to develop a novel high content "Brain-on-a-Chip" device, which integrates
pairs of brain tissue slices and uses novel microfabrication and optical imaging
tools, to identify drug candidates that can be used to treat
TBI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many recent studies indicate that mitochondrial
dysfunction contributes to secondary TBI severity and associated axonal
dysfunction. As such, the investigators aim to develop a high-content approach
to screen mitochondrial drugs to alleviate post-TBI neuronal decay. An
interdisciplinary team of science and engineering investigators will utilize
microfabrication techniques to develop a "Brain-on-a-Chip" device which will be
used to culture paired brain organotypic tissue slices with individual
interconnecting axons that extend over microchannels. Strain injury will be
introduced by pressurizing a cavity beneath the microchannels. Integrating a
multi-electrode array (MEA) on-chip will enable precise and on-line
identification of electrophysiological changes in response to injury. The
investigators expect to assess how various strain injuries affect
electrophysiological and biochemical responses between two organotypic slices
using a novel dynamic optical imaging approach. By using microfabricated "Brain-
on-a-Chip" arrays, the investigators will be able to screen, in parallel, drug
candidates both individually and in combination, more efficiently than has been
previously possible. Establishment of such a novel platform is significant,
because it would accelerate the identification of molecular entities which
control the injury response and, in concert, the development and screening of
drug treatments for complex circuit disorders like TBI and epilepsy. The
education plan includes high school, undergraduate, and graduate training
components with a focus on underrepresented student education. Furthermore,
industrial practitioners will be involved in bioengineering courses, which is an
effective approach allowing student exposure to the industrial environment.