* 1512442
* UNS:Predictive Ab Initio Dynamics in Zeolite Biofuel Production Catalysts: Towards More Gas and Less Coke
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Scott Auerbach, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 329,804.00

Auerbach (1512442) - The study involves theoretical calculations aimed at
understanding the complex catalysis involved in converting biomass-derived
organic compounds to liquid fuel precursors in the confined spaces of zeolites
while avoiding deactivation due to coke formation. A novel theoretical approach
will be employed that will be benchmarked against experimental data. The PI will
also incorporate aspects of his research into educational and outreach programs
including an immersive summer science experience for middle- and high-school
girls.

The proposal builds on recognition that selective conversion of biomass-derived
organic species to longer-chain liquid fuel precursors and the undesired
reaction to form coke, are both examples of carbon-carbon bond forming
reactions, and thus amenable to theoretical methods that provide insight into
fundamental mechanisms of carbon chain growth as affected by zeolite structure
and chemical properties. Thus, the proposed work addresses both phenomena, but
through a unique theoretical approach - "metadynamics in reverse" - by examining
the more-straightforward carbon-carbon bond breaking process and appealing to
microscopic reversibility to gain insight into the carbon addition reactions. To
this end, the PI will employ and extend several aspects of computational
catalysis developed in his lab (in collaboration with the software firm
SCHROEDINGER) to obtain accurate energetics of carbon bond forming and breaking
while incorporating effects of framework dynamics and long-range forces, all
while keeping simulation times manageable. Specifically, the work will address
how confinement effects in the zeolite cage influence the balance between the
activation and condensation steps in aldol condensation. The theoretical
predictions will be benchmarked against related experimental studies carried out
by his collaborator, Paul Dauenhauer.

The broader impact of the research is in the general insight it will provide on
organic reactions in zeolite structures, especially the factors that control
selectivity between condensation reactions to produce desired specific carbon-
number products and unchecked carbon condensation to form coke. In addition to
the direct insight into the aldol condensation process, the theoretical
techniques that will be developed and refined should have broad applicability to
reaction processes in the confined environment of zeolite cages. The PI has
developed a strong education and outreach plan that incorporates aspects of his
research while addressing studies showing that interest in science and math
dwindles amongst girls during their middle-school years. He also directs an
inter-disciplinary program for undergraduate students at U Mass Amherst that
forms teams of students to address real-world scientific issues, especially
those dealing with biomedicine and renewable energy.