* 1512647
* UNS:Efficient CO2 Electrochemical Reduction on Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Amin Salehi-Khojin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 389,718.00

Salehi-Khojin, 1512647&lt;br/&gt;Future energy sustainability and greenhouse gas
mitigation would both benefit from man-made processes that mimic the
photosynthetic conversion of carbon dioxide. Electrocatalysis is one such
approach, but its application has been limited by high cost and unsatisfactory
performance of commonly used precious metal catalysts such as silver and gold.
This proposal explores the potential of inexpensive and earth-abundant materials
as electocatalysts for converting carbon dioxide to energy-rich chemicals. The
investigator will engage both PhD students and undergraduate minority students
in this combined experimental and theoretical study aimed at benefiting society
through the development of a sustainable carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will advance knowledge in the design of earth-abundant electrocatalysts by
building on the investigator's previous discovery that transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDCs) reduce carbon dioxide at low over-potential and
extremely high reduction rate via different reaction driving forces than typical
of precious metal catalysts. The work will explore the mechanism and kinetics of
carbon dioxide reduction to synthesis gas in ionic aqueous electrolyte media
using molybdenum disulfide and other TMDCs as catalysts, and by exploring
synthesis techniques that promote formation of highly active edge sites both
with and without inserted host atoms. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and
density functional theory calculations will be used to gain in-depth
understanding of the carbon dioxide reduction mechanism at the molecular level.
To this end, the study will elucidate the key parameters that govern the
chemistry of the new TMDC catalysts and enable the design of high-performance
electrochemical processes for converting carbon dioxide to useful products.