* 1512848
* UNS:New protein function: developing a family of amine dehydrogenases
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Andreas Bommarius, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 407,542.00

Bio-compatible molecules used in the production of pharmaceuticals often require
unique molecular structures that can only be readily made in pure form by the
use of biological catalysts known as enzymes. The goal of the present study is
to engineer a class of enzymes known as amine dehydrogenases (AmDHs) so that
they can convert a common ketone into a specific compound known as a chiral
amine. The resulting uniquely-structured nitrogen-containing chiral compound can
potentially be used as a building block for a wide range of new pharmaceutical
products through simpler and less costly routes than by conventional (non-
biological) chemical synthesis. This collaboration between Georgia Tech and
Armstrong State University (a predominantly undergraduate institution) will
provide research opportunities for Armstrong State students while also providing
teaching and learning opportunities for graduate students from Georgia
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI recently designed three (R)-specific amine
dehydrogenases (AmDHs) from the corresponding amino acid dehydrogenases (AADHs)
via protein engineering. These AmDHs catalyze the reductive amination of
prochiral ketones into chiral amines. The present proposal extends this line of
research to create variations of the same enzymes to achieve (S)-amines
synthesis. In support of this effort, the research will increase substrate
specificity by broadening the ketone and co-factor binding pockets, and by
tightening ammonia binding. The main tool used for these modifications is site-
directed or site-saturated mutagenesis on key residues, the latter being
identified by crystal structures determined by neutron scattering. The study is
likely to yield results that will be of commercial significance, especially to
the pharmaceutical industry for which the chiral amines are important
intermediates. The reductive amination of ketones to produce chiral amines is an
important transformation in the production of pharmaceutical intermediates.
Therefore, industrially applicable enzymatic methods that enable the selective
synthesis of chiral amines could be very useful. Exchanges in students at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels between the two universities are planned.
These will not only aid the research, but also provide educational and outreach
opportunities at both institutions.