* 1512221
* UNS: Organization and Interfacial Interactions of Surface-tethered Layers of Semiflexible Polymer Chains
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* S Michael Kilbey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2019
* USD 281,502.00

1512221 - Kilbey, S. Michael

Polymers are widely encountered in daily life, and the structure and properties
of their interfaces dictate their use and functioning in many applications. In
most situations, the constituent polymers are considered to be coiled, flexible
chains that adopt a variety of configurations of equal energy. However, when
polymer chains are made of repeat units that give rise to chain stiffness,
restrictions in configuration and resistance to bending lead to drastically
different structures and behaviors. The proposed research project aims to
investigate how those fundamental differences in chain stiffness impact
interfacial structure and properties. To accomplish this research, a new type of
polymer that enables chain microstructure, and therefore chain stiffness, to be
tuned through synthetic chemistry will be synthesized, tethered to interfaces,
and the resultant structure and properties will be measured using a variety of
techniques capable of probing structure at the nanoscale. Results from this
research will catalyze new thinking into how to rationally design polymer-
modified interfaces that are useful in applications ranging from structural
nanocomposite materials to advanced energy systems.

A comprehensive research program encompassing polymer synthesis, interface
modification and surface structure and property characterization is planned.
Novel end-functional polymers based on poly (benzofulvene) (PBF), which enables
chain microstructure to be tuned through synthetic chemistry, thereby setting
chain stiffness and mobility, will be synthesized and characterized. Interfacial
layers of PBFs will be made by reactive modification of activated surfaces, and
the organization, structural response to solvents of different quality, and
surface energy of those PBF "brushes" on flat surfaces will be investigated as a
function of molecular weight, microstructure, and areal density of chains. The
wetting behavior of PBF brushes coated with thin films of PBF chains will be
examined to reveal how packing, arrangement, and microstructure dictate
thermodynamic interactions across interfaces. The structure-property
relationships resulting from sets of systematic studies will provide new
foundational knowledge of the interfacial behaviors of semi flexible polymers,
which is transformative not only because it addresses a research area that is
largely vacant of experimental insights, but also because it establishes a basis
for developing advanced nanocomposites that expand the boundaries of materials-
property space.

Semiflexible polymers are an important but under-studied class of materials that
are relevant to biological polymers, conjugated polymers used in energy
conversion, and mechanically robust synthetic filaments. A clear understanding
of how chain stiffness and orientation interactions affect thermodynamic
behaviors and interfacial structure is essential to support continue
technological advances in those areas, as well as to develop new nanocomposites
that make use of toughness and improved dispersion provided by chain rigidity.
In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students, researchers engaged
in this program will participate in outreach and education initiatives aimed at
middle school students. These activities have goals of fostering personal and
professional growth in young learners through mentoring and hands-on
experimentation, inspiring curiosity and interest in careers in engineering and
science, and promoting diversity. These will be augmented by engagement of a
high school teacher in an authentic research experience, and results from all
activities will be shared through publications and presentations at local and
national conferences.