* 1512186
* PBS NewsHour Coverage of Non-Medical, Non-Clinical Care Research Addressing The Ebola Challenge
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Patti Parson, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID proposal was submitted in response to the NSF Dear Colleague letter
soliciting proposals related to research addressing the Ebola challenge. The PBS
NewsHour will produce 8 Television reports and Web coverage of scientists,
engineers, mathematicians, and computer and technology experts as they apply
their knowledge to tackling the Ebola virus. The programs will be distributed
nationally through PBS, the NewsHour website, and multiple social media channels
reaching a large national audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The public needs to be
kept informed about the research into Ebola in a way that is understandable to a
broad general audience. Current news reports focus primarily on the immediate
crisis of the victims and medical personnel while less so on the science of
Ebola. The NewsHour programs will instead help people learn about the non-
medical, non-clinical care research that can help lead to solutions about Ebola;
information that may also be applicable to similar diseases. The videos and web
content will show and explain the scientific work being done by some of the
leading scientists, engineers, computer experts and big data gatherers. These
researchers' stories and work will be told in ways that will be engaging to a
large and diverse audience, increasing their knowledge of the scientific,
engineering, and mathematical/computer data/modeling work that is critical to
solving the Ebola crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PBS NewsHour has significant
reach through its nightly national broadcasts, its website, and its large social
media following. Over 300 PBS stations broadcast the program each week night
reaching 1.4 million people (11% African American and 51% female). The website
has 3.8 million unique visitors and there are 575,000 Twitter followers. In
addition over 1.5 million registered teachers use the PBS NewsHour educational
materials. The videos and transcripts will be consolidated on the NewsHour
website where they will exist permanently providing a resource for the public
and researchers.