* 1512937
* II-New: PyMTL: A Unified Framework for Vertically Integrated Computer Architecture Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Zhiru Zhang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 443,689.00

This project will develop a new modeling framework to enable compelling new
vertically integrated computer architecture research. The framework, called the
PyMTL by the PIs, leverages the Python programming language to create a highly
productive domain-specific embedded language for concurrent structural modeling
and hardware design. The use of Python as a modeling and framework
implementation language provides considerable benefit in terms of productivity.
The proposal also describes plans for integrating PyMTL into the computer
engineering curriculum, and ongoing educational and industry outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable research projects on data-parallel
accelerators; accelerators for dynamic programming languages; on-chip
interconnection networks; full-chip high-level synthesis; and domain-specific
specification and compilation for FPGAs. It is also envisioned that other
researchers at PIs' institution, and more broadly within the computer
architecture community, will use PyMTL to enable fundamental advances in a
variety of areas. The project also consists of a plan for engaging the computer
architecture research community through an online based portal, conference
tutorials, online tutorials, example lab assignments, cloud-based development
environments, and PyMTL beta-testing.