* 1512511
* UNS: Airborne Microbes as Mitigators of Greenhouse Gases
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Lee Kerkhof, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 227,573.00

1512511 (Fennell)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microorganisms in air are typically
assumed to be inactive. Yet air contains microbial growth substrates, and
microbes known to metabolize these substrates have been collected from the
atmosphere. It is not known whether microbes in ambient air are capable of
inducing biogeochemical change on a global scale, as they are in other Earth
environments. In this research metabolic activity of bacteria exposed to gaseous
growth substrates in natural air will be investigated. The mitigation of two of
the major greenhouse gases (GHG), methane and carbon dioxide, by airborne
bacteria will be investigated, as well as potential interventions to enhance the
effect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial metabolism in air could be an important
and modifiable sink for atmospheric contaminants including methane and carbon
dioxide. Positive findings from this project could stimulate cross-disciplinary
collaboration with atmospheric chemists and modelers to incorporate activity of
natural airborne microbes into conceptual models and eventually quantitative
models of atmospheric processes. Knowledge of microbial activity, metabolism
and/or growth in the atmosphere would establish the atmosphere as part of the
biosphere. This research expands upon a previous NSF project where the PIs
developed rotating gas-phase bioreactors for aerial incubation of bacteria
(Fennell, PI, Mainelis, co-PI; MCB-0606576) and where they have shown that
airborne bacteria are active (Fennell, PI, Mainelis and Kerkhof coPIs;
IOS-1022254). The hypotheses governing the continuing study are that active
microorganisms in the atmosphere play a role in mitigation of greenhouse gases
including methane and carbon dioxide and that this role could be enhanced by
ecological engineering intervention. Specifically, this research will
characterize methane and carbon dioxide biotransformation and uptake by airborne
methanotrophic and phototrophic bacteria, respectively, under environmental
conditions of light/dark and differing humidities and temperatures, addressing
the question, what are the environmental factors that constrain activity of
airborne GHG mitigating microbes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded
by the MCB Division of the BIO Directorate and the CBET/ENG Environmental
Sustainability program under BIOMAPS.