* 1512393
* The Role of Inlet Perturbations on Superstructures of Turbulent Boundary Layers- Toward Global Flow Control
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Luciano Castillo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 208,582.00

This proposal is about the investigation of a very fundamental issue in
turbulent flows, the issue of the effects of small flow changes close to a solid
wall on the development of very long eddies farther downstream. The practical
outcome of such understanding would be the possibility to control turbulence
downstream by small modifications of the flow upstream, leading to improvements
in industrial applications, such as film cooling technology, commercial and
military flight, design of wind energy turbine blades and saving energy in cases
where fluid pumped over a solid surface is turbulent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although turbulent boundary layers have been studied for
over 50 years, the understanding of them remains the cause of ontroversy in the
turbulence community. Such understanding is critical, however, if we are to
develop practical control schemes that can help mitigate the energy penalty of
turbulent boundary layers. Recent studies have shown that there are Large Scale
Motions (LSMs) and Very Large Scale Motions (VLSMs) that carry more than 50% of
the Reynolds stresses and kinetic energy. The largest of these motions have
scales of the order of O(1&amp;#948;) &amp;#8804; L &amp;#8804; O(10&amp;#948;)
and are often also referred to as superstructures. The hypothesis in the
proposed study is to demonstrate the possibility to achieve Global Flow Control
of the downstream flow by manipulating the inlet conditions in such a way to
control the "superstructures". Our team from the USA and Australia seeks to
explain the mechanisms by which such complex interactions are possible, and also
to explore how these superstructures can modulate the inner region and vice
versa. The proposed research consists of high Reynolds number wind tunnel
experiments and high fidelity Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) to study
spatially-developing turbulent boundary layers under the influence of different
inlet perturbations (e.g., including steady and unsteady). The low Reynolds
number simulations will uncover the impact of inlet perturbations on
superstructures and will provide optimum configurations to consider in the
moderate and high Reynolds number studies. Recruitment of students and outreach
will be facilitated by synergies with the ongoing Summer Research Institute
established by the PI in 2013. In addition, there will be links to Puerto Rico
institutions, where the co-PIs have a strong track record of student
recruitment. The PIs also have a plan bringing K-12 teachers to Workshop on Wind
Energy Turbulence each summer for the duration of the grant.