* 1512228
* SusChEM: Directing the distribution of biomass-derived molecules in porous materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Susannah Scott, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 345,361.00

PI Name: Susannah L. Scott Proposal Number: 1512228

The sustainable production of important chemicals and fuels at large scale can
be achieved by using renewable resources such as non-food biomass. The selective
conversion of biomass-derived carbohydrates to specific chemicals in liquid
water using porous solid catalysts is controlled in part by the molecular
movement of biomass derived carbohydrate molecules into the porous structure of
the catalyst, as well as the movement of products out of the porous structure.
This project will study the fundamental science underlying the interactions
between water, catalyst pore structure, carbohydrates, and products using high
resolution measurement techniques which probe the molecular interactions of
these materials. The outcomes of the research may suggest ways to adjust the
catalysis process to achieve higher yield and selectivity of products in shorter
times. Through this research, students will be given opportunities for advanced
training at the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory at Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory.

The overall goal of this research is to understand the interactions between
water, biomass-derived carbohydrates, and furan-based products within porous
catalysts. The use of lignocellulosic biomass on the scale required for
significant production of carbon-based fuels and chemicals will likely involve
continuous liquid-phase processing with heterogeneous catalysts in many of the
chemical conversion steps. Various components of the reaction medium, including
solvent, reactants, intermediates and products, will partition within the porous
catalyst material. Differential absorption of molecules into the pores and their
specific adsorption onto the pore walls are hypothesized to have profound
consequences for selectivity, based on observations of dramatic effects in mixed
solvent systems where an organic solvent is combined with water. To elucidate
the nature of the interface confinement at the molecular level and to quantify
the extent of these interactions, the research will use ex-situ and in-situ
solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) monitoring of solid-liquid
interfaces, via the use of specially designed high temperature-high pressure
magic-angle-spinning probes, to assess local structures of carbohydrate-derived
molecules and their rates of transformations in porous materials such as
zeolites, mesoporous silicas and organosilicas, and carbons. This information
will be combined with calorimetric measurements that probe the thermodynamics of
absorption/adsorption phenomena, and gravimetric measurements to probe their
kinetics. As part of this research, students will be trained on advanced NMR
techniques through the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory at Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory. Knowledge gained on the behavior of interface-
confined species will identify pore structures that select for reactants,
promote desired reactions and expel specific desired products, such as furanics.