* 1512816
* UNS: A functional nanocomposite-based biosensor for real-time ambulatory monitoring of salivary biomarkers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Li-Jing Cheng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 06/30/2019
* USD 339,065.00

1512816 Cheng, Li-Jing &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop a novel sensor device which will be able to measure molecules that are
found in saliva when a person is under psychological stress. The study if
successful will enable measurement of stress markers in ambulatory setting.
Because the biosensor will be equipped with wireless connectivity, one can
monitor stress experienced by the individual remotely.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time, detection of the stress salivary
biomarkers enables assessment of stress levels in individuals. The salivary
biomarkers are typically analyzed by fluorescence immunoassay and enzyme kinetic
method which cannot be done in situ. The proposed stress biosensor built in a
wearable configuration, will significantly benefit those regularly involved in
stress-intensive activities, such as soldiers, pilots, and emergency care
professionals. With the sensing function, stress and fatigue could be detected
early in order to avoid impairment it may cause. Intellectual Merit: The
proposed sensor consists of a composite of biopolymer impregnated with
antibodies against saliva biomarkers, and nanoparticle electronics that measures
changes in tunneling current upon analyte binding. This approach enables
sensitive, specific and reversible detection of neutrally charged cortisol and
D-amylase without addition of chemical reporters or redox reagents for signal
transduction. Such capability overcomes the limits encountered in charge-based
transistor/nanowire biosensors or electrochemical biosensing techniques. A
passive RFID system will be integrated into the sensor for wireless monitoring
of salivary biomarkers. The study will provide insights into the science of
functional materials, nanoscale electron transport, mass transport in confined
geometries and device integration. Broader impacts: The goal of the proposed
education and outreach effort is to foster the development of a diverse science
and engineering workforce with a deep understanding of functional materials,
nanotechnology, and devices for biosensing and signal transduction. To achieve
this goal, the education and outreach objectives are: to develop new lab class
for teaching biosensor and medical devices that allow students to conduct
experiments involving, surface chemistry, molecular detection and mass transport
in microfluidics, and to recruit and retain women and minorities in science and
engineering careers by engaging minority undergraduate and high school students
in summer research projects and through participation in our SESEY summer camp,
which offers research experience in engineering fields for high school girls and
minority students, and ASE program, which provides an eight-week summer
apprenticeship to high school students in our research labs. A hierarchical
mentorship structure is proposed in which students at each level will have the
opportunity to serve as mentors for younger students.