* 1512877
* II-NEW: Research Infrastructure for Big Spatial and Temporal Data
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Brent Hecht, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 391,512.00

This infrastructure project responds to the urgent need of managing and
analyzing big spatial and spatio-temporal data. Such data is continuously
produced from various devices including smart phones, space telescopes, and
medical devices. The project goes beyond the idea of supporting spatial and
spatio-temporal data using general purpose big data engines, by developing
specialized spatial and spatio-temporal big data systems and algorithms. The
hardware infrastructure acquired in this project, including new architectures
such as Graphical Processing Units (GPU) and Solid State Drives (SSD), is used
to study and develop spatial and spatio-temporal big data systems and techniques
for various software and hardware platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software
platforms studied range from traditional parallel database systems to state-of-
the-art distributed computing platforms. Hardware platforms include large
clusters of distributed computed nodes of commodity machines, GPUs, and SSDs.
Spatial and spatio-temporal big data techniques investigated include indexing,
querying, and map rendering. The project encapsulates its developed techniques
in publicly available open-source free software. In addition to use within the
University of Minnesota, the acquired hardware infrastructure is made accessible
to developers, practitioners, and researchers worldwide through a wide set of
publicly available web services for spatial and spatio-temporal big data.