* 1512833
* UNS: Exploiting novel surface rheology to probe and tailor 2D suspension dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Todd Squires, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 289,595.00

The goal of the proposed research is to discover and understand phenomena that
occur in two-dimensional suspensions of particles. These are particles that are
suspended in solutions that are so spread-out that they form what are known as
monolayer suspensions. This is a very fundamental problem with industrial and
biological implications, since such suspensions are very common in both industry
and nature, including emulsions and foams, cells, organelles and biological
fluids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is focused on the understanding of
the rheological behavior of particulate dispersions embedded in insoluble
monolayers of surfactants. Carefully conceived theoretical and experimental
studies of model two-dimensional particulate dispersions are proposed. It is
very important to note that the choice of a 2D system was made so that study of
the lubrication phenomena in flows between approaching particles can reveal new
modes of behavior in interfacial suspensions that have no analog in conventional
three dimensional suspensions. In other words, this is a case where the
investigation of a 2D system offers as rich a field of exploration and relevance
to the real world as the investigation of 3D systems. The proposed research will
involve theoretical analysis of a series of paradigmatic problems (e.g.
lubrication flows and colloidal pair dynamics) involving monolayers whose
surface rheology thickens, thins, or exhibits phase transitions as a function of
surface pressure. It will also involve complementary experiments using
photolithographically-designed particles and structures dispersed within
surfactant monolayer. Exploratory experimental studies of concentrated 2D
suspensions, including detailed particle dynamics, effective rheology, and
discontinuous shear thickening will be conducted. Outreach and dissemination of
research is planned, involving URM students in research. In addition, there are
activities planned to reach out to 4th-6th grade students and attract them to
mechanical, computer, and chemical engineering.