* 1512933
* Limits via sampling of large discrete and continuous structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Steven Evans, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,001.00

Many large and complex systems (e.g., communication networks) are composed of
interconnected elements and they develop over time by small reconfigurations of
the existing structure combined with the addition of extra elements. A point-of-
view that has been particularly fruitful for understanding complex objects in
many areas of mathematics, and science more generally, has been the formulation
of an appropriate notion of distance between objects and the introduction of
"ideal" infinite objects such that the finite objects get closer and closer to a
target infinite object as they become larger. The first subproject investigates
situations in which an informative notion of distance is that objects are deemed
to be close if they are close in a statistical sense; more specifically, the
subproject considers various classes of structures where there is a well-defined
notion of a randomly sampled substructure of a given size and one declares that
two structures are close if the probabilistic behaviors of substructures of
various sizes sampled from each of them are similar. The goal of the subproject
is to investigate whether there are "ideal" infinite structures in these
settings and corresponding notions of random sampling such that the
substructures sampled from large finite structures behave similarly to those
sampled from a target infinite structure. The second subproject investigates one
of the senses in which large and complex objects may be broken down into simpler
building blocks that are combined in a prescribed manner. A prototypical
instance of such a decomposition is the factorization of whole numbers as
products of prime numbers. Here the attention is on geometric objects which can
be discretized to an arbitrary degree of precision by sampling points at random
and the analogue of the multiplication of whole numbers is the formation of
Cartesian products.

The latter half of the proposed research consists of two subprojects in the area
of probability theory applied to biology. One of these involves the analysis of
metagenomic data in which the microbial diversity of an environment (e.g., the
human gut) is surveyed by bulk sampling of genetic material from all organisms
present and the subsequent placement of the organisms on a reference
"evolutionary family tree" of microbial life. The research will develop new
methods for understanding the ways in which an array of such samples differ from
each other and how these differences are affected by external factors such as
the presence of certain medications. The other subproject in the latter half
deals with ecology and population dynamics. It seeks to model the growth of
geographically dispersing populations in an environment that is heterogeneous in
space and time and shed light on questions about how environmental conditions,
dispersal strategies and the effects of competition for resources interact to
influence the long-term survival of the population.