* 1512225
* Collaborative Research- SusChEM: Graded Interpenetrating Polymer Membranes Based on Sustainable Materials for Selective Removal of Organics from Water
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Ryan Toomey, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 12/31/2019
* USD 327,460.00

1512225/1510475&lt;br/&gt;Alcantar/Cardena-Valencia&lt;br/&gt;U of S.
Florida/SRI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative team proposes to develop and
investigate the performance of membranes based on natural, sustainable materials
to remove organic contaminants from water. The ultimate goal of this project is
to create novel membranes based on materials that have the ability to attract
water pollutants and are renewable, biodegradable, and can be obtained via
sustainable agriculture. A high percentage of the network forming these novel
membranes will come from natural sugars and waxes. These compounds will be
extracted from cactus mucilage, the gooey part of cacti. The separation process
will invoke a similar function that cactus plants use to transport water to
survive in arid environments to mimic the separation process of pollutants from
water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work focuses on the application of
fundamental research of sustainable and natural materials capable of removing
harmful organic chemicals from water. Although poly dimethyl siloxane (PDMS)
membranes are readily-used in organic separations due to their hydrophobic
nature and permeability to gases and organics, separation of higher molecular
weight organics-semi-VOCs and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)-remains
challenging due to slow time-constants and selectivity. This project will invoke
biomimicry to comparatively evaluate the use of polysaccharides from mucilage to
emulate nutrient pathways in cacti. The polysaccharides will be cross-linked in
PDMS networks and also in cutin waxes (materials that form the cactus skin).
Since cutin waxes are extremely hydrophobic, this work potentially could
establish that PDMS membranes will be replaced for more sustainable materials,
which will be of high impact in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
working on this project will be trained to apply creative engineering
perspectives to solving chemical and industrial challenges in problems
intrinsically related to environmental assessments and water quality. The
inclusion of undergraduate students will be achieved via an undergraduate
research exchange internship between USF and SRI. In addition, high school
students will be exposed to this project; the PIs will develop a new chemical
laboratory lesson plan for a local high school in St. Petersburg, Florida.