* 1512925
* Three-Dimensional Nonlinear Internal Wave Beams: Mathematical Models and Laboratory Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Triantaphyllos Akylas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2019
* USD 410,109.00

Density-stratified fluids support internal gravity waves due to the restoring
force of buoyancy. Although not as familiar as free-surface waves, internal
waves in fact are ubiquitous in oceans, lakes, and the atmosphere. In these
natural settings, stratification is caused by temperature variations as well as
changes in salinity (in oceans) and pressure (in the atmosphere). Internal wave
motion is inherently anisotropic because gravity provides a preferred direction.
As a result, energy is transported in the form of wave beams, which are the
analogues of the familiar circular wave fronts in isotropic media. Internal wave
beams are of great geophysical interest because they form the backbone of the
oceanic internal tide; moreover, in the atmosphere, they frequently arise due to
thunderstorms. In contrast to most prior studies, which assume strictly two-
dimensional disturbances, this project is concerned with internal wave beams
featuring three-dimensional variations, as expected in the field. Motivation
comes from recent findings, by the investigator's group and others, that suggest
that the propagation of internal wave beams in three dimensions differs
fundamentally from its two-dimensional counterpart. Apart from making basic
contributions to applied mathematics, this project is expected to also shed
light on the role of the oceanic internal tide in momentum deposition, material
transport, and deep-ocean mixing. These processes affect climate dynamics,
pollutant dispersal, and nutrient cycles. A graduate student is included in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort advances theoretical modeling
to gain a fundamental understanding of three-dimensional nonlinear internal wave
beams, particularly the attendant resonant nonlinear interaction with induced
mean flows that is central to three-dimensional wave beam dynamics. Using
asymptotic methods, nonlinear evolution equations are derived for three-
dimensional beam propagation under conditions of geophysical interest, taking
into account the effects of forcing, non-uniform background, dissipation, and
the Earth's rotation. These new mathematical models are analyzed by analytical
and numerical means in order to understand beam-mean-flow nonlinear interactions
from a mathematical and a physical perspective. The theoretical study is
supported by companion laboratory experiments that exploit recent advances in
three-dimensional flow visualization.