* 1512109
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Green infrastructure for water-quality improvement in constructed urban streams
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* John McCray, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 262,887.00

1512109 (McCray) and 1511797 (Mozingo). The U.S. population will increase about
50% over the next 35 years, mostly as urban new development or re-development,
presenting a unique opportunity to implement enlightened urban water solutions.
Beneficial use of stormwater and recycled wastewater at the local urban scale
are innovative water management options but are hampered by regulatory or policy
barriers. The primary purposes of this research are (a) to develop engineered
modules placed in reaches of constructed urban streams for treatment of selected
wastewater or storm-water derived contaminants, including a subset of nutrients
(N and P), trace organic chemicals (TrOCs), urban pesticides, metals, and
pathogens, and (b) to understand the regulatory, urban planning, and social
barriers that must be overcome, and to identify the most conducive urban-
planning scenarios to successfully implement this technology at a relevant urban
scale.

The treatment modules to be developed are termed "biohydrochemically enhanced
stream-water treatment" (BEST) modules. If successful, BEST modules would
enhance urban water quality, promote beneficial reuse of recycled wastewater and
storm water, and provide social benefits. Specific objectives include: (1)
Identify engineering design characteristics and regulatory opportunities and
barriers important for widespread urban landscape-scale implementation of BEST
facilities; (2) Test selected geomedia for removal of priority contaminants
using column and intermediate-scale 2-D BEST experiments; (3) Design
hydraulically optimal BEST modules using experimental results and mathematical
modeling to ensure appropriate flow volume and RT that enable effective
biochemical reactions for priority pollutants (4) Test BEST modules in our
existing pilot-scale constructed streams using local recycled wastewater and
stormwater. The research lessons and infrastructure will be incorporated into
required graduate and undergraduate core classes in environmental engineering,
design studios in urban landscape design, and a hands-on environmental
engineering summer field session. An undergraduate senior design team will
participate in the research.