* 1513121
* CI-EN: Revitalizing Emulab for Modern Networking and Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Eric Eide, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2020
* USD 2,199,450.00

This project upgrades the Emulab facility at the University of Utah, which is
used by thousands of computer science researchers, educators, and students
across the country. Emulab is a scientific instrument for conducting controlled,
medium-scale experiments with emulated networks. It is especially appropriate
for experiments that require a controlled environment, where network links can
be emulated, and where human (or other external) involvement in the experiment
is not required. In operation since 2000, it is a central resource in the
networking and systems research communities. Hundreds of research papers and
dozens of classes have been based on experiments conducted within the Emulab
facilities and demand has remained high. While the fundamentals of Emulab are
strong, and it is widely used, some of its aspects are showing their age and
need to be updated to support cutting edge research going forward. For example,
on the hardware side, approximately one-third of the PCs in the testbed are more
than 14 years old: these out-of-date PCs are no longer useful for scientific
experiments, while user demand for Emulab's more modern PCs exceeds their
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the revitalization and
ongoing operation of the Emulab testbed. Hardware-related activities include
replacing 168 of the oldest nodes with 160 modern multi-core, large memory
nodes, and replacing Emulab's obsolete firewall with one capable of supporting
current high-performance networks. Software improvements include expanded
support for virtualization technologies and modernizing Emulab's web and
scripting interfaces to improve ease of use. Operations activities include
ensuring 24/7 Internet-based availability of the testbed and assisting users and
other sites that run Emulab software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The revitalized
Emulab testbed will support cutting-edge research and educational activities,
and it will enable thousands of researchers, educators, and students to perform
realistic and relevant experiments that would otherwise be impossible. This
effect will be magnified by the dozens of other testbed sites that run Emulab
software.