* 1513275
* CI-NEW: Collaborative Research: A Modular Platform for Enabling Computing Research in Intelligent Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Maja Mataric, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 05/31/2021
* USD 336,334.00

This project is to design, develop, and freely distribute novel, affordable,
modular hardware and accompanying software platforms for enabling non-contact
human-robot interaction (HRI) research. Such research is a significant portion
of HRI today, and encompasses a broad spectrum of computing challenges and
compelling application domains, including education, training, rehabilitation,
and health. The goal of this project is to significantly increase access to
hardware to a large body of researchers, so that computing advances can be
applied to physical systems and evaluated in real-world environments, in order
to drive progress in the computing community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in
sensor and communication technologies have facilitated progress in computing
research on physical platforms. The field of human-robot interaction in
particular has grown significantly and actively brings together an
interdisciplinary community of researchers across computing, robotics, and
social science. However, progress has been limited by the lack of affordable,
general-purpose, modular hardware platforms with available low-level software
that would enable large numbers of computing researchers to enter the field and
develop and test algorithms, as well as conduct statistically significant user
studies by deploying systems in the real world and collecting user data to
inform further computational research in HRI.