* 1513306
* CI-EN: Trust-Hub: Development of Benchmarks, Metrics, and Validation Platforms for Hardware Security, and a Web-based Dissemination Portal
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Miodrag Potkonjak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2020
* USD 320,000.00

The growing hardware security community is faced with an immediate need to
develop effective tools and benchmarks. The purpose of this project is to lead a
community-wide movement toward stronger assurances in our integrated circuits,
computational platforms, and electronics supply chain. Based on the proven
effectiveness of information sharing in many communities including crypto and
computer-aided design, the PIs plan a significant enhancement and increase in
scope of Trust-Hub, a central web-based repository for benchmarks, hardware
authentication platforms, evaluation software, source codes, tools, and much
more in the area of hardware security and trust.

The intellectual merits of this project include development of (i) procedures to
dynamically generate trust benchmarks with hard-to-detect Trojan instances, (ii)
hardware platforms for security validation, (iii) a suite of security metrics,
(iv) a suite of ready to apply attacks, and (viii) comprehensive
hardware/software validation test suites and data. The results of this project
would be of interest to semiconductor companies, US government agencies and
university researchers worldwide. Benefits to the society include secure and
trustworthy electronics for healthcare, defense, finance, transportation,
automotive and other applications. This research will impact the education of
students, industry professionals, and government agencies' engineers through
courses, online materials, and on- and off-campus seminars.