* 1513797
* TWC: Medium: Language-Hardware Co-Design for Practical and Verifiable Information Flow Control
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Andrew Myers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,200,000.00

Current cloud computing platforms, mobile computing devices, and embedded
devices all have the security weakness that they permit information flows that
violate the confidentiality or integrity of information. This project explores
an integrated approach in which software and hardware are co-designed with
strong, comprehensive, verifiable security assurance. The goal is to develop a
methodology for designing systems in which all forms of information flow are
tracked, at both the hardware and software levels, and between these levels.
This can have a significant impact on how computing systems are designed, and
could make the next generation of computing devices and platforms inherently
more secure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates a novel hardware
description language, that allows information flow and timing channels to be
soundly tracked at the hardware level, while permitting fine-grained sharing and
reuse of hardware resources across multiple security levels. The practicality of
this approach will be demonstrated on a high-performance microprocessor with
verified-secure information flow which is designed as part of the project. The
project explores novel techniques for identifying information flows that must be
communicated between the software and hardware levels in order for the hardware
to enforce security, and operating-system mechanisms for automatically
virtualizing rich language-level security policies onto the more limited palette
of security levels representable in hardware. The project uses rigorous
verification of the new language-level and hardware-level techniques to
demonstrate that applications and hardware developed according to the new
methodology provably enforce secure information flow throughout the computing
system.