* 1513942
* CSR: Medium:Collaborative Research:Holistic, Cross-Site, Hybrid System Anomaly Debugging for Large Scale Hosting Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Xiaohui Gu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2021
* USD 518,000.00

Large-scale shared hosting infrastructures such as multi-tenant cloud computing
systems have become increasingly popular by allowing users to lease resources
on-demand in a cost-effective way. As multiple tenants may share computing
resources, hosting infrastructures are complex systems and prone to various
system anomalies. Although software developers often perform rigorous offline
testing, many subtle bugs only manifest themselves during large-scale production
run. Many anomalies such as those where the system does not crash but fails to
behave as expected are hard to reproduce and diagnose using existing techniques.
Existing system anomaly diagnosis work can be broadly classified into two
categories: 1) the black-box schemes which do not require source code and are
suitable for online production-site diagnosis, and 2) the white-box schemes
which require source code and expensive code instrumentation and are suitable
for development site, offline diagnosis. Although white-box schemes provide
fine-grained diagnosis, large-scale production hosting infrastructures are
reluctant to adopt them due to their high-overhead and intrusive system
recording approaches.

The overarching objective of this project is to explore an innovative cross-site
system anomaly debugging approach that intelligently integrates production-site
black-box diagnosis with development-site white-box debugging into a more
powerful hosting infrastructure debugging framework. This project will develop
techniques for development-site, offline white-box debugging that takes the
production-site fault inference results as guidance to find the exact anomaly
causes. The project will focus on diagnosing non-crashing system anomalies
(e.g., performance degradation, service outage, software hang, unexpected halt)
that are common in real world hosting infrastructures but are difficult to debug
using existing techniques.

Techniques developed in this project will generate significant impact on
improving the robustness of real world hosting infrastructures. The PIs will
develop new course modules on the hosting infrastructure debugging for both
graduate and undergraduate classes they regularly teaches. This project will
develop programming courseware based on the research prototypes developed in
this project. The PIs will use their power of role model and a set of outreach
activities to recruit more female students to pursue systems research. The PIs
will disseminate their results and collected data broadly through publication
and technology transfer. Developed software artifacts and experimental datasets
will be released for public use.