* 1513155
* Collaborative Research:  An impact study to examine the efficacy of a mathematics professional development program for elementary teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Paola Sztajn, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,428,581.00

The project will develop and research the impact of an expanded model for
mathematics professional development (PD) for elementary second and third grade
teachers. It builds on the NSF-funded project, All Included in Mathematics
(AIM). The PD is designed for elementary teachers to learn and use successful
mathematics discussion strategies shown to support student learning. This
project will expand the framework by improving teacher access to resources with
web-based tools, targeting a new target audience of teachers in PD, and
researching the impact of Project AIM via analysis of student data. The project
partnership between university faculty and mathematics curriculum leaders from
school districts will develop the web-based professional development resources.
The project is co-funded by three programs: ITEST, EHR Core Research and
Cyberlearning. The EHR Core Research program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. This project will also advance efforts of the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to
better understand and promote practices that increase students' motivations and
capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics (STEM). The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program
funds efforts that will help envision the next generation of learning
technologies and advance what we know about how people learn in technology-rich
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
conduct an efficacy study to understand how a professional development program,
targeting elementary math teachers, can be used with web-based facilitator
support and less support from the original research and development team. The
research questions ask about the extent to which teachers who did not work with
the prior project can implement the new Project AIM materials with fidelity. The
research will also investigate the impact of the professional development on
teachers' knowledge, beliefs and mathematics teaching. Finally, the study is
also examining the impact on students' participation in mathematics discussions
and content learning with particular attention to English Language Learner
students. The study is an experimental design in which school teams are randomly
assigned to the initial treatment or delayed treatment conditions. Data will be
collected to understand the efficacy of the intervention and will include
facilitator implementation logs, measures of teacher knowledge, classroom
artifacts, classroom observations, student discourse observation and student
achievement data.