* 1513263
* CI-EN: Boa: Enhancing Infrastructure for Studying Software and its Evolution at a Large Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2021
* Hridesh Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,426,917.00

In today's software-centric world, ultra-large-scale software repositories,
e.g., SourceForge, GitHub, and Google Code, with hundreds of thousands of
projects each, are the new library of Alexandria. They contain an enormous
corpus of software and information about software and software projects.
Scientists and engineers alike are interested in analyzing this wealth of
information to test important research hypotheses. However, the current barrier
to entry is prohibitive because deep expertise and sophisticated tools are
needed to write programs that access version control systems, store and retrieve
workable data subsets, and perform the needed ultra-large-scale analysis. The
goal is accelerate the pace of Software Engineering research and to increase
reusability and replicability, while properly curating the data and analyses.
This project is building a CISE research infrastructure called Boa to aid and
assist with such research and will be globally available. The project designs a
new programming language that can hide the details of programmatically accessing
version control systems, data storage and retrieval, data mining, and
parallelization from the scientists and engineers and allow them to focus on the
program logic. The project also designs a data mining infrastructure for Boa,
and a BIGDATA repository containing 700,000+ open source projects for analyzing
ultra-large-scale software repositories to help with such experiments. The
broader impacts of Boa stem from its potential to enable developers, designers
and researchers to build intuitive, multi-modal, user-centric, scientific
applications that can aid and enable scientific research on individual, social,
legal, policy, and technical aspects of open source software development. This
advance will primarily be achieved by significantly lowering the barrier to
entry and thus enabling a larger and more ambitious line of data-intensive
scientific discovery in this area.