* 1513256
* Enhancing Minority Middle School Student Knowledge, Literacy, and Motivation in STEM Using Contextualized Agricultural Life Science Learning Experiences
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Heidi Diefes-Dux, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,147,381.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by exploring how
coherent experiences can support urban student competency and interest in STEM
and how related industry workforce and community members can participate in
increasing student and teacher interest in, and awareness of, local and regional
STEM career opportunities. To achieve this, researchers will use a design based
research approach to developing and providing an extensive professional
development to 15 school teachers and engage 250 underrepresented inner-city
4th-6th grade students with agricultural life sciences experiences that connect
to real issues in food science, health, environment, and energy. Researchers
will use a design based research approach to creating the teacher professional
development and new curriculum. Project deliverables include: 1) the design,
field-testing, and implementation of four open-ended Model-Eliciting-Activities
(MEAs) which connect students to their community through problem-based
experiences in agricultural life science contexts; 2) teacher professional
development grounded in the principles of culturally relevant pedagogy and
contextualized inquiry; and 3) a compelling mentoring program that connects
participating youth with locally and regionally relevant STEM careers through
industry, community, and university partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
holistic approach to curriculum development, teacher professional development,
and mentor supported student engagement could serve as a model for how to
prepare students academically for future STEM academic and career paths. In
particular, the Youth Mentoring Program, in which STEM-related community,
industry, and university partners serve as mentors to participating students (as
part of the enactment of MEAs), engages students in problem contextualization,
model building, and communication. These mentors will also help increase student
awareness of local STEM careers and employment, as well as regional education
resources.