* 1513663
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Studying Journalists to Identify Requirements for Usable, Secure, and Trustworthy Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Susan McGregor, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 176,416.00

This research focuses on understanding the digital security and privacy needs of
journalists and their sources to evaluate and design communication technologies
that better support the fundamental operations of a globally free and unfettered
press. Journalists -- along with their organizations and sources -- are known to
be high-risk targets for cyberattack. This community can serve as a privacy and
security bellwether, motivated to use new technologies, but requiring
flexibility and ease-of-use. Many existing secure tools are too cumbersome for
journalists to use on a regular basis. Moreover, these tools may lack important
security and privacy-protecting features that are needed not only by the large
and diverse community that is part of journalistic activity, but by other
individuals and groups that may have a harder time recognizing and articulating
their needs. By learning about the needs and constraints of the journalism
community, this project will identify both technical and training interventions
that can improve the daily security and privacy of journalists, the many
communities with which they interact. The researchers will perform in-depth
interviews and usability tests with journalists and their sources. The insights
gained will illuminate both the conceptual and technical issues they encounter
with respect to cybersecurity. Using the specific risk- and resource-models
relevant to these populations, the researchers will propose, prototype, and
begin evaluating novel technical solutions to issues like communications
metadata, as well as data management, syncing, search and permission controls,
and the possibilities of trusted distributed key servers and "disappearing
data." The results of this work will lay the groundwork for future technical
advances, not only for journalists but also for use by researchers and
organizations interested in implementing and testing these tools and processes
for other communities.