* 1513669
* EAPSI: Incorporation of Nano-Sized Diamonds in Advanced Composite Coatings for Reduction of Friction and Wear
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Andy Nieto, Nieto                   Andy
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The proposed research will attempt to fabricate advanced coatings with reduced
friction and wear, as compared to commercially used materials. Tungsten carbide
/ cobalt coatings are used today in a wide range of sectors including the
aerospace, automotive, and energy industries. The incorporation of nano sized
diamonds into these materials to form advanced composite coatings is envisioned
to improve the wear resistance and reduce friction. The reduction of friction is
critically important to improving energy efficiency; for example, it is
estimated that 33% of fuel energy in automobiles is consumed in overcoming
frictional losses. The proposed research will be conducted at Yonsei University
in South Korea in the laboratory of Dr. Dae Eun Kim. The Center for Nano-Wear
directed by Dr. Kim has world class facilities for accessing the friction and
wear performance of a variety of materials under several types of environments.

The use of nanodiamonds is expected to address several key concerns in tungsten
carbide / cobalt coatings. The wear performance of these coatings is dependent
on achieving an optimal combination of strength (e.g. hardness) and ductility
(e.g. toughness). These properties are often mutually exclusive as they are
dependent on constituent phases which are typically either hard and brittle or
soft and tough. The use of diamonds is expected to increase hardness while
simultaneously providing toughening by inhibiting the formation of brittle
phases. The diamonds are expected to act as a source of carbon during the high
temperature processing used to make the coatings, which will inhibit the
decarburization of tungsten carbide into brittle phases. Diamond also has
excellent thermal conductivity which would be beneficial to wear performance in
high temperature environments. Wear tests will be conducted to evaluate the
performance under simulated loading conditions and also to elucidate the effects
of the nanodiamonds on the material properties.