* 1513957
* SBE: Medium: Towards Personalized Privacy Assistants
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Norman Sadeh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,189.00

Whether it is on their smartphones, in their browsers or on social networks,
people are confronted with an increasingly unmanageable number of privacy
settings. What is needed is a new, more scalable paradigm that empowers them to
regain control over the collection and use of their data. This is particularly
the case for mobile apps people download on their smartphones. These apps have
been shown to collect and share a wide variety of sensitive data, with users
unable to keep up. If all users felt the same way about the data collection and
sharing practices of mobile apps, it would easy to have the apps pre-configured
to only allow for those practices with which they are comfortable.
Unfortunately, prior research has shown that this is not the case. This project
is studying novel technology intended to significantly simplify the process of
configuring privacy settings such as those associated with mobile apps. With
close to 200 million US smartphone users, each with an average of nearly 50
mobile apps on their devices, this project could have a significant impact on
the privacy of everyday Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
research harnesses recent advances in privacy preference modeling, machine
learning and dialogue technologies to develop personalized privacy assistants
capable of learning people's privacy preferences and of semi-automatically
configuring many privacy settings on their behalf. The researchers are
evaluating different configurations of personalized privacy assistants, focusing
in particular on human subject experiments intended to evaluate their impact on
privacy decision making and user behavior. Configurations being evaluated differ
in the style and frequency of dialogues with users, the way in which machine
learning is used to drive these dialogues and the level of automation in
configuring privacy settings. Human subject experiments look at factors that
include the impact of different configurations of the technologies on the level
of comfort users have with their privacy settings, their overall awareness and
sense of control, and both short-term and long-term behavioral effects. Other
important factors include user burden, frequency of interruptions and overall
user satisfaction.