* 1513589
* I-Corps:  Building Information Model (BIM)-Driven Real-Time Mobile Asset Tracking System for Construction Safety
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Yong Cho, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

In the past two decades more than 26,000 U.S. construction workers have died at
work. That equates to approximately five construction worker deaths every
working day. About 90% of workplace injuries can be traced to unsafe work
practices and behaviors. As these statistics indicate, safety in construction
remains a big problem. The sad reality of frequent loss of life, injuries, near-
misses, and collateral damages poses liabilities that can be prevented. The
proposed innovation is to track and monitor location of mobile assets including
workers and equipment for improved safety management in dynamic construction job
sites with real-time visualization. Given the world's $4-7 trillion dollar
construction market, large potential exists for this technology, if successful,
to be used worldwide by virtually any owner, contractor, or city that needs or
wants safe and healthy construction workplaces.

The proposed technology utilizes wireless tracking sensors and positioning
algorithms to display mobile resources in Building Information Models (BIM) in
real time. The developed system will undertake safety and health hazard
identification at the construction stage of a project and automatically locate
workers in real-time, including sending alerts if a worker enters a hazardous
area. As the added advantages, the proposed technology can 1) enhance efficiency
and reduce time commitment of conducting job hazard analysis and management; 2)
improve worker?' safety awareness and their understanding of a surrounding
working environment; and 3) collect and store safety knowledge data which will
assist to sustain the safety knowledge within the company and help knowledge
transfer from experienced professionals to new generations.