* 1513107
* II-New: SC-CAN: South Carolina's Wireless Communication and Airborne Networking Collaboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* David Matolak, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

In this project, the investigators will configure air-to-ground networks with a
small fleet of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to conduct experiments with two
goals: (1) explore several research themes in wireless communications and
networking in order to improve the reliability and efficiency of future wireless
systems, (2) enhance the learning experience of graduate/undergraduate students
by allowing them to conduct hands-on course projects to concretize their
understanding of various components of wireless communications and networking. A
key component of these goals is the use of UAVs, whose use is growing rapidly,
for an ever-expanding variety of applications. Outcomes of this project will
benefit a variety of communities, e.g., public safety, commercial users, UAV
manufacturers, etc. In addition, the project will train a group of students at
both the undergraduate and graduate levels with insights on communication,
antennas, and networks. Ultimately the students can become important members of
the workforce in a variety of communities. Future collaborations with other
university and local organizations who may use UAVs will also be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, SC-CAN, provides the necessary
impetus to research efforts at University of South Carolina at Columbia towards
advancing the state of the art in various aspects of wireless communication and
networking related to UAVs. This includes (1) enabling research in developing
new channel models for airborne networks in various environments and for
providing highly dependable wireless services by detecting and localizing
jamming attacks, (2) facilitating redesign of wireless protocols that utilize
physical layer knowledge to improve spectrum usage and consequently increase
network throughput significantly, (3) analysis and enhancement of the privacy
and security of airborne networks, and (4) providing tools and evaluation
platforms for research on designing reconfigurable antenna systems. This
research will be made possible by the new laboratory equipment and UAVs, which
will enable a great variety of experiments on a wide range of issues in UAV
communications and networking.