* 1513201
* SHF: Medium: Energy Efficient Computing on GPU-based Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Laxmi Bhuyan, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

The current trend in designing future multiprocessors is to integrate hundreds
of cores and hardware accelerators (HAs), such as GPUs, on a single platform.
However, as the system size scales, the power and energy consumption of these
heterogeneous multiprocessors vastly exceed the budget. The primary focus of the
project is to develop energy efficient techniques that can be implemented in the
GPU with proper coordination with the CPUs. Energy reduction in GPU-based
heterogeneous multiprocessors can be achieved by extending current CPU
techniques to GPU. The project develops new runtime techniques for GPU core
scaling and Dynamic Voltage and Frequency scaling (DVFS), and combines them with
basic changes in algorithms and data structures to improve energy efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing models for performance and energy consumption
assume 100% utilization of the processing cores and perfect overlap with memory
access during execution. This project develops a more accurate model for energy
efficiency taking into account the algorithm, data structure, caching and memory
coalescing for different applications. A runtime system is being developed that
monitors the GPU core and memory utilizations together with the energy
consumption while executing an application. The runtime adjusts the number of
cores and/or frequency level dynamically through prediction, but continues to
make corrections as the execution proceeds. The runtime is extended to
heterogeneous systems consisting of both CPU and GPU.&lt;br/&gt;The current DVFS
techniques for scientific computing applications cannot fully eliminate slacks,
therefore, are not energy optimal. By leveraging the algorithmic
characteristics, a frequency scheduling technique is developed for linear
algebra applications to achieve better energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;The project
optimizes the energy efficiency while partitioning and designing tasks of an
application. Without loss of generality, Cholesky factorization is used as an
example and an energy efficient scheduler is developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops software products that can be readily
applied to existing large scale heterogeneous computers executing scientific
applications that are suitable for defense, energy and critical infrastructure
projects. Also applications like weather forecasting and structural dynamics are
developed that have a great impact on society. The research content is
integrated to graduate courses to provide training to students for designing and
programming heterogeneous systems. The project aims to produce very high quality
Ph.D. graduates including female students. The University of California,
Riverside is known for its large proportion of Hispanic students, and UCR is a
minority-serving institution. The project supports recruiting underrepresented
minority and female students.