* 1513416
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Fast and Simple Concurrency Through Data-Abstraction Transactions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Edward Kohler, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,132.00

This research project's goal is making easier the building of fast software for
today's multicore computers. The computer revolution depends on software whose
performance continually improves. When software performance stalls, it becomes
much harder to solve big scientific problems (such as genome analysis or climate
modeling), and harder to continue running the systems that are important to our
society. Modern software must simultaneously use many processors running in
parallel. This is much harder than using a single processor: coordination issues
can cause serious errors, and methods that avoid errors tend to run slowly. This
research shows that a new system, called data-abstraction software transactional
memory, can avoid errors without performance compromise.

Data-abstraction software transaction memory is a kind of software transactional
memory (STM). The STM design allows software programs to run arbitrary
transactions on memory objects. Since transactions are inherently isolated, a
transaction-based program can avoid much of the detailed, error-prone reasoning
about coordination that plagues ad-hoc parallel programs. Data-abstraction STM
advances on conventional STM by tracking changes at the level of abstract
methods on data objects, rather than memory words. The resulting system has the
same ease of programming as conventional STM, but performs much faster. Where a
conventional STM might track hundreds of memory words to ensure transaction
isolation, a data-abstraction STM can track single words, or even nothing at
all, since data abstractions can intelligently track the minimal information
required to preserve their semantics.

The research project builds a data-abstraction software transactional memory and
uses it to construct several fast software applications. These applications,
including a world-class-speed database, achieve strong transactional guarantees,
and great performance, while remaining easy to program. Programmers using data-
abstraction STMs will be able to build more high-performance software, with less
potential for error, on today's best and most efficient hardware, helping us
bring the benefits of the computer revolution to more aspects of modern life.