* 1513639
* RAPID: SCH: Effectiveness of contact tracing for detection of Ebola risk during early introduction of the virus within the USA
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Caterina Scoglio, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 11/30/2016
* USD 137,209.00

The current outbreak of Ebola is the largest thus far, with more than 13,000
reported cases to date in West Africa. Secondary infections have also been
reported in Spain and the United States, raising concerns about training of
medical personnel and safety of the entire population. In an effort to stop the
transmission of the virus within the USA during its very early stage, the Center
for Disease Control and Prevention is adopting a "contact tracing" approach ?
finding all individuals who have had close contact with an Ebola patient and
monitoring the health status of those people for 21 days. This approach requires
careful data collection, and is labor and cost intensive. A quantitative measure
to evaluate the effectiveness of contact tracing is currently missing, due to
the lack of previous experience of Ebola in the USA and insufficient supporting
data from current cases. The goal of this project is to evaluate risk detection
capabilities of contact tracing efforts for Ebola before the epidemic phase, and
estimate the associated cost in potential scenarios. Not only will understanding
the effectiveness of contact tracing be important for the current Ebola
epidemic, but this project will also provide information for developing contact
tracing guidelines and identifying critical circumstances hampering effective
contact tracing in possible future epidemic threats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a network-based stochastic modeling framework of Ebola
transmission for the local contact network of infected individuals (household,
workplace, hospital, airplane, etc.). This simulation framework will allow
investigators to synthesize scenarios and activities compatible with daily news
about Ebola. "Missed- detection probability" versus "contact tracing cost" will
be estimated through extensive simulations. Missed-detection probability, in
this case, denotes the probability that a secondary infected individual is not
detected before transmitting the infection to others. The team will perform
sensitivity analysis to account for inherent uncertainties in different
scenarios. The in-silico analysis will allow the following: 1) test performance
and associated cost of contact tracing efforts in multiple realistic scenarios
and different parameter spaces, 2) propose contact tracing guidelines under
limited resources, and 3) identify critical circumstances for which contact
tracing is not fully effective. A successful implementation of this project will
have immediate benefits to USA public health and security against infectious
disease.