* 1513043
* Collaborative Research: Building Enhanced Scientific Thinking through Modeling Ecosystems
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert Coulter, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2019
* USD 644,430.00

An ongoing collaboration between the Missouri Botanical Garden and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology will advance efforts of the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better
understand and promote practices that increase students' motivations and
capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics (STEM). Specifically, this project will explore how a modeling-based
curricular approach advances 4th and 5th grade students' understanding of
science as a way of knowing. By interacting with simulation-based games to
create and revise models based upon real-world experiences with local
ecosystems, students will begin to reason with evidence and to make connections
between local and global environmental patterns. To support modeling as an
instructional strategy, teachers will participate in extensive professional
development to deepen their understanding of ecological content, use of
technological tools, and pedagogical shifts that facilitate model-based inquiry.
Additional project outcomes will include eight new curriculum modules, new
software modeling tools and simulation games, and evidence of student and
teacher changes in knowledge and awareness of STEM careers. Taking a systemic
approach and engaging all 4th and 5th grade students and their teachers in a
demographically diverse school district, this project has potential for
broadening participation and interest in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
focus of this study will be to investigate the contextual factors found within a
model-enhanced elementary science program which are most closely associated with
student gains in understanding: 1) science as a way of knowing, 2) use of
systems thinking and evidence-based reasoning, 3) conceptual change, and 4)
interest in STEM careers. Approximately 1,400 4th and 5th grade students and 50
teachers will participate in the study over two school years. Data from multiple
instruments (e.g., surveys, interviews, classroom observations, student
projects, pre- and post-tests) and collected over multiple time points will be
triangulated for assessing changes in student and teacher knowledge, as well as
teacher practice. In addition, a subset of 125 students will be purposively
sampled for a more focused exploration of the development of individual learning
trajectories. Researchers will control dosage, systematic classroom, and
instructional differences.