* 1513764
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Flexible All-Wireless Inter-Rack Fabric for Datacenters Using Free-Space Optics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Vyas Sekar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 239,999.00

Data centers are a critical piece of the infrastructure supporting our society.
They flexibly supply the computing resources that enables the Internet-based
economy. The design of a robust data center network fabric is challenging as it
must satisfy several goals, viz., high performance, low equipment and management
cost, incremental expandability to add new servers, and other practical concerns
such as cabling complexity, and power and cooling costs. The project envisions
and delivers on a datacenter network design approach that is radically different
from prior architectures: a fully flexible, all-wireless fabric using Free-Space
Optics (FSO) communication links, which essentially use laser beams to
wirelessly transmit data through air. Although outdoor FSO links are challenging
to operate under adverse weather conditions, their use in a temperature-
controlled datacenter environments offers enormous and untapped potential in
information-handling capacity. The proposed network design equips each rack of
servers with a number of FSO devices, each of which can be "steered" in real-
time to wirelessly communicate with another FSO device on a different rack. The
steering ability enables a dynamic network that adapts to the prevailing network
traffic. The project's success will have perceptible economic impact by making
IT services more efficient - in terms of capital costs, operating expenses, and
carbon footprint - across several critical sectors of the economy. The project
will integrate the research with education to help students become domain
experts in the datacenter networking industry, and actively encourage
participation from under-represented minorities and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a number of scientific
challenges that arise in the context of the above proposed vision. (i) The
project will develop cost-effective FSO devices that have a small form-factor
and can be steered at fine-grained timescales. (ii) In addition, the project
will develop viable mechanisms to facilitate clear line-of-sight for the FSO
links, and address practical operational challenges (e.g., dust, vibrations).
(iii) The project will explore algorithmic foundations for the design of
flexible network topologies; (iv) The project will develop scalable network
management solutions including algorithms to optimally select a runtime topology
and route traffic; (v) mechanisms to guarantee desired properties (e.g., low
congestion and latency) in a dynamically changing topology; (vi) Finally, the
project will build a proof-of-concept system prototype and conduct extensive
evaluation on appropriate platforms.