* 1513006
* II-NEW: Collaborative Research: An Extensible Software Infrastructure for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Lukasz Ziarek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 42,268.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are an emerging computing platform becoming
increasingly common in our society, with diverse applications such as
merchandise delivery, traffic control, news reporting, natural disaster
management, mobile social networks, and Internet connectivity in third-world
countries. Looking forward, the exciting potential of UAVs is accompanied with
significant hurdles that call for broad and concerted interdisciplinary
research, with diverse foci on real-time system design, energy efficiency,
safety and security, programmability, robotics and mechanical design, among
others. Unfortunately, the majority of UAV systems today are either proprietary,
or specific to particular goals of aviation/robotic missions. In this project,
we will explore the feasibility and community support of developing an open-
source and extensible software infrastructure for UAVs to promote research and
education of this promising technology, ultimately leading to a better
understanding, assessment, and possibly wider application of UAVs. The PIs will
work with leading experts in both academia and industry in assembling a
community.

This early-stage exploration will result in a development plan for a first
infrastructure to allow for extensible UAV software design across the computing
stack, spanning operating systems (OS), virtual machines (VM), compilers,
programming languages, and applications. If successful, the planned
infrastructure may significantly shift the focus of the state of the art of UAV
systems, where refined support is limited to hardware drivers and robotics
control, OS/VM support is primitive, and Application Programming Interface (API)
is minimal. Additionally, the infrastructure will provide a platform for UAV
education, which will allow for students to study UAVs at a significantly
earlier stage in a college level curriculum.