* 1513464
* EAPSI:Purification of Hydrogen-Nitrogen Binary Gas Mixtures for Effective Use of Ammonia as a Hydrogen Storage Material
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Sean-Thomas Lundin, Lundin                  Sean-Thomas    B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research that will contribute to the ongoing effort to
develop alternative energy methods toward a renewable energy future. An ammonia
synthesis and decomposition energy framework is one possibility for a carbon
free fuel network in which all carbon-based greenhouse gases are eliminated from
the process. The ideal future process would involve ammonia synthesis from water
via electrolysis, transport to an end-user and then conversion into hydrogen to
be used efficiently in fuel cells. Finding an efficient means of decomposing
ammonia into hydrogen remains an underdeveloped region of this process and the
proposed work will provide a much better understanding of using palladium
membranes to this end. The research involves the purification of hydrogen from
streams containing nitrogen using palladium membranes. Specifically, the
inhibition of hydrogen transport by adsorbed nitrogen species, which correlates
to a reduction in hydrogen productivity, will be investigated. The membranes
will be fabricated at the Colorado School of Mines and then tested and
characterized at the University of Tokyo under the advisement of Professor
Shigeo Ted Oyama, who has knowledge and expertise using a specific analysis
method known as the time-lag technique.

A method of minimizing nitrogen adsorption on Palladium membranes to improve
membrane performance through the use of either palladium-silver or palladium-
gold alloys will be studied, based on results from a recent theoretical study by
Chantaramolee et al. Testing of membranes will involve exposure to hydrogen,
nitrogen, and argon gases with measurements of hydrogen permeance being used to
characterize the flux inhibition caused by adsorbed nitrogen species.
Characterization of the membranes will involve techniques such as FTIR, XPS, and
the time-lag technique which Prof. Oyama's lab has used previously. Success will
be determined by the ability to characterize the temperature and pressure
dependence of the flux inhibition, as well as isolating which surface species
(N, NH, NH2 and/or NH3) are most stable on the surface of the membranes. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.