* 1513382
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Virtual STEM Buddies for Personalized Learning Experiences in Free Choice Informal Learning Settings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kyle Johnsen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 78,711.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. This project
investigates how to provide customized instructional scaffolding to young kids
to learn science in unstructured, out-of-school environments. The innovation is
in using 'virtual STEM buddies' (VSBs), a computerized character that functions
as both a mentor and a peer, and interacts with a child across exhibits within a
children's museum to help them learn about Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics. Research will examine how to design and build such technologies,
and how the 'virtual buddy' fits into other learning interactions (such as those
between parent and child, or between museum guide and child).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VSB, an intelligent embodied agent, will be built and
pilot tested at the Children's Museum of Atlanta, with engineering research
focusing on how to ensure the agent can align with the learner's knowledge and
passions in what Crowley and Jacobs term 'islands of expertise'. Key features
will include assessment of and alignment to the youth's prior knowledge; an
interaction tailored to social construction of knowledge and continuity over
time (so that the agent evolves with the child); and opportunistic instruction
based on teachable moments both within and outside the museum. Engineering
research will explore, in conjunction with participatory design, technologies
for visitor identification (barcode, RFID, biometrics), user experience design
to explore input methods in the noisy environment of a children's museum, and
mechanisms to handle 'bottlenecking' of visitors (i.e., to allow an acceptable
multi-user experience if multiple children want to access the VSB technology at
an exhibit). The learning research will focus on discourse of youth in the
museum with adults and peers, and will be augmented with a brief post exhibit
attitudinal survey based on the "Changes in Attitudes about the Relevance of
Science" instrument.