* 1513287
* Expanding Geospatial Technology Career Development for High School Students Through Teacher Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* James Sample, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,936,772.00

The Power of Data (POD) project is designed to increase secondary student
awareness of and interest in careers that use geospatial technology (GST) and
data; increase their knowledge of educational pathways to enter these careers;
and develop their 21st century workforce skills. Building on successful
implementation in Arizona, the 4-year project will be carried out on a larger
scale. The project will use a train-the-trainer approach involving some 30
teacher educators, 90 teachers and 27,000 students. Teacher educators will be
supported a facilitation academy, resources, and a "living" facilitation guide
for teacher educators. will be developed. These resources will enable teacher
educators replicate the POD Teacher Workshops in their local areas, resulting in
the GST and project-based instruction (PBI) in their classrooms and in out of
school activities. Through project-related activities, students will have
opportunities to assume geospatial roles and work side by side with stakeholders
as they examine community issues through a spatial lens, analyzing data
surrounding authentic problems to determine appropriate solutions. The project
will research project implementation and what project elements contribute to
increase in student knowledge and awareness of GST careers, related career
pathways, and 21st century skills. This project will advance efforts of the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to
better understand and promote practices that increase students' motivations and
capacities to pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The POD project will target both urban
and rural settings with traditionally underserved populations and will involve
an estimated 30 teacher educators, 675 additional teachers trained by the
teacher-educators, and 27,000 students. Project research will investigate key
elements that contribute to project outcomes. The POD team will research each
level of implementation from teacher educators and investigate how the project
contributes to the development of student STEM career awareness and interest.
The POD facilitation guide, including case studies of common teacher
experiences, student work samples, video teaching cases and ways to connect to
local industry, will be available online via print on demand or electronically.
Research and evaluation results and instruments will be shared through
conference presentations and journal articles.