* 1513110
* CI-EN: ORBIT GEN 3 - Enhancing the ORBIT Testbed with LTE and Cloud Radio Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,345,240.00

This project is aimed at a third-generation equipment upgrade for the ORBIT
(Open Access Testbed for Next Generation Wireless Networking) testbed which has
been operated by Rutgers University as a community resource since 2005. The
ORBIT testbed, which researchers access remotely over the Internet, provides a
flexible, scalable and reproducible platform for conducting wireless network
experiments. ORBIT lowers the barrier for experimentation in the area of radio
and wireless technology and thus improves education and research productivity in
the field. The goal of this project is to extend the testbed to incorporate two
key new capabilities: (1) LTE (Long Term Evolution) radio access, to support
realistic evaluation of future mobile data services, and (2) "cloud radio"
processing to enable experimental studies of emerging "5G" radio access
technologies. The proposed testbed enhancements will help accelerate the pace of
wireless/mobile technology development by facilitating evaluation of emerging
radio technologies and network architectures such as dynamic spectrum access,
cooperative MIMO (multiple input multiple output) and heterogeneous cellular
networks. More specifically, the LTE and radio cloud capabilities to be added in
this project will enable the study of techniques for enhancing wireless system
capacity, helping to address the important societal problem of spectrum scarcity
as mobile data usage continues to grow exponentially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ORBIT upgrade proposed here involves two major enhancements to the testbed.
First, both the radio grid emulator and the outdoor ORBIT campus network will be
upgraded to incorporate LTE in addition to the existing WiMax capability. LTE is
rapidly being deployed in 4G cellular systems worldwide, and it is important to
enable the research community to use this access technology for realistic mobile
network experiments. LTE capability will be added to the outdoor ORBIT network
by retrofitting a commercial base station to be controllable through the ORBIT
management framework (OMF), while LTE on indoor nodes will be implemented in
software running on available SDR platforms. Second, the radio grid's backend
will be upgraded with a unique combination of FPGA and CPU based "software radio
cloud" that will increase processing speeds by two orders-of-magnitude. The
proposed radio cloud is designed as a hierarchically organized high-performance
system which includes fast CPU-based servers, FPGA co-processors and "thin-
client" software-defined radio nodes all connected together by a fast and
programmable switching backplane. The system will include nearly 16 compute
server blades (each with rated computing capacity of 700 GIPS), a large FPGA-
based centralized co-processor array, a total of about 48 software defined radio
(SDR) client nodes and about 128 x 10Gbps OpenFlow switch ports for
connectivity. Examples of experiments that will be enabled include LTE-WiFi
interworking, LTE-based mobile cloud services, wideband spectrum sensing and
dynamic spectrum access algorithms, massive MIMO (multiple input multiple
output) and cooperative PHY, cellular cloud RAN (radio access network) and
virtual wireless networks. LTE capabilities will be released during year 1 of
the project, and a first version of the radio cloud will be released in year 2,
followed by an updated version in year 3.