* 1513961
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: DEFIND: DEclarative Formal Interactive Network Design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Limin Jia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Networks are complex systems that unfortunately are ridden with errors, which
may lead to disruption of services with grave consequences. One approach to
eliminating errors is to construct a formal model of the network and verify the
correctness properties. However, extracting models from existing networks is
often beyond what network operators can do. To lower the complexity of network
design and verification, an alternative approach is to use high-level abstract
domain specific languages (DSLs) to define networks. For instance, in the
context of Software Defined Networks (SDN), researchers have developed Frenetic,
Pyretic, NetKAT network programming languages. These DSLs are often backed by
formal semantics, which provide some correctness guarantees of programs
(networks) written in them. However, DSLs have yet to make inroads into
practical network deployments. One key barrier to adoption is that these
languages tend to be used in silos, decoupled from the process of designing,
implementing, and deploying the networks. To address these challenges, this
research proposes DEFIND, a platform that enables iterative network design and
unifies the entire toolchain of specifying, implementing, deploying, verifying
and debugging networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research includes the
following three tightly connected tasks that comprise DEFIND. All three tasks
use the Network Datalog declarative networking language, as the unified
intermediary language. The first research task develops static analysis
techniques to analyze the correctness properties of network protocols. When
properties do not hold, DEFIND provides meaningful feedback to aid program
debugging. The second research task leverages dynamic provenance tracking to
generate counter-examples and suggest potential fixes when static analysis in
the first research task cannot provide conclusive results. The final task
provides a new API for programming networks, whereby a network operator
specifies the desired functionality of the network using example behavior.
DEFIND aims to automatically generate network specifications from these
examples. Results from the first two tasks are applied to refine examples and
generate correct network specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of this proposal lies in the development of a unifying framework that combines
both formal analysis and implementation of network protocols during design,
analysis, and implementation phase. DEFIND aims to enable network operators,
even if they are not trained in programming, to directly design and configure
new network protocols. The PIs will co-teach a research seminar that
investigates the application of formal methods and programming techniques in the
domain of network protocol design.