* 1513120
* II-New: Infrastructure for Energy-Aware High Performance Computing (HPC) and Data Analytics on Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Ponnuswamy Sadayappan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 898,685.00

The project builds a comprehensive research infrastructure to meet the needs of
a large research team at the Ohio State University allowing experimental
research in a number of computer science areas including high performance
computing, data analytics, storage, and virtualization. The project will lead to
significant advances in many computer science areas, and its impact will be
enhanced through active dissemination of software from the investigators. The
project will contribute substantially to human resource development, education
in computer science increasing diversity in related areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, researchers will acquire and deploy an
infrastructure that includes three types of accelerators, conventional as well
as energy-efficient nodes, large main memory including Solid State Drive (SSD)
on a subset of nodes, and hardware for fine-grained power measurements. The
requested resources will allow experimentation with a number of popular or
emerging cluster configurations that address needs of a variety of compute-
intensive and/or data-intensive workloads. Such an internally hosted and
reconfigurable cluster will also allow power measurements, voltage margin
reduction experiments, and failure detection and recovery studies in the
presence of physical failures - none of which is typically feasible at national
supercomputing and cloud infrastructures. The infrastructure is motivated by the
multiple paradigm shifts that high performance computing is presently
undergoing. They include increasing use of accelerators or coprocessors,
increased criticality of energy and resilience beyond performance, synergy with
data analytic applications, and popularity of massive main memory or SSD
technologies. These trends provide opportunities and challenges for a variety of
scientific, medical, and enterprise applications to be explored in this project.