* 1513036
* Scaling limits of random curves at criticality
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Gregory Lawler, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

Many mathematical models from statistical physics are characterized by the fact
that there is a sharp qualitative change when a parameter reaches a certain
value. This is an idealization of phase transitions such as the change of water
from solid to liquid to gas as temperature varies. These mathematical models at
critical values of the parameter often produce random fractals. The proposer
will continue investigation of these fractals. The theory is well developed in
two dimensions where the systems are invariant under conformal transformation
and the investigation will be on fine properties. The theory in three dimensions
is less developed and the main goal is to construct nontrivial
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the goal in two dimensions is to
study the Schramm-Loewner evolution (SLE) as a measure on curves parametrized
with the natural fractal parametrization. Technical questions to study include
the Holder continuity of the curves (under natural parametrization) and the
stationary of the SLE loop measure. The latter property is needed to construct a
conformally covariant measure on SLE loops analogous to the Brownian loop
measure. There are several questions in three dimensions that will be
investigated: trying to show that there is a unique chronological loop-erasure
of Brownian motion and to describe the limit as a Laplacian random walk; proving
analyticity of the intersection exponent for Brownian motion and establishing
the multifractal spectrum for harmonic measure; and finding general methods to
give nontrivial measures on continuous, non-self-intersecting curves of fractal
dimension greater than one. The use of infinitesimal (non-standard) techniques
will be considered as an alternative to continuum models for objects such as
exponentials of Gaussian free fields, uniform spanning trees, and percolation.