* 1513116
* CI-P: Towards the Creation of a Unified Repository for MultiLingual and CrossLingual Multiword Expressions
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Mona Diab, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Single concepts that cross word boundaries, such as kick the bucket and traffic
light, are typically referred to as multiword expressions (MWE). MWE usage is
pervasive in natural languages. MWEs pose a significant challenge from a
processing perspective. Explicitly identifying, classifying, and modeling MWEs
in text is shown to improve NLP technologies. The objective of this proposal is
to conduct exploratory research and build consensus towards the creation of a
Unified Repository for Multilingual and Cross-lingual MWE cutting across
different languages (Arabic, Chinese, English, Spanish, Persian), genres and
domains while adding contextual references and links to existing lexical
resources. Understanding the space of MWE across different languages will have a
significant impact on multilingual and cross-lingual NLP applications as well as
studies in Linguistics in general. Such a large-scale resource will provide for
a disciplined investigation into language universals and language-specific
studies by adding insights into shared and varying cultural and language
concepts as grounds for extensive typological and etymological studies of how
concepts are formed across peoples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiword Expressions
(MWE) occupy a significant portion of the semantic space. With deeper
understanding of MWE, their nature, behavior and usage, natural language
processing (NLP) practitioners can build more robust systems to achieve the goal
of Natural Language Understanding (NLU). Looking at a diverse set of languages
simultaneously would lead to more insights into language universals and language
specific phenomena having profound impact in how we design overall natural
language solutions. The objective of this proposal is to conduct exploratory
research and build consensus towards the creation of a Unified Repository for
Multilingual and Cross-lingual MWE cutting across different genres and domains
while adding contextual references and links to existing lexical resources such
as WordNet. The vision is for a repository that is consistently annotated with
links across 5 different languages: Arabic, Chinese, English, Spanish, and
Persian. This grant will support the following: i) investigating universal
linguistic information that is common across MWEs in various languages as well
as identifying differentiating features that are language-specific or found in
typologically related languages; ii) conducting pilot annotation studies on
essential annotation tasks; iii) building the basic infrastructure for
harvesting, storing, and annotating the data; iv) developing tools to bootstrap
the envisioned resource from existing resources; and, v) Organizing two 2-day
workshops to gather input from leading researchers in the field and to build
consensus on key issues for such a resource.