* 1513086
* GeniConnect: Game-based learning, mentoring, and laboratory experiences - A model for industry-afterschool partnerships
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ravit Golan Duncan, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,201,851.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). In particular, it
touches on three of the ITEST Program's focal areas: (1) investigating coherent
sets of experiences that support student competency; (2) modeling the roles
business and industry workforce member's play in motivating students; and (3)
develop examples of productive ways to support broadening participation through
industry/afterschool partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biotechnology, and
genetics in particular, are rapidly advancing areas that will offer new jobs
across the spectrum from technicians to scientists. Each year, U.S. companies
spend nearly a billion dollars on STEM education programs. Yet we lack research-
based models for engaging students with industry professionals to further their
awareness of STEM careers and help them learn the content these careers demand.
This three-year ITEST Strategies project, GeniConnect, focuses on middle school
student engagement in genetics and biotechnology using game-based learning
(Geniverse). With guidance and mentoring from industry professionals, research
scientists, and community volunteers, 150 diverse students from Cambridge, MA
will participate in an eight-week afterschool program. Students will also
conduct hands-on experiments at the Biogen Idec Community Lab while becoming
familiar with STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project framework will be
guided by an evidence-centered design, aligned with project activities intended
to develop better models to sustain successful industry and afterschool
partnerships. Two key research questions guide the investigation: (1) How can a
suite of experiences involving game-based learning, laboratory activities and
mentoring by industry professionals foster student understanding and motivation
in genetics and biotechnology and further student awareness of careers and real-
world connections? This question forms the iterative design and pilot study
components of the research. Analysis will help the team understand both
foundational concepts needed for understanding modern genetics and the
dimensions of motivation concerning students' feelings of relevance, personal
interest and self-efficacy toward genetics and biotechnology; and (2) What
methods and processes can aid industry groups and afterschool programs in
forming meaningful and productive partnerships? This question forms the
feasibility research. It explores the essential aspects of STEM professionals'
engagement, preparation and relationship building with afterschool groups as
well as how participation and program design aspects are valued. Data collection
strategies will include survey, log data from the Geniverse platform, focus
groups, and in-depth interviews; outcome measures will center on content
knowledge, motivation, value, interest and self-efficacy. The contexts for
research and design will be the home and afterschool
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project partners include the Concord Consortium, a
nonprofit with extensive experience researching and developing STEM educational
technology; Purdue University; and East End House, a nonprofit community-based
organization serving under-resourced youth in Cambridge, MA. Project results
will inform not only the research community of the design and delivery of
effective afterschool STEM programs for career awareness and learning, but also
supply afterschool programs and industry partners with a pathway for success.
Using this framework, the project will create a STEM Partnership Toolkit to be
distributed to approximately 500 community-based organizations and afterschool
programs nationally that are member organizations of the Alliance for Strong
Families and Communities.