* 1513369
* RAPID: SCH: A Framework for Epidemic Contact Tracing Using Multi-contextual Information
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Krishna Kavi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* jun huan
* 11/30/2015
* USD 99,965.00

In order to stop the Ebola Epidemic it is essential to do effective "contact
tracing." The problem is complex as the contact tracing has to be done
retroactively after a patient is diagnosed with the disease. Any lapse in
contact tracing could potentially fail to track citizens at risk and spreading
of the disease. Ad hoc tracing, relying on the infected carrier?s recollection
of places visited and people met may lead to inaccurate tracking. Similarly,
relying on the recollections of individuals who may have come into contact with
the carrier cannot accurately identify those who are at high risk and those who
are at low risk of contracting the disease. This project proposes a framework
that uses existing readily available technologies that can do effective,
automated contact tracing without compromising the privacy of the users. The
framework has two parts: aggregator - which collects information from the users,
and analyzer --- which processes the information to do contact tracing. This
project will develop advances in algorithms to minimize false positives, storage
features for context and social data that is both scalable and will preserve
privacy of potential contacts.

The best current method for managing the Ebola epidemic currently is through
contact tracing; that is, retrospectively identifying anyone with whom the
affected person has come in contact. The current contact tracing system is time
intensive and error-prone. The proposed system will do the tracing
automatically, using a scalable, privacy preserving method that draws data from
the affected person?s social network and smart phone context. The proposed
framework is not only applicable to contact tracing for Ebola, but also can be
used for contact tracing of other infectious diseases, as well as emergency
preparedness in the case of bio-terrorism attacks. The technologies developed as
part of this project, such as privacy preserving storage architecture, can also
be applied to other problems.