* 1513396
* Collaborative Research: Understanding mechanisms of projected 21st century ocean warming around Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Christopher Little, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,674.00

Devastating storm surges result from a combination of the characteristics of the
storm itself; e.g. wind strength, direction of storm approach to the coast,
storm duration; and from preconditioning due to rising sea level, such that the
storm waves can overtop protective barriers that provided adequate defense when
sea level was lower. Water added to the oceans from melting glacier, ice caps,
and ice sheets is a significant cause of sea level rise. In particular, the
Greenland Ice Sheet is projected to be a major contributor to sea level rise
during the present century. Much of the recently observed contribution is a
response to warming ocean temperatures around Greenland, which cause marine-
terminating glaciers to melt and calve icebergs into the ocean. Models that are
used to predict this anticipated sea level rise exhibit a broad spread in ocean
temperatures around the Greenland Ice Sheet, for reasons that are not well
understood. This project is designed to improve understanding of the physical
processes responsible for this spread in projected ocean temperatures amongst
models.

The lead principal investigator for this project, through his ongoing work with
local and state governments, will ensure that the results are relevant to and
transferred to planners and policy-makers. His parent company will assist in a
similar information transfer to the private sector. The project will also
contribute to workforce development through support for the training of a
graduate student in state-of-the-art interdisciplinary science and through
support of three early-career scientists during their formative years. The
detailed mechanistic understanding provided by this work will reveal: the
physical processes underlying the spread in CMIP5 projections of near-Greenland
ocean warming; the nature and location of the surface fluxes driving warming;
and the linkages between warming at different depths and different locations
around the ice sheet. It will also provide a physical basis for linkages between
near-Greenland ocean warming and other related Arctic climate system processes
(e.g. Northern Hemisphere sea ice and the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation). These linkages are vital to understanding how climate-driven
changes in Greenland?s mass balance are coupled to other processes such as the
loss of sea ice and more general polar surface warming. A two-part strategy will
be used to evaluate causal physical mechanisms underlying the spread in CMIP5
projections of ocean warming in an efficient and detailed manner. Statistical
analysis of ocean temperature will cluster AOGCMs by their ocean warming
patterns and their co-variability (across space and models) with surface fluxes
and other climate processes. Numerical simulations, forced by surface fluxes
from a representative subset of CMIP5 models, will then be used to develop
detailed oceanic heat budgets. Targeted perturbation experiments will isolate
the role of atmospheric and Greenland meltwater flux in the context of widely
varying CMIP5 representations of the Arctic freshwater budget.