* 1513671
* TWC: Medium: CRYPTOGRAPHIC APPLICATIONS OF CAPACITY THEORY
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Ted Chinburg, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,095,000.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop a mathematical foundation
underlying the analysis of modern cryptosystems. Cryptography is a core tool
used to secure communications over the Internet. Secure and trustworthy
communications and data storage are essential to national security and to the
functioning of the world economy. Recent spectacular research results have
enabled the development of new types of cryptography, exciting new potential
applications, and hopes for stronger guarantees of cryptographic security in the
long term. This project aims to increase confidence in these new constructions
by unifying new methods from mathematics with cryptographic tools.

Nearly all of public-key cryptography relies for its security on the assumed
difficulty of solving various number theoretic problems. Recent developments in
cryptography such as fully homomorphic encryption, candidate multilinear maps,
and efficient post-quantum lattice-based cryptography have produced a multitude
of new algebraicand number-theoretic cryptographic hardness assumptions. Many of
these problems are new and largely unstudied by the computational number theory
community. This project uses tools from arithmetic geometry such as capacity
theory and Arakelov theory to develop a more rigorous understanding of the
theoretical and computational limits to the fundamental cryptanalytic techniques
used to assure cryptographic security. This project will improve the numerical
and theoretical tools used in cryptanalysis, and promote a better understanding
of the security of many practical cryptosystems.