* 1513065
* Authentic art making as a vehicle for connecting to STEM learning and careers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Susan Rodgerson, Artists For Humanity, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by drawing explicit
connections between the artistic practices in the studio and the practices of
STEM professionals. It will also contribute to the field's understanding of how
to develop interdisciplinary educational experiences that capitalize on
naturally occurring opportunities for transfer of knowledge and skill across
disciplines. Artists for Humanity and Education Development Center, Inc. are
collaborating to develop and study a model for using authentic art-making to
promote high school students' interest in STEM learning and STEM careers. The
project builds on a highly successful Artists for Humanity out-of-school-time
art and design program for Boston youth, which uses an apprenticeship model to
educate under-resourced youth through mentor-guided creation and sale of
artworks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Youth at Artists for Humanity represent a
racially and ethnically diverse, low-income demographic. Few teens entering AFH
experience success in STEM learning, or express interest in STEM careers. Yet
many engage in sophisticated art-making that calls on a variety of STEM-related
practices, dispositions, and knowledge without recognizing the connection to
their in-school STEM studies. STEAM Power will highlight the STEM thinking
students do in the art studio, drawing explicit connections between the artistic
practices in the studio and the practices of STEM professionals to help youth:
develop a view of STEM that expands their school experiences, recognize their
own STEM strengths, and increase their interest and confidence in pursuing
further STEM study and careers. The goal of the project is to increase teen
artists' interest in STEM and STEM careers by highlighting the STEM thinking
they do in the studio and deepening their STEM learning within this relevant and
motivating context. By looking to impact the STEM interests and potential career
choices of youth whose artistic training places a premium on thinking
creatively, working collaboratively, and communicating effectively, a segment of
the youth population is impacted that, while currently underrepresented in the
workforce, has much energy and vision to offer STEM fields.