* 1513273
* Physics of Wind Musical Instruments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Nicholas Giordano, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2019
* USD 290,492.00

Sound generation in wind instruments such as the recorder, flute, and trumpet
involves the motion of a compressible fluid (air). This motion can be extremely
complicated, and can lead to vortex formation and other phenomena found in
strongly driven fluids. Such complex fluid motion is generally found in the
mouthpiece of a wind instrument or near constrictions such as toneholes, where
experimental observations are most difficult. This project will use advanced
computational methods to study the fluid dynamics of air inside and around
several wind instruments. This fluid motion is directly responsible for sound
generation, so the results of this study will lead to a better understanding of
the musical tones produced by a variety of wind instruments. The computational
results will also be compared, where possible, with experimental results
obtained with custom made instruments as part of this project or through the
experimental work of other groups. The undergraduate and graduate students who
will be involved in this project will engage in experimental work and will also
work on the modeling. This modeling experience will prepare them for careers in
advanced scientific computing, since the methods used to solve the Navier-Stokes
for a musical instrument are applicable to many problems of technological
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical laws that describe the fluid
dynamics central to wind instruments are well known. These laws are expressed in
the Navier-Stokes equations, a set of nonlinear partial differential equations
which are applicable to many situation involving fluid flow . The complexity of
the Navier-Stokes equations is such that their application to realistic musical
instruments (and other complicated systems) demands a computational solution,
which is now feasible with available high performance parallel computers. This
project will use the approach known as "direct numerical simulation" to obtain
solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations for a variety of wind instruments. This
will be achieved using state-of-the-art computational resources and custom
designed algorithms for multicore computer architectures. These computational
studies will be complemented with experimental measurements designed to test
specific predictions of the modeling results, leading to new insights into these
instruments. Several hypothetical new instrument geometries will also be
studied, work that may identify new geometries that produce specific tonal
properties not found in current instruments. The techniques that are developed
in this project will be applicable in all wind instruments and will therefore be
of broad interest to the field of musical acoustics and beyond.