* 1513009
* LinCT: Linking Educators, Youth, and Learners in Computational Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Sarah Cohn, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,198,689.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by producing
empirical findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about
which models and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely
to increase capacity in the STEM and STEM cognate intensive workforce of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LinCT (Linking Educators, Youth, and Learners
in Computational Thinking) project at the Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) will
engage female teachers-in-training and youth from underrepresented demographics
in immersive technology experiences and STEM education. LinCT will guide
teachers to develop their understanding and use of technology in the classroom,
as well as prepare youth for a future where technology plays a key role in a
wide range of professional opportunities. The project aims to inspire teachers
and youth to see the possibilities of technological competencies, as well as why
the incorporation of technology can build meaningful learning experiences and
opportunities for all learners. The LinCT program model offers learning and
application experiences for participating teachers and youth and provides an
introduction of technological tools used in SMM educational programs and
professional development on approaches for engaging all learners in STEM. Both
groups will provide instruction in SMM technology-based Summer Camps, reaching
1,000 young people every year. In each following school year, project educators
will develop and deliver technology-based programs to nearly 1,000 under-served
and underrepresented elementary students. The project will allow teachers and
youth to deliver exciting and engaging technology-based programs to nearly 4,000
diverse young learners. As a result, all participants in this project will be
better equipped to incorporate technology in their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LinCT project will investigate effective
approaches for broadening the participation of underrepresented populations by
providing female pre-service teachers and female youth with opportunities to
lead programming at the Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM). Over three years, the
LinCT project will employ 8-12 female teachers-in-training [Teacher Tech Cadres
(TTC)] and 12-24 female youth [Youth Teaching Tech Crews (Y-TTC)] from
demographics that are underrepresented in STEM fields. The integration of these
groups will result in relationships fostered within an educational program,
where all participants are learners and teachers, mentors and mentees. The
results of this unique program model will be assessed through the experiences of
this focused professional learning and teaching community. The LinCT research
study will focus on three aspects of the project. First, it will seek to
understand how the teachers-in-training and youth experience the project model's
varied learning environments. Next, the study will explore how the TTC's and the
Y-TTC's motivation, confidence, and self-efficacy with integrating technology
across educational settings change because of the program. Finally, the study
will seek to understand the lasting aspects of culture, training, and community
building on SMM's internal teams and LinCT partner institutions (University of
St. Catherine's National Center for STEM Elementary Education and Metropolitan
State University's School of Urban Education).