* 1513328
* Broadening Interest in Geosciences, Habitat, and Technology among Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Anupma Prakash, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,137,024.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging high
school Alaskan girls in studies of nearby natural environments. An out-of-school
program consisting of a 10-day summer academy and six Saturday events during the
school year will be implemented in both Juneau and Fairbanks. The program
structure will be the same in both locations, and both locations will build on
students' general interest in biology and the natural environment to frame
interdisciplinary studies of ecosystem dynamics, geophysical dynamics, and use
of technologies, such as remote sensing, to study impacts of environmental
change. In Juneau the program will focus on the life history and ecosystems of
harbor seals, and in Fairbanks the program will focus on the life history and
ecosystems of harbor salmon; both animals are familiar and important to the
cultural lives of participants. During the summer academy participants will
generate research questions, conduct mini-research projects, synthesize their
observations and results, and present their findings to the public. During these
activities, participants will hear from local female scientists from the region,
and they will work alongside female undergraduate and graduate science majors in
using scientific instruments to take measurements and conduct analyses. During
the school year following the academy, students will explore environmental
change scenarios with scientists, community members, and various agency
representatives; they will explore the impacts of temperature variations on
habitat variation; they will meet with indigenous residents to hear stories
about the focal species of interest; and they will visit STEM workplaces and
explore possible career tracks with career professionals and counselors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the impacts of an out-of-school,
place-based, and research based learning environment on the STEM-related career
interests and identity development of high school girls. The goals of the
project are to: a) increase the intent of Alaskan girls to enter STEM careers;
b) increase interest in the geosciences and technology among Alaskan girls; and
c) Increase Alaskan girls' actual and perceived STEM competencies. Recruitment
of participants will be targeted on schools and districts having high
proportions of indigenous students, economically disadvantaged students, or
students representing other minority groups. The project research plan focuses
on an under-explored area of study: the relationship between science identity
and engagement with role models, particularly within the context of out-of-
school learning environments. Data will be collected from participants using
semi-structured interviews before, after, and a year past exposure to the
program; summer and Saturday events will be videotaped to document the practices
of participants, instructors, and role models; and a variety of artifacts
generated by participants during their involvement in the program will be
analyzed. A grounded theory approach will be used to construct answers to three
research questions: a) What is the impact of professional STEM role models
(female) on the participants' identity development and motivation to pursue
STEM? B) To what extent does the proposed learning environment, which leverages
real-world research problems, impact identity? And c) What do the girls learn
about STEM and STEM practices, and how does this relate to who they want to
become? The research team will also seek evidence of participant impressions of
scientists and how interests in biology may link to interests in geoscience and
technology.