* 1513248
* Teachers and Researchers Advancing Integrated Lessons in STEM (TRAILS)
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* David Eichinger, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 01/31/2021
* USD 964,235.00

This project will advance efforts to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) through the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers program. It will
address the long-term need to help teachers prepare more students to excel in
STEM fields. The project will meet this need through integrated science
instruction that will help students to link learning to the real-world context,
which research shows will help increase their interest, motivation, and
persistence in STEM careers. The project will: (1) engage in-service science and
technology teachers in professional development to build STEM knowledge and
practices to enhance integrated STEM instruction; (2) establish a sustainable
community of practice of STEM teachers, researchers, industry partners, and
college student mentors; (3) engage students in STEM learning through
engineering design and 3D printing and scanning technology; and (4) generate
strategies to overcome barriers for students in rural schools and underserved
populations to pursue careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use real-world exemplars as the foundation for integrating entomology and
engineering design to investigate the development of 21st skills (creativity,
critical thinking, collaboration, communication, and computational thinking) in
STEM for teachers and students. To prepare teachers for this challenge,
professional development will be based on a community of practice model that
involves training, curriculum modification and adaptation, and lesson planning
on integrated instruction. The project will examine the influence of these
efforts on students' ability to design, test, and develop products and artifacts
to help them make real-life connections to the world in which they live. Because
students in rural communities have few role models, STEM faculty and their
graduate and undergraduate students from Purdue University and Ivy Tech
Community College, along with local community stakeholders and business leaders,
will team with 45 high school teachers and more than 2000 students in an
authentic learning context of design and discovery learning. This approach will
afford teachers and students from 21 schools in rural Indiana with access to
experts from STEM disciplines through technology-rich pathways, face-to-face
interactions, and follow-up in-class support. The findings from this study will
inform theory about authentic ways to reduce barriers for students in rural
areas that continue to hinder their access to instruction shown to be effective
in advancing 21st knowledge and skills. Results from this study will also help
increase students' interest in and motivation for careers in STEM fields.