* 1513007
* Expanding the Enzyme Repertoire by Evolution and Engineering
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Frances Arnold, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,503,040.00

Creating new enzymes (proteins that speed up chemical reactions) is a formidable
challenge for which few effective design strategies exist. However, nature
frequently creates new enzymes, for example when enzymes are needed to degrade
man-made chemicals and to use these as a nutrient source. This project will
develop a strategy for creating new enzymes based on a fundamental understanding
of both chemistry and of the natural evolution of enzymes. The project will
probe the degree to which the range of naturally occurring enzymes can be
expanded to deliver novel chemistries and has significant potential to
contribute to the competitiveness of the chemical and pharmaceutical industries.
The project will provide interdisciplinary training and preparation that will
help graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to develop careers in a rapidly
changing academic and professional environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project extends a proof-of-concept demonstration that the catalytic functions of
cytochrome P450s can accommodate synthetic precursors to new reactive
intermediates as a result of the enzymes' versatile iron-heme prosthetic group.
These new reactive intermediates open up the possibility of an array of enzyme-
catalyzed reactions that are not known in nature. The project will explore how
the non-natural reaction kinetics can be fully optimized and how the new
reactions can be incorporated into metabolic pathways using a combination of in
vivo and in vitro approaches. Directed evolution will be used to improve the
expression of mutated cytochrome P450s, improve reaction kinetics, and perturb
the rate of electron transfer for improved nitrene-transfer reaction
selectivity. Detailed kinetic, structural and biochemical studies of the 'fossil
record' of all evolutionary intermediates will provide fundamental insights into
the molecular pathways by which new amination activities can be realized. The
specific focus on intermolecular alkene aziridination and C-H amination draws on
expertise in directed evolution and understanding of mechanistic similarities
between P450's native chemistry and the desired new enzyme
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded jointly by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences; the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program, Division of Chemistry, and the Biocatalysis
Program of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
Division.