* 1513429
* Participant Support for Foundations of Molecular Modeling and Simulation: Molecular Modeling and the Materials Genome (FOMMS 2015); Welches, Oregon, on July 12-15, 2015
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Randall Snurr, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2016
* USD 22,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support for the 6th
triennial conference on Foundations of Molecular Modeling and Simulation held in
Welches, Oregon, near Mount Hood, on July 12 - 16, 2015. The conference brings
together a diverse group of community experts from academia, government, and
industry, and from overseas to promote the application of computational and
data-based methods to chemical and materials sciences problems ranging from the
design of new materials for energy and environmental applications to
understanding how drug molecules interact with the body. Computational modeling
and data-based approaches have the potential to drive innovation, reduce costs,
and speed product development. The theme of the 2015 conference is "Molecular
Modeling and the Materials Genome." The Materials Genome Initiative is a White
House initiative with a goal to discover, design, manufacture, and deploy
advanced materials twice as fast as currently possible, at a fraction of the
cost. Computation and data are envisioned to play a key role in achieving this
objective. NSF support enables the participation of 15 graduate students and 5
post-docs who might not otherwise be able to attend the conference. The
conference provides a hands-on educational experience for graduate students and
postdocs in computational and data-based methods, and their application to
discovery, design, and product development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial support for the 6th triennial
conference on Foundations of Molecular Modeling and Simulation held in Welches,
Oregon, near Mount Hood, on July 12 - 16, 2015. The conference brings together a
diverse group of community experts from academia, government, and industry, and
from overseas to promote the application of computational and data-based methods
to chemical and materials sciences to a range of problems in science and
engineering. The theme of this conference is "Molecular Modeling and the
Materials Genome." The Materials Genome Initiative is a White House initiative
with a goal to discover, design, manufacture, and deploy advanced materials
twice as fast as currently possible, at a fraction of the cost. Computation and
data are envisioned to play a key role in achieving this objective. This award
enables 15 graduate students and 5 post-docs to participate in the conference,
who might not otherwise be able to attend. The Foundations of Molecular Modeling
and Simulation series was initiated in 2000 to foster the application and
development of molecular-based computational methods. It has a diverse cross
section of participants and topics, combined with the intimacy and accessibility
of a relatively small conference. The 2015 conference has no parallel sessions
and consists of 18 plenary speakers, three workshops with an educational focus,
and two poster sessions. The invited speakers span university and industry and
include international experts. The conference facilitates meaningful
interactions between senior and junior researchers, interactions that are often
difficult to coordinate at larger meetings. Additionally, three hands-on
workshops are held on 1) materials informatics 2) software development
practices, and 3) computing on graphics processing units and advanced computing
architectures. The workshops provide a hands-on educational experience for
graduate students and postdocs in computational and data-based methods, and
their application to discovery, design, and product development.