* 1513373
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Quickest Change Detection Techniques with Signal Processing Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 467,186.00

CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Quickest Change Detection Techniques with
Signal Processing Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of detecting changes in stochastic
systems, often referred to as sequential change detection or quickest change
detection, arises in various branches of science and engineering. In all these
applications, an anomaly in the environment changes in some way the distribution
of the sequentially acquired observations. The goal is to detect the change and
raise an alarm as soon as possible, so that any necessary action can be taken in
time, while controlling the rate of false alarms below an acceptable level.
While the quickest change detection problem has been actively studied since
early 1950s, there are many open challenges in this field that are of
theoretical as well as practical interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses long-standing open problems in quickest change detection, as well as
challenging problems that are motivated by modern applications, such as the
following: 1) Optimum quickest change detection for Markov data; 2) Optimum
quickest detection for transient changes; 3) (Asymptotically) optimum quickest
change detection schemes for multistream data when changes are sparse; 4) Joint
quickest change detection and isolation (localization of the change) in
multistream data; 5) Controlled sensing for quickest change detection and
isolation with composite post change hypothesis; 6) Data-driven quickest outlier
detection and isolation. Furthermore, the investigators study the applications
of their results in the following areas: 1) Line outage detection in power
systems; 2) Epidemic detection; 3) Change detection in financial applications;
4) Surveillance using sensor networks; 5) Dynamic spectrum sensing; 6) Intrusion
detection in power grids/networks; 6) Anomaly and fraud detection in big data.