* 1513103
* I-Corps:  Wireless Invention Kits and Media Engagement Platform
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Stephen Ruthmann, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Beginners face barriers to music making; music notation, technique, and theory
can seem like pre-requisites to meaningful musical experiences. Current
electronic music technologies are too complex, constrained, or expensive.
Educators and children need better tools that support learning through creative
tinkering with technology and music. Current tools are too complicated for
beginners, not open-ended enough to support diverse student interests,
inadequately supported by creative pedagogy and support materials, and too
expensive. This I-Corps team is developing a musical invention kit that enables
users to transform everyday materials, like paper, cardboard and aluminum foil,
into musical instruments. The kit connects users' tangible creations to a music-
making app in a web browser or mobile device. The proposed design is both
simple, lowering the barriers to entry for musical creation, and powerful,
enabling kids, families and teachers to invent and play with music and sounds
they love.

The proposed technology consists of a kit of physical and electronic materials
that, together with custom web and mobile applications, enable kids to design
and build musical instruments, interfaces and controllers. At the core of the
kit is a microcontroller break-out board with analog, capacitive and high-
resistance switching inputs. The microcontroller communicates with our custom
mobile and web music and media applications via low-power Bluetooth enabling
children to work with our kits avoiding the clutter, complexity and limitations
of wires. Also included are paper templates pre-printed with conductive ink
traces and connectors. These templates can be cut, customized, extended, drawn-
on with pencil lead and conductive ink, and folded into physical objects such as
custom music controllers and interactive storyboards. Tutorials and an inspiring
online community support users' creative work.