* 1513060
* SciGirls Strategies: Gender Equitable Teaching Practices in Career and Technical Education Pathways for High School Girls
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Rita Karl, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,616,272.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.

Twin Cities Public Television project on Gender Equitable Teaching Practices in
Career and Technical Education Pathways for High School Girls is designed to
help career and technical education educators and guidance counselors recruit
and retain more high school girls from diverse backgrounds in science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) pathways, specifically in technology and
engineering. The project's goals are: 1) To increase the number of high school
girls, including ethnic minorities, recruited and retained in traditionally male
-STEM pathways; 2) To enhance the teaching and coaching practices of Career and
Technical Education educators, counselors and role models with gender equitable
and culturally responsive strategies; 3) To research the impacts of strategies
and role model experiences on girls' interest in STEM careers; 4) To evaluate
the effectiveness of training in these strategies for educators, counselors and
role models; and 5) To develop training that can easily be scaled up to reach a
much larger audience. The research hypothesis is that girls will develop more
positive STEM identities and interests when their educators employ research-
based, gender-equitable and culturally responsive teaching practices enhanced
with female STEM role models. Instructional modules and media-based online
resources for Minnesota high school Career and Technical Education programs will
be developed in the Twin Cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul and piloted in
districts with strong community college and industry partnerships. Twin Cities
Public Television will partner with STEM and gender equity researchers from St.
Catherine University in St. Paul, the National Girls Collaborative, the
University of Colorado-Boulder (CU-Boulder), the Minnesota Department of
Education and the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities System.

The project will examine girls' personal experiences with equitable strategies
embedded into classroom STEM content and complementary mentoring experiences,
both live and video-based. It will explore how these experiences contribute to
girls' STEM-related identity construction against gender-based stereotypes. It
will also determine the extent girls' exposure to female STEM role models impact
their Career and Technical Education studies and STEM career aspirations. The
study will employ and examine short-form autobiographical videos created and
shared by participating girls to gain insight into their STEM classroom and role
model experiences. Empowering girls to respond to the ways their Career and
Technical Education educators and guidance counselors guide them toward
technology and engineering careers will provide a valuable perspective on
educational practice and advance the STEM education field.