* 1513770
* Integrating Cognitive and Sensorimotor Systems in Stuttering and Speech Production
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Eric Jackson, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 208,271.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship supports a rising scientist in the interdisciplinary
area of speech production, cognitive science and neurocomputational modeling.
Speech production is a complex skill that hinges on the real-time integration of
cognitive and sensorimotor processes. Contemporary models of speech production
pay little attention to salient cognitive processes such as intention,
attention, and awareness. One way to further basic understanding of the critical
link between cognitive and sensorimotor systems during speech production is to
examine typically and atypically developing systems. This project investigates
stuttering, a neurodevelopmental speech disorder, by leveraging the well-known
phenomenon of anticipation. Anticipation refers to the a priori sense a speaker
has that upcoming speech will be stuttered. Examining anticipation and speech
behavior through the lens of a pathological system (i.e., a stuttering system)
will ultimately shed light on a basic question in speech research?how cognition,
perception, and action underlie speech production and its development. Findings
from this work will also have real-world applicability as they will support the
development of tailored diagnostic and clinical procedures for those who
experience stuttering and its related social and emotional
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This innovative work combines computational
modeling and empirical investigation to develop and test a model of stuttered
speech production. It applies principles of Dynamic Field Theory (DFT), an
established neurocomputational approach to modeling that formalizes the
relationship between cognitive and sensorimotor systems. DFT has benefitted from
recent advances in cognitive science, mathematical biology, motor control,
developmental psychology, and theoretical neuroscience, highlighting the
multidisciplinary nature of this work. Critically, DFT integrates real-time
processes with processes of learning and development. Thus, the framework is
poised to contribute to an understanding of the relationship between in-the-
moment speech behaviors and their cognitive underpinnings that often occur over
longer timescales, and are more difficult to observe. The experimental component
of this project employs optical tracking and functional near-infrared
spectroscopy, allowing for direct comparisons at behavioral, kinematic, and
neurophysiological levels. Specific aims of this project include: (1) extending
a preliminary DFT-based model of typical speech production, as well as
attempting to break the model in ways that are reflective of stuttering; and (2)
testing the model empirically in a cross-sectional study that examines the
development of anticipation of stuttering across the life span. This proposal is
also supported by the NSF EPSCoR.