* 1513314
* SPRF-IBSS: Linking complex social and ecological systems through integrative network modeling
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Michele Barnes, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2018
* USD 152,298.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising interdisciplinary scholar
studying complex social and ecological systems. Humans rely on the natural
environment to support to support a wide array of social needs, such as health,
prosperity, and welfare. Yet natural systems are facing an unprecedented level
of stress, and strategies to advance global sustainability are urgently needed.
This challenge is particularly relevant for coral reefs, which are critical for
supporting biodiversity and human well-being, yet continue to decline globally.
In an effort toward meeting this challenge, this grant supports an SBE
postdoctoral fellow in assessing how connections within and between coastal
communities and fisheries resources contribute to successful (or unsuccessful)
management of coral reefs. Results are uncovering problematic power dynamics,
and providing recommendations on the connections that communities and
practitioners should seek to build to improve biodiversity conservation and
social well-being. Supporting NSF?s mission to advance national health,
prosperity, and welfare, this project directly informs coral reef management
planning and practice in the U.S and abroad, with results and insights being
disseminated to fishing communities, practitioners, marine resource managers,
and the scientific community. This project also directly addresses NSF?s mission
to promote scientific progress by linking theory and data from the social and
ecological sciences, and by defining frontiers in applied ecosystem modeling.
Finally, this project advances education and diversity by providing the fellow
with invaluable training and preparing her for a productive career in academia,
where women have been historically underrepresented.

How do connections within and between people (the social system) and nature (the
ecological system) mediate outcomes in social-ecological systems? To what extent
are social and ecological systems interdependent, and how might this vary with
context? To answer these questions, the SBE fellow is advancing a novel
interdisciplinary network modeling framework to assess how social-ecological
interdependencies within and between fishing communities and fisheries resources
mediate outcomes, i.e., livelihood benefits and sustainable fisheries, in coral
reef ecosystems from across the Asia-Pacific. This research leverages cutting
edge advances in multi-level random graph modeling and brings together
perspectives from sociology, political economy, human geography, and ecology in
order to (1) identify key social and ecological interdependencies, (2)
understand how social actors mediate social interactions and relationships with
resources, and (3) develop novel theory and cultivate practical guidance for
more effective natural resource management. This project provides important
empirical insight on how social and ecological systems are interlinked, the
factors that drive the formation of social-ecological structures, and how
social-ecological feedbacks relate to outcomes, thus presenting a unique
opportunity for the development of theory applicable to a much wider range of
settings. This work also contributes to a growing body of interdisciplinary
research investigating the role of social connectivity, power asymmetries, and
social-ecological alignment in facilitating (or impeding) desirable outcomes in
environmental governance. Finally, this research is advancing a novel
interdisciplinary methodological framework that can be applied empirically
across a range of contexts in both the social and ecological sciences.