* 1513072
* Generalized Semiparametric Varying-Coefficient Models for Longitudinal Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Yanqing Sun, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 119,999.00

This research focuses on the development of new theory, methods, and
computational algorithms for analysis of longitudinal data, motivated by
problems in AIDS clinical trials and HIV vaccine efficacy trials. The methods
will enhance our understanding of the benefits of treatment switching in an AIDS
clinical trial, and how HIV vaccination modifies the disease progression in HIV
infected individuals over time. The broader impacts of the research include the
development of statistical theory for longitudinal data, applications to
medicine, public health and the social sciences, advancing statistical learning
and training for undergraduate and graduate students, and promoting the
participation of women in scientific research. The statistical models and
methods will provide a broad platform for investigating complex covariate
effects including linear and nonlinear effects, time-varying effects, and
nonlinear interactions among the covariates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates a class of generalized semiparametric varying-coefficient models
for longitudinal data. These models can be used to analyze both categorical and
continuous longitudinal responses through a link function, and flexibly model
three types of covariate effects: constant effects, time-varying effects, and
covariate-varying effects. Part I studies the generalized semiparametric
varying-coefficients model (GSVCM), where the covariate-varying effects are
parametric functions of an exposure variable specified up to a finite number of
unknown parameters, and Part II investigates the GSVCM model, where both the
covariate-varying effects and the time-varying effects are unspecified
functions. In Part III, the generalized semiparametric single-index varying-
coefficients model (single-index GSVCM) is investigated. The model is more
powerful for assessing interactions among multiple covariates. Estimation
procedures for the model based on multivariate local linear smoothing and
generalized weighted least squares are proposed. Large sample theory will be
developed for the proposed estimation and hypothesis testing procedures. Other
important problems that will be investigated include variance estimation,
hypothesis testing of covariate effects, weight function and bandwidth
selection, goodness-of-fit diagnostics, and estimation and hypothesis testing of
link functions. Computational algorithms will be developed to facilitate the
applications of the proposed methods to real data from AIDS clinical trials and
vaccine efficacy trials. By pursuing the directions outlined in the project,
significant progress may be made in building biologically interpretable models,
and in developing statistically efficient methods to handle the complexity of
longitudinal data.