* 1513616
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Topological Data Analysis for Large Network Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Paul Rosen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 793,089.00

This project leverages topological methods to develop a new class of data
analysis and visualization techniques to understand the structure of networks.
Networks are often used in modeling social, biological and technological
systems, and capturing relationships among individuals, businesses, and genomic
entities. Understanding such large, complex data sources is highly relevant and
important in application areas including brain connectomics, epidemiology, law
enforcement, public policy and marketing. The proposed research will be
evaluated over multiple data sources, including but not limited to large social,
communication and brain network datasets. Furthermore, the new approaches
developed in this project will be integrated into growing data analysis
curricula, shared through developing workshops, and used as topics to continue
attracting underrepresented groups into STEM fields and computer science
specifically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific challenges this project
addresses are two-fold: how to use topology to extract features from the data;
and how to design effective visualizations to communicate these features to
domain experts and decision makers. Topological techniques central to this
project provide a strong theoretical basis for simplifying and summarizing
complex data while still preserving critical underlying structures. They also
provide a basis for task-oriented designs that allow us to control the volume of
data to be displayed in visualizations, so users can develop faithful mental
models of the data, facilitating information discovery. This project focuses on
two research agendas. First, it proposes a rich body of topological
summarization techniques to extract and preserve important topological features
within large-scale graph-structured networks, and to obtain compact and
hierarchical representations that are suitable for visual exploration. The
feature extracting process captures complex interactions in the system,
describes features at all scales, is robust with respect to noise, and has
efficient computation. Second, this project proposes designing visualizations
that encode the extracted topological structures explicitly, focusing on
investigating techniques to fully exploit their properties in the visual
metaphors to be developed. The project web site
(http://www.sci.utah.edu/networktdav) provides additional information and will
include access to developed tools and test data sets.