* 1513324
* RAPID: III: Data Collection and Risk Evaluation Learning in Identifying High Risk Ebola Subpopulations for the Intervention and Prevention of Large-scale Ebola Virus Spreading
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Guoqing Chen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2016
* USD 188,730.00

The 2014 Ebola epidemic is the largest in history, affecting multiple countries
in West Africa, and now impacting the US and other countries worldwide. The US
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and partners are taking
precautions to prevent the further spread of Ebola within the United States.
There is a lack of public understanding of the risks associated with Ebola;
witness the inconsistently applied local responses (such as quarantines) that do
not match CDC recommendations. This project will develop technology to enable
individuals to evaluate risks associated with their own past and planned
activities and travel. This will both enable those at risk to take appropriate
action, and reduce unwarranted demand on the healthcare system by reassuring
those whose activities have not placed them at risk. This project will use data
gathered from the CDC and other public sources to develop risk models, and
develop a mobile app that will use this data along with the user's own location
and activity history and plans to report individual risk to the user. An
individual's data never leaves their own device, ensuring personal privacy. The
resulting lessons learned will ease the process of developing similar
individualized risk assessment tools for future epidemics, providing long-term
benefits beyond the Ebola virus epidemic.

The research will address three main issues. The first is focused crawling of
structured (CDC Contact Tracing reports) and unstructured (social media, web
blogs) information on time, location, and activities of Ebola patients. A second
research challenge is patient activity modeling: Given the returned information,
developing a time/space/activity model determining the risk of the patient
acting as a transmission agent. Finally, the project will develop a mobile app
that tracks time, location, and activities of the mobile device user, and
retrieves the patient activity models developed from public data to determine if
the user is at risk of infection. This is a complex problem, as the data may be
non-specific and require inferential techniques to estimate risk (e.g., being in
the same time/location as a transmission agent poses very different risk if the
location is a sports stadium as opposed to a restaurant); the project will
develop ontologies for activities to use in estimating risk. The project will
use expert opinion to seed regression models for risk assessment. Lessons
learned from this project will also identify challenges for future research in
information integration, risk analysis, machine learning, and privacy preserving
technologies.