* 1513939
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Improving Mobile-Application Security via Text Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Carl Gunter, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 924,000.00

Security policies often base access decisions on temporal context (e.g., time of
day) and environmental context (e.g., geographic location). Access control
policies for operating systems frequently consider execution context (e.g., user
ID, program arguments). However, little has been done to incorporate user
expectation context into security decision mechanisms. Text artifacts provide a
source of user expectation context. When finding, installing, and running
software, users are shown natural language text, e.g., textual functionality
descriptions, permission requests, privacy notices, and user interface text.
This research aims to improve security decisions using expectation context, by
relating user-facing natural language text with security
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses specifically on mobile
applications by incorporating expectation context when making security
decisions. Mobile applications provide specific forms of user text and security
operations. This research considers the relationship between an application's
description or user interface text and different granularities of security
operations. The research forms the foundation for techniques and tools that
inform mobile-device users of the security and privacy implications of
installing mobile applications. As broader impacts, this research enables
developers to produce more secure mobile applications and enables users to use
more secure mobile applications.