* 1513649
* NeTS: Medium: Reconfigurable Antennas and Optimized Multi-channel MIMO Designs for DSA Systems with a Broad Frequency Coverage
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Hao Xin, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 800,000.00

Dominated by mobile video traffic, the exponential growth of wireless data is
placing severe demand on the radio frequence (RF) spectrum. The role of spectrum
as a critical economic growth engine was recently highlighted in the President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) report, which recommended
creating 'the first shared-use spectrum superhighways.' The FCC has set in
motion several initiatives that aim at identifying underutilized portions of the
licensed spectrum and exploring new models for spectrum sharing among different
types of users. In this project, the PIs propose to address the feasibility of
dynamic spectrum access (DSA) operation over a large swath of the spectrum,
encompassing the UHF portion of the TV White Spaces (470-698 MHz segment), the
3.5 GHz radar band, as well as other bands in the 1 to 4.4 GHz range that may
later become candidates for DSA operation. If successful, this project is
expected to have a transformational impact on many wireless communication
systems, including extended-range wireless LANs, regional wireless area
networks, wireless sensor systems, and coexisting cellular/WLAN systems (e.g.,
LTE-U and WiFi).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda includes novel designs
for a small form-factor reconfigurable antenna element that can operate over
this frequency range, advanced antenna-circuit configurations for tunable
narrowband carrier aggregation in the UHF TVWS segment, antenna configurations
for supporting polarization diversity in MIMO-based DSA, optimized price-based
cognitive MIMO (CMIMO) precoders that are founded in game theoretic techniques,
and scheduling mechanisms for network-wide CMIMO operation. Optimizations at
both the signal level (via MIMO precoding matrices) as well as the antenna level
(via highly tunable small form-factor reconfigurable antennas) will be
performed. The project also includes a comprehensive educational plan to further
broaden its impact, including integrating research with undergraduate and
graduate education, recruiting and outreach to minority and under-represented
students, Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REUs), disseminating research
data and findings through open access, and outreach to society through open-lab
days and other activities.