* 1513936
* CIF: Medium: Data Science: Analytics for Unstructured and Distributed Data
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Soummya Kar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,197,412.00

CIF: Medium: Data Science: Analytics for Unstructured and Distributed
Data&lt;br/&gt;José M F Moura and Soummya
Kar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been a perfect
storm of convergent technologies leading to an onslaught of data in digital
format, ready to be acquired, stored, accessed, transmitted, and processed. This
research develops quantitative analytics that are appropriate for data arising
in many novel areas like social networks or urban environments, outside
traditional engineering or science. This data is unstructured?it is no longer a
single time series or a single image and cannot be naturally arranged in a
vector or table. The data is distributed?it originates from many different
agents, possibly scattered over a large physical space (e.g., a metro area).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To process unstructured and distributed Big Data, the
research extends traditional signal processing methods to distributed signal
processing on graphs (DSPG) by associating two graphs with the data: 1) the
?physical graph? whose nodes index the data and whose physical edges capture the
relations or dependencies among the data; and 2) the ?cyber? graph, possibly
different from the physical graph, whose nodes index distributed processing
units and whose cyber edges represent (local) communication channels among these
units. To extend DSPG analytics to process distributed Big Data analytics, the
investigators address the following challenges: 1) discover the structure of the
underlying physical graph; and 2) design consensus+innovations scalable
distributed algorithms to accurately process the distributed Big Data. Examples
of important analytics include: forward filtering that computes y = Hx, where H
is a graph filter or graph transform and x is the data associated with the
agents; and inverse problems that compute solutions to linear systems Hx = y,
where H and y are given, while x is reconstructed.