* 1513546
* Collaborative Research:   Principled Science-Driven Methods for Massive, Intricate, and Multifaceted Data in Astronomy and Astrophysics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Nathan Stein, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2016
* USD 24,293.00

Massive new data resources are coming online in every area of human exploration,
changing the way researchers approach data analysis. All-purpose algorithms are
expected to identify patterns in data with little tailoring to the problem at
hand. While this all-purpose approach is understandable given the massive
computational challenges of "big data," it often sacrifices our ability to
understand underlying scientific processes. On the other hand, explicitly
embedding scientific models into massive statistical analyses may pose
significant computational challenges. This project navigates the tension between
such all-purpose or "data-driven" methods and specially-designed or "science-
driven" methods using a suite of data analytic projects in astro- and solar
physics. This work is motivated by recent advances in space-based
instrumentation that are increasing both the quality and the quantity of data
available to astronomers. Several projects focus on developing new methods for
detecting and characterizing astronomical sources, combining information in
observations made across the electromagnetic spectrum, including high resolution
spectrography, imaging, and time series. Other projects investigate methods for
extracting useful features from ultra-high-resolution images of the Sun with the
ultimate aim of predicting explosive dynamic processes in the solar atmosphere.
The CHASC International Center for Astrostatistics has a track record of
designing methods that leverage efficient data-driven techniques but still
incorporate scientific understanding of the astronomical sources and maintain
the ability to answer specific scientific questions about the underlying
astronomical and physical processes. The CHASC Center not only aims to develop
new methods for astronomy but also plans to use these problems as springboards
in the development of new general statistical methods, especially in signal
processing, image analysis, multilevel modeling, and computational statistics.

The CHASC International Center for Astrostatistics plans to tackle these
challenges using principled statistical methods that incorporate both data-
driven and science-driven approaches. For example, the investigators will use
coarse data-driven models in an initial analysis that aims to identify simple
structures that can be used in a more scientifically meaningful secondary
analysis. To formally test for unexpected features in astrophysical images, the
team will use flexible data-driven models for deviations from science-driven
models for known features. As these examples illustrate, modern astrostatistical
analyses involve subtle tradeoffs between complexity and practicality and pose
significant computational challenges. A primary aim of this project is to
produce tailored Monte Carlo methods that are efficient in such complex
settings. The team's statisticians (Meng, van Dyk, Lee, and Stein) have
substantial research experience in developing the methods that the Center will
extend, employ, and publicize to tackle these challenges: inferential and
efficient computational methods under highly-structured models that involve
multi-scale structure and/or multiple levels of latent variables and incomplete
data. Such models are ideally suited to account for the many physical and
instrumental filters of the data generation mechanisms in astrophysics. The
astronomers (Kashyap and Siemiginowska) have expertise in the instrumentation
and science of high-energy and optical astronomy, and have collaborated with
statisticians in developing methods to address scientific questions. It is
expected that a fundamental impact of this research will be more general
acceptance and use of appropriate methods among astronomers. Second, the
development of methods for efficient modeling of scientific phenomena, the
comparison of complex models, and science-driven classification and clustering
will help solve complex data analytic challenges throughout the natural, social,
medical, and engineering sciences.