* 1513684
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Economics of contractual arrangements for Internet interconnections
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Constantinos Dovrolis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 800,000.00

The Internet is an ecosystem of about 50,000 Autonomous Systems (ASes) that
operate independently, having different objectives and operational constraints.
What glues the Internet together is the bilateral techno-economic agreements
that form the interconnections between these ASes. These interconnections have
evolved in a rather ad-hoc manner over the last 20 years or so, since the
commercialization of the Internet in the mid-nineties, often resulting in
bilateral or multilateral disputes about who should peer with whom, whether one
of the two parties should pay the other, and about the conditions that an
interconnection should satisfy. These problems result in congested
interconnections and, in some cases, unreachability problems that can affect
millions of Internet users. The main premise of this research is that the
currently deployed framework of Internet interconnection has fundamental
weaknesses and systemic problems that inevitably will continue causing peering
disputes between ASes. Instead of looking at each peering conflict as an
isolated incident, this project investigates thoroughly the limitations of the
interconnection framework that is currently in place.

The research objectives of this project are three-fold. First, to analyze four
common distinct interconnection scenarios, and to investigate their limitations
under a general but realistic modeling framework. These scenarios cover the
cases of monopoly and oligopoly in the Internet access market, as well as the
possibility of one or more transit providers in the path between access and
content providers. The modeling framework is based on recent developments in
economics such as the framework of two-sided markets and the theory of
incomplete contracts. The second objective is to analyze data provided by
Comcast and other sources to estimate the key parameters of the previous
economic models and validate their predictions. These parameters include the
elasticity of demand for Internet traffic at the access and transit markets, the
sensitivity of the demand to congestion, and the traffic growth rate for
different Internet service plans. The third objective is to develop a new
techno-economic interconnection framework that can provide a broader and more
economically efficient set of interdomain relations than just transit and
settlement-free peering. The proposed interconnection framework should also
provide the right incentives so that all relevant Internet firms continue to
invest sufficient resources to Internet infrastructure. The design of the new
interconnection framework will be guided by the modeling and empirical results
of the first two research objectives. The educational activities for this
project will enhance undergraduate, graduate and professional education with
concepts that lie at the intersection of networking, game theory, economics, and
techno-economic agent-based modeling. Outreach activities will disseminate the
results of this project to operator communities, regulator bodies and related
techno-economic forums.