* 1513954
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Integrated Simulation of Cloth Mechanics and Appearance for Predictive Virtual Prototyping
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brooks Hagan, Rhode Island School of Design
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 244,236.00

Simulated virtual prototypes have removed much trial-and-error from the design
process in many fields. But to be useful as a virtual prototype, a simulation
must reliably predict the relevant characteristics of the thing being designed:
strength for a bridge; lift for an aircraft, or appearance for a fabric.
Previous advances in rendering have led to a current explosion in the use of
rendered images to prototype the appearance of objects, and even to represent
them to customers, but only where the materials involved can be represented
well. Textiles are currently difficult to represent, due to their intricate
construction and subtle reflectance, and because their appearance is
inextricably linked to their shape and motion. Although fairly suitable for
movies, the state of the art in simulating cloth appearance and deformation is
not predictive of real appearance and therefore not usable in a design process,
in which realistic but inaccurate results are useless. This project, which
represents a collaborative effort between computer scientists at Cornell
University and textile designers at the Rhode Island School of Design, aims to
create the predictive simulation tools needed to enable virtual prototyping to
revolutionize the textile and garment industries in the same way it has already
revolutionized so many fields of manufacturing. New models and algorithms
created by the Cornell team will be integrated into the Loomit tool for fabric
design, which will then be used by the RISD team to produce new textiles that
will in turn be shipped back to Cornell where changes in the RISD design process
resulting from Loomit's enhanced capabilities will be studied. At RISD this
involvement will engage many student artists and designers, helping them develop
the skills to work with increasingly technological media in their future
careers, while at Cornell the project will afford computer science students
experience understanding and solving problems faced by artists and
designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Textiles remain a challenge for appearance
simulation because of many unsolved fundamental problems. The state-of-the-art
models for realistic cloth rendering and simulation were developed for
entertainment applications and do not accurately predict the behavior of real
textiles. In this project, the PI team will compare appearance and deformation
models to measurements of textiles from CT, imaging, and other modalities, then
improve them as needed so that they are capable of fitting real materials.
Current methods cannot capture the properties of an existing fabric well enough
to predict its appearance under close visual inspection. The PI team will
develop new methods for jointly capturing the appearance and mechanical
properties of textiles, combining measurement and model tuning to produce
predictive working models of textiles and the garments and furnishings made from
them. Detailed cloth simulations and renderings are currently impractical for
moderately complex objects, such as complete garments. Scalability fundamentally
requires multi-scale models that simulate details only when they are actually
needed. The PI team will create multi-scale models that enable interactive,
predictive visualization during the design process. Since the targeted
applications all require accurate prediction, a major focus of the research is
on validation, testing both the accuracy of the individual technical pieces and
the ultimate usefulness of the new techniques in actual use.