* 1513375
* Pathways to the Denmark Strait Overflow:  A Lagrangian Study in the Iceland Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 10/24/2014,08/31/2019
* Susan Lozier, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 438,187.00

Intellectual Merit: The Denmark Strait overflow is an important contributor to
the deep limb of the global Meridional Overturning Circulation. However,
considerable uncertainty remains regarding the source(s) of the overflow water,
and the causes of its transport and temperature/salinity variability. A better
description of the dense water pathways leading to Denmark Strait through the
Iceland Sea is needed to understand, and ultimately predict, changes in the
overflow entering the North Atlantic Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies
have proposed that there are two pathways for dense water to enter the Denmark
Strait: one from the Greenland Sea via the East Greenland Current, and another
from the interior Iceland Sea via the North Icelandic Jet. A recent modeling
study suggests that these pathways may alternate with changing wind conditions,
in particular the wind stress curl in the region around Iceland. During years
with high (low) wind stress curl, the East Greenland Current (North Icelandic
Jet) is thought to be the dominant pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subsurface
Lagrangian observations, which directly measure fluid parcel pathways, are not
presently available in the Iceland Sea. This project will deploy acoustically
tracked floats set at a depth of 500 m, just above the sill depth of Denmark
Strait, to directly observe dense water pathways in the Iceland Sea over a two-
year period. A total of 35 float trajectories, tracked with an array of six
sound sources, will be combined with atmospheric, hydrographic and altimetry
data to define the relationship between the observed pathways and the forcing
conditions during the experiment. An ocean general circulation model simulation
of particle trajectories in the Iceland Sea, forced with the conditions observed
during the experiment, will be compared with the float trajectories. The field
work is heavily leveraged, with the Institute for Marine Research in Bergen,
Norway providing the sound source array, the ship time for sound source and
float deployment and about 40% of the floats. Overall, this study will help to
better understand the Denmark Strait overflow and its variability as well as
shed light on the general subsurface circulation of the Iceland
Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project has bearing on the
variability of the lower limb of the Meridional Overturning Circulation, and
thus is relevant to the broader topic of the ocean?s role in global climate
change. The research is highly collaborative with several international
partners, including the Institute of Marine Research in Bergen, Norway, the
Marine Research Institute in Reykjavik, Iceland and the Institute of
Oceanography in Hamburg, Germany. This experiment will also provide an
opportunity for an early career scientist to lead her first field project.