* 1513197
* CI-NEW: Collaborative Research: Computer System Failure Data Repository to Enable Data-Driven Dependability
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Xiaohui Carol Song, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2019
* USD 779,331.00

Dependability has become a necessary requisite property for many of the computer
systems that surround us or work behind the scenes to support our personal and
professional lives. Heroic progress has been made by computer systems
researchers and practitioners working together to build and deploy dependable
systems. However, an overwhelming majority of this work is not based on real
publicly available failure data. Unfortunately, an open failure data repository
for any recent computing infrastructure that is large enough, diverse enough and
with enough information about the infrastructure and the applications that run
on them does not exist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address this
pressing need. The research team appreciates that this effort is challenging on
many levels. Failure data are considered sensitive and are usually unveiled only
before trusting eyes of a small subset of the people at the organization. As
part of a current one-year planning grant, this team has collected specific
requirements for the repository from a wide audience, collected failure and
usage data from the largest centrally managed computing cluster at Purdue and
performed preliminary analysis to reveal the workload usage patterns. The goal
of this full-scale project is to collect data from a variety of computational
infrastructure at the two participating universities, and from several of the
NSF-funded large cyberinfrastructure projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will collect, curate, and present public failure data of large-scale computing
systems in a repository called FRESCO. The data sets will include static
information, dynamic information about the workloads, and failure information
for both planned and unplanned outages. The data collection from production
machines will have to obey several practical constraints -- no changes to the
workload, little performance perturbation, and minimal changes to the operating
system. Further, the data have to be sanitized for removing sensitive
information and processed to make it interpretable by a broad group of
researchers. This project will also provide analysis tools to answer certain
commonly occurring questions, such as the correlation between workload and
failure and the performance implications of using one library over another, as
well as an intuitive graphical front-end which will allow people to explore the
data sets and download the relevant ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread use of
the data and the associated analysis tools will give computer systems
researchers an unprecedented ability to do data-driven research and offer
computing infrastructure providers an analytic-driven capability to run more
efficient reliable infrastructures.