* 1513604
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: From Hobby to Socioeconomic Driver: Innovation Pathways to Professional Making in Asia and the American Midwest
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2023
* Jeffrey Bardzell, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2023
* USD 615,984.00

This study concerns the evolving collection of information technology practices
that have been grouped under the umbrella of "making," which includes end-user
experimentation with emerging forms of hardware and software such as open
hardware, digital fabrication, Internet of Things, and more. "Making" has been
widely envisioned to enable a transition from tinkering to prototyping and
entrepreneurship and, finally, to help revive manufacturing industries in the
United States. Making in the US remains largely a hobbyist practice, and the
transition from making-as-hobby to a new wave of economy-building technology
innovation is not easy. Yet it can be done and indeed is already being done in
other parts of the world, including the cities of Shenzhen, China and Taipei,
Taiwan. Through empirical research, hands-on design workshops and international
comparison, this project will examine and document successful pathways from
making as hobby to socioeconomic driver, and how they are supported by
technological, policy, economic, and pedagogical infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broadly, this research will provide a contribution to studies of
technology innovation in regions beyond more familiar technology hubs like
Silicon Valley: Asia and the American Midwest. It will contribute to discussions
that place models of technology innovation and design in relationship to local
histories, cultures, and sociopolitical contexts. This includes debates around
non-linear stories of technological progress, creativity, and design. This
research will also contribute to a growing body of research focused on
investigating the tools, techniques, and social organization of maker
collectives, hackerspaces, and repair practices by providing both an
ethnographic foundation and technological insights for emerging issues
concerning making's transition into production and entrepreneurialism. Making
provides the means, tools, and educational culture for developing novel and
multidisciplinary approaches in STEM learning. Computation when taught through
hands-on making has the potential to open up STEM fields and careers to
underrepresented groups and minorities. Prior research has documented, however,
that challenges remain; for instance the number of women in makerspaces remains
low and professional maker communities are only indirectly brought into STEM
education. This project will contribute to a broader national interest in
transforming hands-on making into a sustainable model by facilitating
interdisciplinary and international collaborations and engaged learning
inclusive of the sciences, technology, engineering, arts and design as well as
industry and expert amateurs.