* 1513320
* Engaging Secondary Students in Regionally Relevant Science Topics Through Videography
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Anne Gold, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,165,653.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging students
and their teachers in studies of environmental change. Middle and high school
students from low-income backgrounds and other groups underrepresented in STEM
fields will participate in a summer program and a school-year program to produce
videos documenting the effects of environmental changes on their lives and
communities. Students will learn skills associated with recording, editing, and
producing videos; they will choose topics and locations to document
environmental changes; and they will create videos that include original footage
of local environments and interviews with scientists, still images, and other
supplementary materials needed to communicate their findings. Students will be
paired with science and film graduate and undergraduate student mentors to
research, film, edit, and screen their videos. All videos will be screened at a
Film Festival open to the general public.

The project goals are to: a) generate and sustain interest in STEM-related
fields through collaborative videography projects; b) increase student STEM
workforce readiness and awareness through interactions with mentors working in
STEM, science communication, and digital technology fields; and c) advance
knowledge in STEM education of factors that impact student outcomes. The project
will compare the outcomes of two student engagement models: an intensive one-
week summer model, and a school-year model implemented over a period of 6
months. Research in this project will focus on student outcomes related to
career awareness and goals, school engagement and persistence, attitudes toward
science and technology, and climate science knowledge. Outcomes of the two
models will be measured, and the moderating effects of demographic factors and
the influence of teachers, mentors, peers, parents, and social media will be
examined. Demographic information and data from surveys and assessments
administered before and after program implementation will be used to compare
three groups: a) participants in the summer model; b) participants in the
school-year model; and c) and a demographically matched comparison group. A
combination of qualitative and quantitative research methods will be used to
interpret student outcomes and factors influencing those outcomes.