* 1513284
* Middle Grades Career Mentors: Digital Resources for Effective CTE STEM Mentoring
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Hillary Wells, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,153,820.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing a suite
of digital tools designed to support positive messaging around skill-based
education and careers and to improve mentors' communication with middle school-
aged youth mentees. Maintaining U.S. economic advantage requires attracting
talent to high-growth, high-demand skill-based, STEM-related careers that are
traditionally attained through Career and Technical Education (CTE). Replacing
old negative perceptions with new, more accurate messages about CTE and then
reaching youth with these messages before high school is essential. Career-
focused mentoring is a vehicle for delivering these messages and supporting
youth exploration of CTE as a possible path for their own lives. Investigators
will explore the hypothesis that through strong connections between those best
positioned to articulate industry needs (mentors) and those most receptive to
filling that need (mentees), this project will improve youth awareness and
interest in CTE and the rewarding careers that are available to them. Research
and development activities will be carried out collaboratively in informal
learning environments in Boston and New York City that serve middle school-aged
youth from underrepresented communities, through career-focused mentoring
programs. The project team, led by media producers of the WGBH Education
Foundation, includes market researchers and communications strategists at Global
Strategy Group, learning scientists at Education Development Center, and
mentorship program partners at SkillsUSA, Learning for Life's Middle School
Explorer Clubs, and Boy Scouts of America's Scoutreach. If promising, the
career-focused mentoring programs of SkillsUSA, Learning for Life, and Boy
Scouts of America will incorporate the messaging roadmap and digital tools to
support their mentoring curricula, which impact greater than one million youth
in each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first phase of research, investigators
will study perceptions of STEM-focused CTE from a nationwide sample of 800
middle school-aged youth and 30 mentors from skill-based STEM industries. In the
second phase, investigators will work with six program leaders and 30 mentors
from SkillsUSA, Explorer Clubs, Scoutreach, and other mentoring programs to
document the needs of mentors for support as they enter into the mentoring
process. The third phase will engage mentorship program leaders and 36 mentors
in the iterative development of a suite of digital tools that would support
positive messaging around skill-based education and careers and that would
improve mentors' communication with youth mentees. In addition, a pre-post
mentorship program pilot study will explore the promise of the digital tools for
effectively supporting mentor-mentee communications that improve youth awareness
and interest in STEM-focused CTE and skill-based, STEM-related careers. Thirty
six mentors and 288 of their youth mentees will participate in the pilot study.
Data sources for research include interviews and surveys of program leaders,
mentors, and mentees, as well as tracking mentor activity within the online
digital tool environment. This research would advance knowledge of how mentors
influence disadvantaged youth perceptions of and interest in CTE and skill-
based, STEM career pathways, in which there is currently little evidence as to
how mentor preparation shapes ability to positively impact youth outcomes. Major
outcomes will include a) deeper understandings of youth and mentor perceptions
of CTE and mentors' needs for supporting their work with mentees, b) a messaging
roadmap and digital tools that prepare mentors for their work with middle school
youth, and c) empirical findings regarding the potential of the digital tools
for effectively supporting mentor-mentee communications that improve youth's
awareness and interest in CTE and skill-based, STEM-related careers. Outcomes
will be shared widely to research, education, and industry communities, locally
and nationally, through social media, partner networks, conference
presentations, and research publications. An advisory board will provide
independent review on the project activities.