* 1513815
* The Psycholinguistics of Morality
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Jesse Snedeker, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2017
* USD 211,877.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship trains an interdisciplinary scientist exploring the
Psycholinguistics of Morality, which is a fascinating subject at the
intersection of social psychology and linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
in cognitive science and social-moral psychology indicates that people make
lightning fast causal and moral judgments when they encounter information
communicating harmful interpersonal events, and that social attitudes factor
into judgments of blameworthiness. However, other research in linguistics
suggests that representations of causation may be primarily rooted in basic
properties of language including verb meaning, and, thus, are largely impervious
to social category information and motivation. This research examines the extent
to which causal attribution for morally-relevant events -- including violence
and coercion -- is determined by a social-cognitive architecture revealed in
patterns of language processing. Thus, it bridges a gap between these
disciplines and represents the launch of a new interdisciplinary area of
concentration: the psycholinguistics of morality. Specifically, this project
investigates whether implied gender and race in minimal language sets up
implicit causal representations of an event to be biased toward the sentence
subject or object before any substantive information about an event is
communicated ? a possibility with profound implications for our understanding of
everyday judgment and decision-making. Moreover, this project investigates the
extent to which information about distinctiveness and mental state capacities
shifts implicit causal attributions, and, downstream, explicit causal
attributions (i.e., self-compassion and self-blame). Legal arguments, the news
media, educational materials, psychotherapeutic interventions, and public health
warnings often draw upon people?s intuitive statistical models (e.g., by using
statements about distinctiveness, or whether outcomes are likely to affect
particular people or groups) and emphasize mental state information (e.g., by
using statements about people?s capacities for thinking and planning versus
feeling and sensing). Thus, this research has implications for the use of this
information in messaging in multiple domains of everyday life. Finally, by
determining the extent to which explicit causal attribution can be altered
through these cognitive-linguistic pathways, this project also paves the way for
potential broader positive impacts, including interventions aimed at attenuating
inappropriate blaming and improving day-to-day well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of behavioral studies in three phases
unites methods from psychology and linguistics in order to track causal
processing inaccessible to conscious awareness through patterns in language
processing. Phase 1 maps the effects of implied gender and race on linguistic
signatures of causal attribution for morally-relevant actions and determines
their connections with: a) social attitudes, b) representations of
distinctiveness (i.e., intuitive statistical models), and c) representations of
mental states. Phase 2 directly tests effects on implicit causality from
interventions on two potential cognitive mechanisms: representations of (a)
distinctiveness, and (b) mental state capacities. Phase 3 involves determining
effects on explicit causal attribution (i.e., self-compassion and self-blame)
from interventions on implicit causality. Besides revealing the complexity of
causal processing of morally-relevant action in language and thought, the
project addresses specific concerns within and across disciplines. For
linguistics, these studies aim to inform the critical project of delineating
intrinsic properties of the lexicon from extrinsic effects on language from
world knowledge. For social-moral psychology, these studies bring new focus to
the role of purely linguistic features in moral judgment of human behavior. And,
by increasing understanding of the consequences of shifting causal
representations in language and thought, this research addresses issues at the
intersection of linguistics, cognitive science, and social-moral psychology,
including the extent to which explicit causal models are alterable through
interventions on implicit causality via general cognitive representations (e.g.,
models of distinctiveness and/or mental state capacities).