* 1513984
* Integrating geochemistry and ethnography to understand modern and ancient ochre use
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Andrew Zipkin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2017
* USD 221,500.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising interdisciplinary scholar
studying ochre pigments from Stone Age archaeological sites. Understanding the
potential significance and meaning of ancient symbolism has been enhanced by
novel geochemical techniques for provenance studies of ochre, particularly
minimally destructive trace element fingerprinting. This study builds on these
methods by adapting iron, strontium, and lead stable isotope analysis to
geologic sources used by traditional societies in Kenya today, and to ochre
artifacts and rock art paint samples. Multi-isotope analysis can improve the
accuracy of provenance identification, and also contribute to our understanding
of the geologic mechanisms of ochre deposit formation. Finally, information
provided by indigenous people who currently use ochre will allow us to learn
more about their pigment source preferences, criteria for raw material
selection, techniques of pigment preparation, and symbolic meanings associated
with geologic sources, rock art images, and pigmented artifacts. Enhanced
understanding of modern ochre use and its meanings will shed new light on the
evolution of human symbolism from the Stone Age to present
day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communicating information and identity with symbols is
an essential attribute of our species. Humans have used red and yellow ochre
pigments for symbolic expression for hundreds of thousands of years. However,
rock art and other practices involving these iron-based pigments are
understudied in the modern era. Research on this rapidly vanishing form of
cultural heritage is thus critical to understanding the origins of symbolism.
This project bridges archaeology, ethnography, and geochemistry to investigate
ochre use. First, recent rock art sites and the ochre deposits used for pigments
will be identified through collaboration with modern rock art painters.
Geochemical techniques will then be used to characterize the ochre deposits, and
to match them to paint samples from rock art sites and ochre artifacts from
archaeological sites. This approach will facilitate verification of the sources
of rock art pigments identified from ethnographic information. This project will
refine minimally destructive analytical methods that can be used for ochre
pigments and other iron-containing materials. Improving methods to determine
geologic sources of ochre pigments has significant implications for identifying
looted heritage items, forgeries, and for stemming the illicit antiquities trade
that endangers tangible culture and fuels conflict around the world.