* 1513031
* II-New: Enabling Analysis of Time-Dependent 3D Transparent Flows via Light Field Imaging and Displays
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Lian-Ping Wang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2018
* USD 174,445.00

This project supports construction of a novel computational imaging system for
efficient and robust acquisition and reconstruction of multi-scale flows. Since
transparent flows do not have their own images but borrow appearance from nearby
objects, the solution developed here directly acquires light paths off/through
the flow wavefront/volume and then infers the physical properties of the flow.
The acquisition system is portable and non-intrusive, to support on-site
acquisition of various types of flows. Time-dependent 3D transparent flows such
as fluid wavefronts, gas-liquid interfacial flows, and turbulent flows are
ubiquitous in chemical, biological and environmental engineering. Accurate
reconstruction of such flows under experimental setups have a broader impact on
these areas and their applications, e.g., studying coal combustors and
predicting natural phenomena such as warm rain and
hurricane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new 3D flow acquisition system leverages
emerging light field (LF) cameras and displays. An LF collects all rays emitting
from a 3D scene. The research team explores two unique properties of LFs, ray
sampling and multi-view imaging. A reconfigurable LF camera-display system is
first developed to directly capture how the flow changes the light paths.
Tailored computer vision algorithms are then developed to infer physical
properties of the flow (density, velocity, vorticity, etc). Compared with state-
of-the-art solutions, the new acquisition system is portable and can be re-
configured to acquire various flow types ranging from completely specular
wavefronts to transparent gas volumes and to turbulent flows laden with solid
particles. For validation, direct (with all scales resolved) simulations of
turbulent channel flows are conducted, without and with solid particles, against
the experimental measurements using a mesoscopic approach known as the lattice
Boltzmann (LB) method.