* 1513198
* Innovative Collaborative Research Experience and Technical Education (iCREATE)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kenric Kesler, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2019
* USD 840,514.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by producing
empirical findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about
which models and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely
to increase capacity in the STEM and STEM cognate intensive workforce of the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project will be
testing a model of community engagement in STEM learning through the design and
implementation of a high school level career and technical education (CTE)
bioscience course. The problem, the spread of infectious disease, specifically
influenza, was chosen for the local community (Coconino County, AZ) after
consultation with community partners. The project emanates from efforts in
education designed to develop the next generation of STEM innovators who can
productively participate in our increasingly global society. Developing the next
generation of STEM innovators will be difficult as only 62% of Arizona high-
school sophomores passed Arizona's Instrument to Measure Standards in
Mathematics (AIMS) and only 40% of those sophomores passed the Science AIMS. At
the same time, the disaggregation of this data shows the achievement gap between
students of underserved populations and Caucasian students continues to grow
significantly in both areas. Locally, industry and community leaders in Coconino
County and the City of Flagstaff have shared similar concerns. For instance, the
Flagstaff business community has recognized the compelling need for an increased
and better-educated workforce by initiating the Flagstaff STEM Consortium in
August 2012, which named Flagstaff "America's 1st STEM Community". While
Flagstaff has numerous STEM professionals in all fields, and many have presented
to local students, there is a clear need for more meaningful and sustainable
connections between students and STEM businesses and agencies in order to
increase student motivation and interest in STEM learning and careers. The
iCREATE project directly addresses the STEM workforce problem at a regional
level. In addition, the project specifically targets the underrepresentation of
students of color in the STEM workforce. The courses provided by CAVIAT,
including the bioscience courses in this project, serve the diverse population
of Coconino County. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project ensures a high-quality
STEM workforce for Flagstaff and Northern Arizona, which is designed to 1)
increases student awareness of career opportunities in STEM and cognate fields
at all levels (technicians, scientists, engineers, etc.), 2) motivates students
to pursue appropriate educational pathways to STEM related careers, and 3)
provides a technology-rich experience that develops disciplinary knowledge,
practices, and non-cognitive skills needed for STEM fields. In addition, with a
focus on engaging Native American students across the region, the project will
broaden participation of students underrepresented in STEM-related domains. This
will occur through a focus on effective experiences that foster student
competency, innovative curricular models, the role of business and workforce
members, and engaging diverse underrepresented populations. The ultimate goal of
the iCREATE project will be to positively impact the regional STEM workforce
through the implementation of a new model of community engagement in STEM
learning. To accomplish this goal, the project will be designed to meet the
following objectives: 1. Test and refine a model of community engagement in STEM
learning to engage students in finding solutions to authentic, community-based
problems; 2. Engage community partners to design and implement a technology-rich
bioscience course focusing on infectious disease and its data collection
challenges; 3. Increase student motivation and interest in STEM learning and
careers; and 4. Integrate sustainability into the project for a long lasting
impact in the community. This bioscience course will be designed to engage
students in an authentic problem important to the local community while drawing
upon community resources. It will integrate the study of relevant bioscience
topics and epidemiological principles with the technological project of
designing and implementing a data collection system using computer and
geospatial technologies software in order to monitor the transmission of
influenza. Project partners include: The Center for Science Teaching and
Learning at Northern Arizona University, Translational Genomics Research
Institute North (TGen-North), Flagstaff STEM city, multiple regional health care
providers and the Coconino Association for Vocations, Industry and Technology
(CAVIAT), a local provider of career and technical education courses.