* 1513141
* NSF Workshop on Wireless Security
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Yanchao Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Wireless technologies have fueled IT and economic growth around the globe. The
past decade has witnessed an explosive deployment of wireless technologies,
coupled with a rapid development of highly capable mobile devices and life-
changing applications. Advances in wireless technologies have led to a pervasive
communication fabric that encompasses everything such as vehicles, smartphones,
smart meters, environmental sensors, portable medical devices, and personal
communication devices. There is no doubt that the wireless cyberspace has had a
transformative impact on the society and has revolutionized almost all aspects
of daily life, work, and leisure. The ever-growing wireless cyberspace is
unfortunately accompanied by a commensurate increase in security threats, both
originating from and directed at the wireless cyberspace. It is thus not
surprising that cyber security has become a focus for research and development
across academic, government, and industry sectors in recent years. On the one
hand, wireless networks and systems often have characteristics and security
requirements that are quite varied. On the other hand, there are new
opportunities to explore for securing the wireless
cyberspace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Workshop on Wireless Security is to
help the research community better understand the critical need for security in
future wireless networked systems and identify promising research directions to
secure the wireless cyberspace. This workshop brings together researchers and
practitioners in multiple fields-such as wireless networking, information
theory, mobile systems, and security-and provides a forum for an in-depth
scientific discussion and debate on the critical security challenges facing the
future wireless cyberspace. This workshop is intended to cover a wide scope of
emerging security and privacy issues in wireless networks, mobile systems, and
wireless/mobile applications. The expected outcome of this workshop is a report
that clearly identifies major research challenges in wireless security, exposes
the research community to new and exciting inter-disciplinary research problems,
and articulates a vision of conducting fundamental and inter-disciplinary
research in this area. The workshop engages various stakeholders in the
community to explore strategies for enhancing educational opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students. The workshop also engages personnel from
across the entire US including women and minority faculty and researchers. The
final workshop report will be available online for sharing with the research
community.