* 1513801
* Modeling Synergistic Coordination in Multi-Agen Human and Human-Machine Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Maurice Lamb, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2018
* USD 226,273.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising interdisciplinary scholar in the
area of human computer interaction. The success of many everyday activities
depends on the effective behavioral coordination of cooperating individuals.
These activities include moving materials through an assembly line, loading a
dishwasher with a family member, shaking hands with a co-worker, and maneuvering
a remotely operated vehicle to repair a satellite. Recent research within the
fields of human movement science, psychology and complex dynamical systems has
revealed new methods for modelling these interactions. The objective of this
project is to examine whether these human inspired models can be implemented in
robotic and artificial agents in order to develop highly robust and flexible
human-machine systems. Accordingly, the project will result in important new
advances in interactive human-robotic and human-artificial-agent based systems
by grounding the behavior of these systems in the dynamics of natural human-
human interaction. More generally, the proposed project has significant
implications for the design and development of workplace machinery, autonomous
vehicles, and medical technologies where high levels of precise human-machine
cooperation are necessary. Understanding how to implement human inspired
behavioral dynamic models in robotic and artificial agents will also help with
the development of assistive technologies, including prosthetics, robotic aids,
and therapeutic technologies, that are better tailored to the needs of the
specific end user.

Cooperating individuals behave as a single, synergistic unit, with their actions
and behaviors often coordinated in a self-organized manner, requiring little or
no explicit direction or a priori planning. The objective of this project is to
develop and test dynamical (differential equation) models that capture the
synergistic self-organization of human multi-agent coordination and deploy these
models in artificial agents (virtual and robotic agents) to create highly robust
and mutually responsive coupled human-machine systems. The project is designed
to advance a new framework for the development of coordinated human-machine
systems, one that is derived from empirical evidence of the physical,
informational and biomechanical processes that shape and constrain the dynamics
of successful and adaptive joint-action behavior in humans. Using a set of
object moving and passing tasks, the specific aims of the project are to
demonstrate (1) how dynamical models of the synergistic coordination that occurs
between pairs of human agents performing a physical joint-action task can serve
as the basis for artificial agent performance and (2) can be implemented in
systems of interacting human and artificial agents to produce stable and
adaptive patterns of robust behavioral coordination equivalent to that observed
during human-human interaction. The proposed research integrates contemporary
methods from behavioral, cognitive and social psychology, human movement
science, computer-science, complexity science, engineering, and philosophy and
will advance our fundamental understanding of the behavioral dynamics of human
joint action. Moreover, the proposed project will have broad and transformative
implications for the development and design of interactive robotic and
artificial agent based assistive, diagnostic, and therapeutic sensorimotor
technologies.