* 1513379
* INSPIRE: Adaptive Multi-Scale Modeling of Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Gabor Toth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 999,966.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Plasma Physics and Computational
Physics programs in the Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, the Magnetospheric Physics program in the Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences Division in the Directorate for Geosciences, and the Office of
Integrative Activities. Ionized gas, or in scientific terms plasma, is the most
common state of matter in the Universe. In the solar system, for example, the
solar corona where solar eruptions occur, the solar wind that carries the
erupted plasma and magnetic field from the Sun to the Earth, the magnetosphere
surrounding the Earth and protecting us from the harmful effects of the
eruption, and the ionosphere through which radio communications and GPS signals
propagate and get disturbed, all consist of plasma. Understanding plasma is
crucial for predicting and mitigating the effects of space weather. Plasmas also
play an important role in engineering, for example in the design of fusion type
reactors that promise to provide an inexhaustible source of clean energy for
humanity. Computational modeling of plasma dynamics is very challenging due to
the different spatial and temporal scales and the complex behavior of the
system. The project is aimed at improving the efficiency of present plasma
simulation models by a factor of 1000 or even more. If successful, the new model
will provide accurate and affordable simulations for systems that currently
cannot be modeled even on the largest supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are different approaches for plasma modeling that all have advantages and
drawbacks. The most accurate kinetic methods describe all the important effects
of plasma by describing the full distribution function in a six dimensional
phase space, but they have tremendous computational cost. Even on today's
supercomputers, modeling a large three-dimensional system with kinetic methods
is far out of reach. Alternative fluid-type methods describe the plasma
distribution function with a handful of moments, such as density, velocity and
pressure. Solving for these quantities in addition to the magnetic field can be
done quite efficiently, and in fact one can model the solar corona, the solar
wind, and the magnetosphere with global fluid models with reasonable
computational resources. Unfortunately, in most systems there are some parts of
the domain where the fluid description is not sufficient, and this can have
consequences for the global solution. The project aims at combining the kinetic
and fluid type methods in an adaptive and dynamic fashion. The expensive kinetic
model will be restricted to the small parts of the domain where the fluid
description is not accurate enough, while the efficient fluid methods will be
employed in the vast majority of the domain. This hybrid approach promises to
provide accurate solutions at a tiny fraction of the cost of the fully kinetic
models. A speed up of factor of 1000 or even more is expected. This will allow
modeling global plasma systems with unprecedented accuracy and vastly improve
our understanding and predictive capabilities.