* 1513364
* Biochemical reaction systems: multistationarity, persistence, and identifiability
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Anne Shiu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 91,899.00

Biochemical reaction networks are the fundamental engines of life, giving rise
to biological processes ranging from photosynthesis to digestion. The objective
of this research is to analyze such networks endowed with mass-action kinetics.
These dynamical systems model various biological mechanisms, and they will be
studied using algebraic, geometric, and combinatorial methods. The investigator
is pursuing the following aims directly related to reaction networks: (1)
determining how the combinatorial geometry of a given reaction network informs
the long-term dynamics of the resulting dynamical system, (2) classifying and
analyzing multistationary reaction networks, and (3) parametrizing
multistationarity in post-translational modification systems (important
signaling motifs in biology) using techniques from real algebraic geometry such
as real root counting. In a fourth research direction, the investigator is
analyzing Grobner bases of certain elimination ideals with the aim of developing
criteria for identifiability, which is the question of whether parameters can be
uniquely recovered from data. This investigation will occur both in the context
of quasi-steady-state approximations in chemical reaction systems and in the
setting of graphical models in algebraic statistics.

This research seeks to provide new insights about the dynamical behavior of
medically relevant biochemical reaction networks. Indeed, the reaction systems
studied in this research are widely used models for biomolecular activities;
examples include pharmacological models of drug interaction, signal transduction
models, and enzymatic mechanisms. In particular, this research will yield
insight into the long-term behavior of reaction systems and provide a better
understanding of multistationary networks.