* 1513332
* The Youth Digital Storytelling STEM Academy
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Ellen Metzger, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,099,567.00

The project will develop a student-directed intervention that leverages research
on motivation to encourage student interest and engagement in the Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)-related field of climate
science. The intervention is designed to give students the opportunity to use
video storytelling to tell their own stories in a meaningful way for their
communities. Through this experience, students will develop competencies in
climate science, engineering design, media technology, and communications
including storytelling. The program will focus on middle school students, a
critical age for the development of STEM interest, who are from geographical
areas traditionally underrepresented in the STEM workforce. Students will
produce videos supported by teachers and students from San Jose State University
(SJSU) from the sciences and visual arts. Middle school teachers will attend a
one-week summer workshop focused on developing the science and filmmaking skills
to implement the intervention. During the proposed project, 60 teachers and at
least 2,000 students will directly participate in the project, with additional
participation from parents, friends, and teachers who attend the project film
festival. Students will submit their final films together with a digital
portfolio that includes the supporting science and career connections to the
project film festival. Selected films will be screened at The Tech Museum and
featured on YouTube. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use an iterative
design-based research approach to study how digital technology, storytelling and
the STEM-related field of climate science can be used to help traditionally
underserved students identify with STEM fields and careers. Students will
participate in the program in their middle school science class, guided by their
trained teachers, university student mentors. A set of online instructional
videos will be designed to support teacher and student learning. A collection of
data sources including pre/post student surveys, classroom observations, student
interviews and external evaluations of the films and digital portfolios will be
used to inform and revise the project design, and to understand to what extent
and nature of intended project impacts. The materials produced through this
project, including videos and instructional materials, will be available online
and thus support replication of this educational model in other classrooms. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program that supports projects that build understandings of
best practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to
engaging students in learning and developing interest in STEM, information and
communications technology (ICT), computer science, and related STEM content and
careers.