* 1513737
* Functional Role of BYDV 3' RNA Translational Enhancer Element
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2019
* USD 569,715.00

Plant viral diseases affect a significant number of food crops world-wide and
can have severe impact both on economic conditions and food supply. The research
in this project will probe how the genetic material of a specific plant virus
form an unusual structure that is able to initiation the production of proteins
(a process called translation) in the host cell. There is a potential to use
information from this research not only to control viruses but also to develop
systems for production of proteins that are nutritionally beneficial, protein
antibodies or proteins that have economic uses. At a more fundamental level,
because of similarities in translation, this knowledge may be relevant to other
major viral diseases such as hepatitis C, HIV and West Nile. Because of their
relatively small size and well-defined components, plant viruses serve as a
model system to increase the understanding of more complex viral and cellular
translation. This project will provide excellent training for students from high
school through graduate school in both biochemical and quantitative
measurements. Many of the students involved in research in the past have been
from underrepresented minority groups and this is likely to continue in the
future. These students will contribute to a diverse and well trained workforce
in science and technology. This project will also involve high school teachers
and community college faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When an RNA virus infects a
cell, it must out-compete host cell mRNA to produce viral proteins. Viruses
accomplish this by a number of strategies, many involving unique viral RNA
structures. Barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV) contains an unusual RNA structure
(a BTE) in the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of the mRNA. In preliminary results,
it was shown that the BTE binds ribosomes, eukaryotic initiation factors (eIFs)
and interacts with a 5' UTR stem loop. The details of this novel mechanism of
protein synthesis initiation are unknown. This project will investigate three
critical steps in assembly of an initiation complex. These include 1)
determining the rate-limiting steps for 40S/43S ribosomal subunit binding to the
3' BTE of BYDV; 2) analysis of ribosome transfer to the 5' UTR and 3) 3' BTE and
5' UTR interactions. Fluorescence spectroscopy will be used to determine the
effects of each of the isolated proteins on ribosomal subunit binding. The site
of ribosome transfer at the 5' UTR and the rates of scanning and influence of
eIFs on those rates will be measured by FRET techniques. In a novel application
of single molecule fluorescence, the rate of transfer of the 40S ribosomal
subunit from the 3' UTR binding site to the 5' UTR will be determined. The BYDV
5'-3' RNA interaction appears to be transient and it is therefore difficult to
elucidate the effects of the complex on ribosomal subunit transfer. To further
quantitate these interactions, the related, but much more stable interaction of
the carnation Italian ringspot virus 5'-3' UTRs will be used. The experiments
described here will increase understanding of the molecular interactions that
allow viral mRNA to compete efficiently with the much higher concentration of
cellular RNA for translation.