* 1513519
* Shaping the Future of Geoscience Education Research: Synthesizing Results and Articulating Future Directions
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* R Macdonald, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2015
* USD 49,994.00

The project is investigating the current status of geoscience education research
(GER), focusing on undergraduate education and building on recent reports on
Discipline-Based Education Research (DBER). The project supports a collaborative
effort by the geoscience education research community to identify and synthesize
the accomplishments, results, and claims of GER, compile an annotated list of
methods used in such research, and recommend future research directions and ways
to support such efforts. The project includes engagement of the GER and broader
geoscience education communities through a three-day workshop as well as virtual
activities to engage the community before, during, and after the workshop. The
project website supports community-wide engagement and dissemination. The
project is providing a focus on the current status and future directions of GER
and ultimately, as research translates into practice, in shaping undergraduate
geoscience education at the individual, institutional, and national level. The
project supports the development of the geoscience education research community
through the workshop and virtual opportunities for
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes crowd-sourced engagement
of the GER and broader geoscience education communities through a three-day
workshop, as well as virtual opportunities to engage the community before,
during, and after the workshop. Virtual activities include virtual discussions
before the workshop, a virtual poster session and discussion during the
workshop, and feedback and comments on draft products after the workshop. The
project website is hosted by the National Association of Geoscience Teachers
(NAGT). Primary deliverables from the project include resources focused on the
methods used in GER, what has been learned to date in GER, critical topics and
questions for future GER work, and strategies for building the GER community and
support new researchers in the field.