* 1513694
* TWC: Medium: Distributed Differential Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Pierce, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,200,000.00

When data is controlled by diverse stake-holders, privacy concerns may limit
sharing. Loose federation can be an obstacle to dependability because lack of a
global view can limit large-scale coordination and stability. Lack of a global
view is one of the problems that contributed to the 2008 financial collapse.
Ideally, an outside party could coordinate behavior, but this is often
impossible: domains may be reluctant to share their local information.
Differential privacy can mitigate these concerns -- it provides a strong,
attractive privacy guarantee that protects data owners from risks associated
disclosure of their data, but this guarantee can be hard to achieve in
distributed settings. This project is developing practical tools for distributed
private data analysis that can be used by non-experts in a variety of
applications, allowing for important new analyses of distributed data. The
project also includes substantial outreach activities, in the form of course
development and workshop organization, and will train PhD students to be future
leaders in the development of privacy technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project advances the practical theory of differential privacy in distributed
settings. It has three main thrusts: 1) to extend the theory of differential
privacy to work with relaxed guarantees, amenable to high-accuracy analyses when
there are only a relatively small number of parties with limited ability to
collude; 2) to develop programming languages and automatic verification tools
capable of automatically certifying the differential privacy properties of
distributed systems, in which each party has only partial access to the data;
and 3) to develop tool chains to implement differentially private algorithms in
distributed settings, using (among other technologies) secure multi-party
computation as a computational substrate.