* 1513906
* NeTS:  Medium:  From Verification to Synthesis in Software Defined Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Matthew Caesar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,200,000.00

Every aspect of our society, from business, to government, to medicine and the
sciences, is now tightly intertwined with the functioning of computer networks
such as the Internet. Unfortunately, modern computer networks are extremely
complicated, making them prone to implementation errors and misconfigurations,
which can lead to vulnerabilities and other avenues to attack. To address this
challenge, this project is designing and implementing systems which
automatically verify correctness of network behavior, and correct
vulnerabilities and errors in operational networks. These systems can provide
immediate practical assistance to protecting networks and critical
infrastructure against the attacks and cyberthreats we read about in the news
every day.

The project's technology functions by scanning a network, constructing a formal
model of the network's behavior, and using custom formal logic algorithms to
automatically derive diagnoses and repairs to network state. The core technical
approach is founded on data-plane verification (DPV), which models network-wide
properties using a view of the network that is as close as possible to the
network's actual running behavior, i.e., the data plane: forwarding tables
contained in routers, switches, firewalls, and other networking equipment. This
low-level view allows DPV to catch and prevent errors that other tools miss, and
provides a framework for the unified analysis of heterogeneous, multi-protocol
networks.

Intellectual Merit: This research is designing new algorithms to detect,
prevent, and repair errors in complex networks. To achieve this, the researchers
are developing a new class of formal methods to efficiently model network
properties such as reachability, as well as techniques to store and query these
models in real time. The researchers are also developing systems based on these
algorithms to quickly and correctly localize faults, repair them before they can
affect live networks, and deploy operating environments based on software-
defined networking that automate application of their techniques. This research
is shedding light on the ability to formally model networks, and is building
insights into how to design networks and network protocols that have strong
security properties from first principles. The work will also help enable
interdisciplinary research across formal methods and networking disciplines,
with the common goal of enabling highly available networking infrastructures.

Broader Impacts: The results of this research will significantly enhance
reliability and security of critical network infrastructure, and ease network
management tasks. Being able to construct networks that can provide formal
guarantees on the correctness and resilience of packet forwarding would have
significant economic impact, by making networks more reliable and cost-
effective. Networks that can deal reliably with rarely encountered exceptions
are an essential component of attack survival and recovery for business and
government communication systems. The techniques developed in this research will
also improve resilience to misconfigurations, which may accelerate deployment of
networks in underdeveloped and rural areas lacking experienced network operators
with resources to troubleshoot network problems. Finally, the project is
training students on cutting-edge and cross-disciplinary research in networking,
formal methods, and security.