* 1513633
* RAPID: Early Warning Algorithms for Predicting Ebola Infection Outcomes
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Richard Slayden, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2016
* USD 137,119.00

This investigation concerns the development of mathematical algorithms to
provide rapid diagnostic tools for the early detection of infection by the Ebola
virus. Unlike current methods, the proposed approach will not require that the
subject be symptomatic for detection of the virus. The proposed methodology
exploits the observation that the immune system behaves like a canary in a coal
mine, providing an early warning system that, if quantitatively understood,
could be used to identify infection, accelerate treatment and improve outcomes.
The detection technique consists of building an array of mathematical models
for, e.g., gene expression data, that characterize the nominal state of the
healthy immune system. These models are then applied to detect novel, or
anomalous behavior of the immune system in infected subjects. The initial model
building phase will employ non-human primate and mouse data to establish
viability of the approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcriptional analysis has
been widely applied to identify markers for disease classification, diagnosis,
and prognosis. Many methods have been developed to identify the signaling
pathways that respond to the changes between varying biological states, i.e.,
healthy and disease states, from a static viewpoint. However, the transition
between biological states is a complex dynamic process that is information rich.
In preliminary work on influenza, a nonlinear model of gene expression was built
for over 400 pathways using data from healthy individuals that were
experimentally infected with influenza virus. Of these pathways, the cytosolic
DNA/RNA sensing pathway (a system for detecting pathogen-associated nucleic
acids) was the first to exhibit changes in gene expression in the majority of
subjects who became symptomatic, reflecting the immune system's initial response
to an invading pathogen. Moreover, as the immune system response progressed,
there was a cascade of anomalous pathway signaling, reflected by changes in gene
expression, which could provide an early warning signature for detection of a
pathogen well before externally observable symptoms of the disease appear. In
this project, the pathway cascade of the mammalian cell response to Ebola virus
will be investigated with the goal of characterizing the features of its
disease-specific evolution, which will be used to identify molecular signatures
for diagnosis prior to observable symptoms. The sensitivity and robustness of
the modeling procedure will also be explored.