* 1513730
* SHF: Medium: RUI: Collaborative Research: Advanced Traceability for Composing Product Line Safety Cases
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Jane Huang, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 444,326.00

In order to reduce time-to-market and development costs, families of safety-
critical software systems are increasingly developed as product lines. Examples
include the software in medical devices, airplanes, assistive robots, and self-
driving vehicles. Product lines provide structured reuse of a wide range of
software artifacts including requirements, architecture, design, code, and test
cases. For safety-critical product lines, a safety case must be constructed for
each product to provide evidence that it is safe for use. Constructing these
safety cases is time-consuming and slows industries? time-to-market of new
products. This project develops a solution for product lines that partially
automates the construction of a product?s safety case from existing software
artifacts and that guides the developer through the needed safety analysis and
refinement steps. The goal of the project is to reduce the cost and effort of
developing a safety case while leveraging product-line reuse to increase the
quality and safety of delivered products.

The ability to reuse variability-aware safety assets can transform the way
manufacturers of safety-critical product lines analyze the safety of their
products and construct safety cases. Solutions are evaluated on real-world
product lines with industrial collaborators. The underlying traceability
techniques and tools, developed under this grant, will benefit a broad set of
software-intensive systems by addressing the ongoing problems of trace link
evolution and safe reuse. The project cross-trains students in traceability,
software safety and product lines, and produces training materials to encourage
transition to practice of the solutions developed.