* 1513415
* Interactive Mentoring Activities for Under-Represented Minority Faculty
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Squire Booker, American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology will direct a career
development and mentoring program called Interactive Mentoring Activities for
Grantsmanship Enhancement (IMAGE). IMAGE was developed because there is a
serious lack of faculty development programs that target under-represented
minority faculty, particularly senior postdoctoral scientists and early-stage
Assistant Professors. The IMAGE program seeks to increase the number of
federally-funded junior faculty, particularly members of groups that are under-
represented in STEM disciplines and faculty that teach at minority serving
institutions. Given that a key element of a sustainable academic career in the
sciences is extramural funding, developing tenable strategies to improve the
success rates of under-represented minority faculty in securing funding is a
critical component in increasing the number of under-represented minorities in
academia. IMAGE will offer annual mentoring workshops and one-on-one structured
mentoring. In addition, IMAGE will provide a web-based interactive resource for
dissemination of grant writing and career development resources, as well as for
mentoring. This online resource will make information obtained through the IMAGE
program widely available to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMAGE
program will provide intensive mentoring on grantsmanship skills and career
development strategies over a three-year period. Senior postdoctoral scientists
and early-stage Assistant Professors from groups under-represented in science
will attend annual mentoring workshops focusing on grant-writing, peer
mentoring, and career development advice, as well as receiving one-on-one
structured mentoring where each participant will be paired with a senior,
successful scientist who has a strong track record of securing federal funding.
Best practices and other resources generated through the IMAGE program will be
made widely available through the development of an online web-based resource.
The IMAGE program has the following specific aims: 1) To organize an annual
grant-writing and mentoring workshop for Junior Faculty and Postdoctoral
Fellows. 2) To provide one-on-one mentoring in the preparation and submission of
a competitive NSF grant application. 3) To provide postdoctoral mentees with
effective strategies for obtaining a faculty position. 4) To develop a curated
web-based resource for use by postdoctoral fellows and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by Programs in the
Chemistry of Life Processes (Division of Chemistry) and Molecular Biophysics
(Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences).