* 1513839
* EAGER:  Genetic transformation of common milkweed, Asclepias syriaca:  Creating a model plant for ecological investigations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Anurag Agrawal, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2018
* USD 313,999.00

Plants are the basic energy source in nearly all food chains and provide the
essential resources to sustain all animal life either directly, through
consumption, or indirectly, because carnivores eat herbivores, which eat plants.
Tremendous consumption pressure on plants has led to the evolution of a
remarkable diversity of tactics to defend against being consumed. This project
will manipulate the genetics of the common milkweed to identify the basis for
these defenses. With this information, the researchers can alter defenses in
field populations to understand their consequences for the organisms that feed
on milkweed, such as the threatened monarch butterfly. Deciphering the
mechanisms of plant defense will significantly advance the field of evolutionary
ecology. This project will translate methods used for crop plants to natural
communities, demonstrating diverse ways in which genetic manipulations can
improve our understanding of the ecology of species interactions and natural
communities. Results will be welcomed by individuals and organizations
interested in conserving species such as the monarch butterfly, and will
contribute to public outreach efforts as well as to educational activities at
all levels from K-12 through graduate students.

Theory, observations, and experiments show that many plants traits have evolved
by natural selection to ward off insect attack. Despite numerous demonstrations
of how plant traits can reduce herbivory, scientists lack an understanding of
the mechanisms underlying plant defensive responses in most wild plant species.
This research will take advantage of recent developments in molecular biology
and plant signaling to manipulate a key and universal pathway in plant defense
signaling based on the hormone jasmonic acid. The researchers will first produce
lines of genetically transformed plants that have various reduced levels of COI1
expression. Key challenges will be to improve efficiency and yield of
transformants, and to generate empty vector controls from the same genetic
background as each transformed line. They will then verify successful genetic
silencing of COI1 by measuring COI1 transcript expression and plant sensitivity
to jasmonic acid. The third objective is to improve the ability to propagate
plants clonally for use in ecological experiments. The project will employ RNA-
interference to genetically silence the perception of endogenous jasmonic acid
in milkweed, an approach that bears significant risk. This native plant has been
studied for its interactions with many insect pests. If this project is
successful, milkweed could become a model in plant ecological research.