* 1513622
* A Novel Approach to Study Nonlinearity and Interaction in Regression
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Ker-Chau Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 03/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The increasing access to large databases across many global economic sectors, as
well as various scientific disciplines, poses significant challenges that demand
novel statistical methodologies for conducting data analytics. A common feature
of these databases is the large number of subjects under study, and the large
number of variables describing a wide variety of attributes attached to each
subject. Guided by the dual principles of parsimony and accuracy, statistical
models can be developed to serve as informative approximations to the unknown
physical reality underlying the intricate mechanism of the data generation
process. However, a lack of understanding of the nature and the pattern of
complex nonlinear interactions between variables involved in the system has
largely hindered the progress in the field of high-dimensional data analysis. In
this project, novel statistical theory, methods, and software will be developed.
These results will address key foundational issues and open up new avenues for
research.

Regression is one of the most fundamental concepts in statistics, with
applications in almost all disciplines. The growing interest in high-dimensional
regression either from the forward or from the inverse perspective has brought
out many facets that increase its flexibility in modeling complex data with
proven statistical efficiency. Working in the data-intensive area of genomics, a
novel statistical notion, liquid association (LA), has been developed that
allows researchers to study dynamic patterns of co-regulation between genes.
This project will investigate methods of employing LA for variable selection in
high-dimensional regression. In combination with inverse modeling techniques
including sliced inverse regression (SIR), hidden patterns of interaction
between clusters of nonlinearly-correlated variables can be revealed. In many
applications, it is often necessary to incorporate a certain set of background
variables that are known to be important in the model. This adds another layer
of complexity in revealing patterns in the interlocked variable-to-variable
interactions. Methods of marginalizing the interference caused by background
variables will also be developed.