* 1513349
* Building STEM Identity and Career Interests in Native American Students By Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and Remote Sensing Technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Karla Bradley Eitel, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,101,523.00

The project is designed to develop, implement and assess an educational model
intended to improve Native American student science identity through culturally
relevant use of technology that can directly improve the well being of their
communities. The project will engage 90 low-income, high school Native American
students from the rural Nez Perce Reservation in Idaho through a program of
educational activities centered on the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
and remote sensing. The students will be trained in UAV use focused on remote
sensing of Tribal ecosystems, as well as in science communication and
leadership, as part of an enhanced curriculum during an immersive residential
summer program at the University of Idaho (McCall) Outdoor Science School
campus, located on ancestral Nez Perce Tribal lands. During the academic year,
the students at will take part in learning activities focused upon UAV and
remote sensing technologies, including virtual field trips, guest speakers, and
other instruction delivered via videoconference. Students will take part in
hands-on remote sensing and mapping activities of ecosystems that are integral
to their culture such as riparian ecosystems (which support traditional and
current Tribal fisheries) and forest ecosystems. Each school year will culminate
in a large-scale mapping project that will be chosen and designed, based on
student and Nez Perce community member input. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will investigate two central research hypotheses: that science identity is
increased in Native American students when they engage in technology-based
projects that directly relate to their community/cultural interests, and that
interest and achievement by students in STEM education is sustained when
community involvement is central to the approach. The project will collect data
related to three constructs of science identity theory: competence, performance
and recognition. Methods will include pre- and post-program surveys, assessment
of STEM concepts, reflective journaling, semi-structured interviews, focus
groups, observations, and longitudinal data collection. Data generation will
focus on the three constructs of science identity theory: competence,
performance and recognition. Through this work, we will contribute to a model of
culturally-connected science identity that expands and enhances existing
understanding about science identity. This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program that supports
projects that build understandings of best practices, program elements, contexts
and processes contributing to engaging students in learning and developing
interest in STEM, information and communications technology (ICT), computer
science, and related STEM content and careers.