* 1513572
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Developer Crowdsourcing: Capturing, Understanding, and Addressing Security-related Blind Spots in APIs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Daniela Oliveira, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 454,969.00

Despite an emphasis the security community places on the importance of producing
secure software, the number of new security vulnerabilities in software
increases every year. This research is based on the assumption that software
vulnerabilities are caused by misunderstandings, or lack of knowledge, called
blind spots, which the developers experience while they are building systems.
When building systems, developers often focus more on functional requirements
than on non-functional ones, such as security. Thus, they can make design
decisions that prioritize functionality without noticing the security
vulnerabilities these decisions create. Today, developers often have no access
to effective software tools that highlight these vulnerabilities during
development. This research identifies common developer blind spots with the goal
of building and evaluating practical software tools that help prevent blind
spots during development and detect vulnerabilities in deployed software.

To capture developers' reasoning when faced with blind spots, and to identify
common blind spot characteristics, this research converts several identified
blind spots into programming puzzles, and conducts a user study with developers
solving these puzzles. Statistical analysis of the developers' answers
identifies common characteristics among blind spots, and the observations of
developers' behaviors guide the creation of tools to automatically detect blind
spots and to warn developers about them as developers experience them. The tools
have two complementary goals: (1) prevent blind spots from occurring by cueing
developers on-the-spot about potential blind spots as they write code, and (2)
identify software vulnerabilities in existing applications by detecting code
that may have been written as a result of a blind spot. This research evaluates
these newly developed tools in the context of a user study with developers,
producing the following outcomes: (1) understanding of blind spots in
application programming interfaces (APIs), and of developers' attentional and
decision processes when writing code using APIs, (2) understanding of how to
notify, without habituation and annoyance, developers on-the-spot about blind
spots so that relevant security information is used by developers while writing
code, (3) creation of open-source, publicly available developer tools that
notify developers about blind spots and facilitate detection of vulnerabilities
caused by blind spots, and (4) development of guidelines for better API design
to minimize blind spots by considering developers' attentional and decision
processes. This research addresses an important gap in secure software
development by incorporating the human factor of the development process. This
is particularly crucial given our society's increasing dependence on software
applications.