* 1513501
* Chagas Disease in the ancient Americas: Investigating past to present human parasitism through the molecular and archaeological record
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Richard Green, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2018
* USD 217,611.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship trains an interdisciplinary scientist exploring the
evolutionary and anthropogenic processes associated with the emergence of Chagas
Disease in the Americas.

Chagas Disease (CD) is caused by a New World parasite that has infected humans
since our earliest migrations into the Americas c. 15,000 years ago. Today the
causative agent, Trypanosoma cruzi, infects millions of people, primarily in
Latin America. CD presents a new global challenge as its continual spread,
facilitated by climate change and human activity, threatens non-endemic
countries, causing 300,000 infections in the US alone. While treatment is
available for acute infections, the chronic form can result in cardiac and
digestive organ failure. The clinical manifestations have been recognized in
archaeological human remains from South America as early as 9,000 years ago.
Despite the increase of available genetic data, the evolutionary history of T.
cruzi and the timing of the emergence of Chagas Disease remain unresolved. This
project applies novel paleogenomic methods to target T. cruzi in human remains
found in pre-Columbian South America to test hypotheses regarding the origins,
timing and dispersal of human-adapted lineages. More critical for contemporary
society, the research team also explores the anthropogenic (i.e. human behavior,
landscape use, social structure, subsistence) and natural (i.e. climate change)
factors associated with the emergence and persistence of CD in the Americas.
Interdisciplinary collaboration and training from both life and social sciences,
including computational biology, is critical for success. All sequence data
generated during the research will be deposited on public databases, broadly
accessible to students, clinical researchers and the greater scientific
community. Results will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journals, at
professional meetings, and within the classroom and community, providing the
fellow with additional opportunities to continue her participation in outreach
and educational programs that promote young women in science. By providing
direct access to the genetic signatures of past human infection, we promote a
"deep-time" approach to contemporary issues of local and global health.

The proposed project synthesizes bioarchaeological, molecular and ecological
evidence to examine the origins and dispersal of T. cruzi and illuminate the
evolutionary and anthropogenic processes associated with the emergence of Chagas
Disease in the Americas. While previous paleogenetic analyses of CD offer
limited genetic and phylogenetic information, analyses of complete ancient
pathogen genomes capable of addressing the proposed questions are now possible
following the application of DNA enrichment and high-throughput sequencing to
archaeological or historic samples. This project represents the first genome-
scale study of ancient CD. In the dedicated cleanroom at the UCSC Human
Paleogenomics Lab, "next-gen" methods are applied to an extensive, well-
contextualized collection of archaeological human remains from pre-Columbian
South America, including samples identified with clinical signs of CD. For each
individual, a unique DNA sequencing library is constructed immediately following
DNA extraction from the bone, tooth or tissue. The process of library
construction effectively transforms samples into renewable resources;
"immortalized" libraries can perpetually be re-amplified and thus repurposed for
new experiments and shared with other researchers. Pathogen DNA often represents
less than 0.1% of endogenous molecules in a library; enrichment methods are
employed to target and capture only sequences of interest, radically improving
the likelihood of recovering T. cruzi DNA. The research team uses the latest
computational methods capable of confronting next-generation data from highly
damaged, degraded DNA fraught with sequencing errors, helping us to establish
authenticity, and producing high quality output to use in evolutionary analyses.
With calibration points derived from the time-stamped sequence data, they can
estimate mutation rates, reconstruct phylogenies alongside publicly available
modern T. cruzi DNA with methods that integrate heterochronous data, and date
divergence events used to test current hypotheses regarding the evolution of
human-adapted T. cruzi. With the addition of paleoecological records and the
archaeological context of the past several millennia in the New World, the
Fellow aims to provide a diachronic perspective on the paleoepidemiological
patterns of CD in the face of changing cultural and environmental conditions.