* 1513579
* Optimal Decision Strategies for Large Spatio-Temporal Decision Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Brian Reich, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 149,998.00

A number of current public health, ecological, and environmental crises can be
conceptualized as spatio-temporal decision problems wherein a harmful
replicating agent is spreading across space and, simultaneously, a decision
maker must select when, where, and how to allocate limited resources targeted at
controlling the spread of the agent. Examples include the spread of an
infectious disease across people in a social network, the spread of a computer
virus across machines in a network, and the spread of an invasive species across
an ecological landscape. The costs of these epidemics are enormous. For example,
32% of global deaths are attributed to infectious diseases, the cost of computer
viruses to U.S. businesses is estimated to exceed 60 billion dollars per year,
and the cost of invasive species is estimated to exceed 100 billion dollars per
year and to affect 100 million acres of land. Thus, improvements to spatio-
temporal decision making could have tremendous benefits to all sectors of
society. Technological advances have made it increasingly easy to collect,
store, and manipulate large amounts of data. This research project takes first
steps toward methods that use accumulating data on the spread of a replicating
agent to inform resource allocation over time. The methodology adjusts for non-
stationary agent dynamics, changing availability of resources, and uncertain or
incomplete measurements.

A key component of controlling the spread of a replicating agent over space and
time is deciding where, when, and how to apply interventions. This control
process is formalized as an allocation strategy which comprises a sequence of
functions, one per time point, that map up-to-date information on the spread of
the agent to a distribution over subsets of locations to receive an
intervention. The project formally defines an optimal allocation strategy using
potential outcomes, and demonstrates that spatial proximity induces causal
interference among locations, thereby preventing direct application of existing
methods for sequential treatment assignment. A parametric estimator of the
optimal strategy within a pre-specified class of allocation strategies using a
systems dynamics model and simulation-optimization is developed. This estimator
has low variance and can be applied in a data-impoverished setting, however it
may suffer from high bias if the systems dynamics model is misspecified. A semi-
parametric estimator of the optimal allocation strategy which does not require
correct specification of a systems dynamics model is also developed. Because the
semi-parametric estimator relies on fewer assumptions about the underlying
systems dynamics, it is potentially robust to model misspecification but may
have high variance. To balance bias and variance, and optimize finite sample
performance, shrinkage of the semi-parametric estimator toward the parametric
estimator will be investigated. The methodologies will be illustrated with an
application to the spread of white-nose syndrome in bats.