* 1513779
* RI: Medium: An Analysis of the Consequences of Cortical Structure on Computation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* John Beggs, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 706,320.00

Networks of cortical neurons are clearly organized into layers and columns, but
relatively little is known about how these arrangements affect cortical
computations. To approach this issue, a 512 micro-electrode array will be used
to stimulate and record activity from hundreds of cortical neurons. With this,
the inputs and outputs of a cortical network can be experimentally controlled. A
recently-developed framework for understanding neural computation known as
"reservoir computing" permits the computational power of neural networks to be
quantified based on knowledge of their inputs and outputs. The 512-electrode
system allows input stimulation to be localized to different cortical layers or
columns. Similarly, outputs can be selected by recording from different layers
or columns. Thus, the contributions of layers and columns to computations, and
the types of computations they perform, can be measured and compared. The
results of this research are expected to increase the understanding of how the
cortex attains its remarkable computational power. In addition, the results of
this work are expected to inform future designs of brain-like computing
circuits. To promote scientific education and outreach, an existing software
package called "Simbrain" will be further developed and disseminated. This
package will allow students from high school level and above to understand how
cortical networks transform inputs into outputs as they perform
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three specific aims will be pursued. First,
the measurement of computational capacity must be based on realistic levels of
random background stimulation. The high-conductance state is a well-known
phenomenon in vivo resulting from constant random synaptic inputs, and is also a
common feature in many (particularly reservoir computing) neural circuit models.
The 512-electrode array will be used to deliver background stimulation to
determine levels that will improve computational performance. Second, layer
input and output locations will be studied. Using kernel quality and VC-
dimension metrics, the computational power and role of each layer taken
individually or as a whole will be assessed. It is possible that some layers
more strongly generalize input patterns while others separate them. Thus it will
be possible to dissect the computational contribution of each layer. Third, the
same metrics will be applied to stimulation to one column which feeds to
another. Here the computational power and role of multiple columns will be
assessed, and any computational differences between columns directly stimulated
by the array and columns stimulated by other columns can be observed.