* 1513884
* NeTS: Medium: Multicell MIMO for Scalable High-Density Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Douglas Blough, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 799,986.00

The public's demand for data has been growing at an enormous rate and growth is
showing no signs of diminishing. In particular, users are increasingly demanding
data from wireless devices such as smart phones, tablets, and laptops. To
accommodate this demand, the number of wireless access points (APs) being
deployed in high-demand areas has increased substantially and this has resulted
in significant interference between nearby wireless communications, which
reduces performance and can result in unmet user demands. This research is
studying the development of advanced coding, signal processing, and scheduling
techniques based on multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communication to
significantly reduce interference between competing transmissions, thereby
substantially increasing the overall user demand that can be accommodated. The
project will benefit society by opening up new types of high-demand
applications, such as augmented and virtual realities, to wireless users and
will maintain performance for these and other applications in the face of ever-
increasing data demands. The project will also enhance education through unified
courses that integrate advanced signal processing developments and wireless
networking instead of the traditional approach, which treats these as separate
disciplines.

This research is investigating new nonlinear processing techniques for multicell
MIMO within a framework of AP coordination for single clusters of 2-6 APs, which
covers home networks and small enterprises. To address the demands of large
enterprise wireless networks, the project is also researching a hierarchical
approach, which employs innovative techniques to deal with the problem of edge-
node interference between clusters to scale performance across multiple AP
clusters. The project will develop algorithms, techniques, and protocol
extensions in the area of performance scaling for multi-AP wireless networks.
Among the contributions are: (1) a novel non-linear precoding approach for
maximizing downlink performance in an AP cluster, (2) a new algorithm for
selecting groups of users for concurrent communication in a cluster and an
algorithm, based on a classic algorithm from VLSI circuit partitioning, for
iteratively improving the user groupings, (3) a slotted protocol that segments
mobile and stationary users and allocates mobile slots on demand, (4) an
approach to providing consistent access point orientation across AP clusters so
as to eliminate interference between clients at cluster boundaries, (5) a loose
coordination protocol executed between clusters that will allow neighboring
clusters to handle interference between them without the costly overhead of
exchanging full channel state information across the network, and (6) new
physical-layer-aware techniques for client-coordinated access to multiple
providers networks.