* 1513915
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Feedback Communication: Models, Designs, and Fundamental Limits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Claude Shannon?s ?A Mathematical Theory of Communication? is the landmark event
that paved the way for the development of modern communication systems. Shannon
analyzed the fundamental redundancy that must be added to data in order to
achieve reliable communication in the presence of noise. Since then his vision
has guided the practical design of virtually all aspects of modern communication
systems such as forward error correction, spectrally-efficient communication,
multiuser and inter-symbol interference, multiple-antenna systems, opportunistic
communication, and joint compression/transmission. However, while feedback is
present in virtually all modern communication systems, the field of information
theory has had relatively little impact on how feedback is employed in practice.
The proposed work will advance knowledge by developing a more complete
understanding of how feedback should be employed in communication systems and
what quantitative improvements in delay, complexity, and transmitted power one
can expect from its effective use, under realistic delay constraints such as
those found in high-speed wireless data. In summary, the successful completion
of the project is expected to contribute new mathematical tools, designs,
viewpoints, and models to the field of information
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to bring the insight,
design guidance, and performance bounds for which information theory is known to
bear on the design of systems with feedback. By providing new design principles
and feedback codes, this research has the potential not only to advance basic
science but also to improve the efficiency and reliability of our communications
infrastructure, including consumer technology such as WiFi and smartphones.
Given the proliferation of personal communication devices, such improvements
would augment the efficiency with which crucial resources such as energy and
radio frequency bandwidth are currently utilized.