* 1513816
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Algorithmic Foundations for Trajectory Collection Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Carlo Tomasi, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2020
* USD 807,999.00

This project engages experts in computational geometry, optimization, and
computer vision from Duke and Stanford to develop a theoretical and algorithmic
framework for analyzing large collections of trajectory data from sensors or
simulations. Trajectories are functions from a time interval to a multi-
dimensional space that arise in the description of any system that evolves over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trajectory data is being recorded or inferred from
hundreds of millions of sensors nowadays, from traffic monitoring systems and
GPS sensors on cell phones to cameras in surveillance systems or those embedded
in smart phones, in helmets of soldiers in the field, or in medical devices, as
well as from scientific experiments and simulations, such as molecular dynamics
computations in biology. Algorithms for trajectory-data analysis can lead to
video retrieval systems, activity recognition, facility monitoring and
surveillance, medical investigation, traffic navigation aids, military analysis
and deployment tools, entertainment, and much more. Many of these application
fields intersect areas of national security, as well as domains of broader
societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a transformational
approach that combines the geometry of individual trajectories with the
information that an entire collection of trajectories provides about its
members. Emphasis is on simple and fast algorithms that scale well with size and
dimension, can handle uncertainty in the data, and accommodate streams of noisy
and non-uniformly sampled measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
have a long track record of collaboration with applied scientists in many
disciplines, and will continue to transfer their new research to these
scientific fields through joint publications and research seminars, also in
collaboration with several industrial partners. This project will heavily rely
on the participation of graduate and undergraduate students. Participating
undergraduates will supplement their education with directed projects, software
development, and field studies. Data sets used and acquired for this project
will be made available to the community through online repositories. Software
developed will also be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding trajectory data sets, and
extracting meaningful information from them, entails many computational
challenges. Part of the problem has to do with the huge scale of the available
data, which is constantly growing, but there are several others as well.
Trajectory data sets are marred by sensing uncertainty and heterogeneity in
their quality, format, and temporal support. At the same time, individual
trajectories can have complex shapes, and even small nuances can make big
differences in their semantics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major tension in
understanding trajectory data is thus between the need to capture the fine
details of individual trajectories and the ability to exploit the wisdom of the
collection, i.e., to take advantage of the information embedded in a large
collection of trajectories but missing in any individual trajectory. This
emphasis on the wisdom of the collection is one of the main themes of the
project, and leads to a multitude of important problems in computational
geometry, combinatorial and numerical optimization, and computer vision. Another
theme of the project is to learn and exploit both continuous and discrete modes
of variability in trajectory data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deterministic and
probabilistic representations will be developed to summarize collections of
trajectories that capture commonalities and differences between them, and
efficient algorithms will be designed to compute these representations. Based on
these summaries, methods will be developed to estimate a trajectory from a given
collection, compare trajectories to each other in the context of a collection,
and retrieve trajectories from a collection in response to a query. Trajectory
collections will also be used to infer information about the environment and the
mobile entities involved in these motions.