* 1513736
* EAPSI:  Combination of Non-Axisymmetric Cutting and Polishing for Engine Components
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Max Stein, Stein                   Max            D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Non-axisymmetric components, components which are not symmetric about their
center, are prevalent in many engineering applications. Examples of these
components include engine camshafts and piston heads. Manufacturing of these
components requires multiple extremely precise and expensive cutting and
grinding processes. Combining these processes into one machine would greatly
reduce the cost of producing these parts both in terms of time and money, and
decrease errors caused by the need to switch machines for different phases of
processing. Recently, Professor Yoshitaka Morimoto of the Kanazawa Institute of
Technology in Japan has created a new machine capable of producing these non-
axisymmetric components using traditional cutting tools called Non-Axisymmetric
Curved Surface Turning (NACS-Turning). NACS-Turning is capable of producing the
desired geometry, but leaves undesired cutting marks on the workpiece. In order
to correct this condition, this project proposes the combination of Professor
Morimoto?s machine with a Magnetic Abrasive Finishing (MAF) tool designed by the
PI to remove the cutting marks and smooth the surface of the workpiece. This
will create a single machine capable of cutting and smoothing components to the
desired specifications. As a result, creation of these essential, but difficult
to manufacture, components will be significantly faster and cheaper. Travel to
Professor Morimoto?s laboratory in Japan is necessary because NACS- Turning does
not exist anywhere else in the world.

NACS-Turning is accomplished with the use of a machine which features a unique
computer aided machining (CAM) program found only in Prof. Morimoto?s
laboratory. MAF can be applied to components machined with NACS-Turning through
the use of a newly developed hybrid-tool. The hybrid-tool utilized a binder to
create a fixed abrasive tool capable of performing grinding operations. As the
tool wears and mixes with the applied lubricant, the binder breaks down. This
allows the MAF particles to move freely in a loose abrasive phase, and polish
the surface of the workpiece to nanometer level surface roughness values. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.