* 1513283
* CI-EN:  Internet Laboratory for Empirical Network Science:  Next Phase (iLENS-NP)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,232,627.00

A strength of the Internet is that it is a federation of network providers
instead of a monolithic infrastructure. However, this federation limits
visibility into network configuration and operations and negatively impacts the
capability of research and development efforts to model network behavior and
topology, design protocols and/or new architectures, and study real-world
properties such as robustness, resilience, and economics. The application of
edge-based measurement and analysis techniques is key to overcoming these
limitations. The secure measurement platform, Archipelago (Ark) supports large-
scale active measurement studies of the global Internet. Since 2007 Archipelago
has gathered a large set of network topology data which used for a broad
spectrum of scientific research. Ark is a unique laboratory in which researchers
can quickly design, implement, and easily coordinate the execution of
experiments across a globally distributed set of dedicated monitors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance Ark's capabilities and data
products in order to support network research, providing empirical grounding for
study of many real-world Internet phenomena, theoretical and practical efforts
in network modeling and mapping; longitudinal studies of the Internet's
historical evolution, and evaluation of potential future network architectures.
The project consists of four infrastructure development tasks: (i) deploying a
new hardware architecture that expands the scale and manageability of the
infrastructure, (ii) integrating recent measurement technology advances to
enable fundamentally new scientific experiments and data sets, (iii) upgrading
the functionality of the measurement-on-demand web interface to the Ark
platform, and (iv) creating a new interface for browsing, querying, and
visualizing the data gathered.