* 1513205
* Zipping Towards STEM:  Integrating Engineering Design into the Middle School Physical Science Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Donald Visco, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2019
* USD 742,356.00

This project will advance efforts to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics through the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers program. It will integrate
engineering design principles into Akron Public School district's curriculum
unit on force and motion for 1800 underrepresented eighth grade students across
12 schools and 98 classrooms. Students will be introduced to basic applied
physics concepts in rigid-body dynamics where they will design, test, and
redesign model stock mini-cars using computer assisted design software, 3D
printers, and virtual and desk-top wind tunnels. To prepare students for this
challenge, university-led summer institutes will provide all eighth grade
science teachers with the knowledge, technical content, and technology
experience needed to implement the integrated curriculum based on engineering
practices. This step provides assurance that teachers can move students from the
fundamental to the challenge level where students will seek a deeper
understanding of engineering design principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate
and senior-level aerospace systems engineering students and faculty members from
the University of Akron and other local partners will help guide teachers and
students through six basic tasks using model mini-cars. As students engage in
the design and redesign process they will manipulate weight placement to
maximize speed and use computer-based virtual wind tunnels to assess car
performance in terms of drag coefficient. User-friendly graphical interface
software will help students account for computational fluid dynamics and provide
students with design performance metrics on drag and fluid flows through fog
induced streamlines. Models for further testing will be produced using 3-D
printers. Data collected will determine how well teachers and students move
through the engineering design tasks. If the results show that teachers and
students grasped the basic concepts that undergird engineering design, school
district leaders have agreed to continue to use this model system wide to bring
real-world experiences to eighth grade classrooms using engineering design to
teach force and motion.