* 1513594
* Constrained Statistical Estimation and Inference: Theory, Algorithms and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2017
* John Lafferty, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 320,000.00

This project lies at the boundary of statistics and machine learning. The
underlying theme is to exploit constraints that are present in complex
scientific data analysis problems, but that have not been thoroughly studied in
traditional approaches. The project will explore theory, algorithms, and
applications of statistical procedures, with constraints imposed on the storage,
runtime, shape, energy or physics of the estimators and applications. The
overall goal of the research is to develop theory and tools that can help
scientists to conduct more effective data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
statistical methods are purely "data driven" and only place smoothness or
regularity restrictions on the underlying model. In particular, classical
statistical theory studies estimators without regard to their computational
requirements. In modern data analysis settings, including astronomy, cloud
computing, and embedded devices, computational demands are often central. The
project will develop minimax theory and algorithms for nonparametric estimation
and detection problems under constraints on storage, computation, and energy.
Other constraints to be studied include shape restrictions such as convexity and
monotonicity for high dimensional data. The project will also investigate the
incorporation of physical constraints through the use of PDEs and models of
physical dynamics and mechanics, focusing on both algorithms and theoretical
bounds.