* 1513330
* RAPID: Host molecular responses after Ebola virus infection
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2014,06/30/2016
* Richard Gelinas, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 06/30/2016
* USD 197,223.00

Current methods for determining if a person has been infected with the Ebola
virus are based on searching in a sample of the patient's blood for pieces of
the virus, for example viral proteins or nucleic acids. For these methods to
work well, there needs to be a lot of virus present, which occurs only late in
an infection, or else sensitive equipment and sophisticated procedures are
needed. Such procedures and equipment are not readily available in the places
most severely affected by the current Ebola outbreak. In the work proposed here,
the investigators plan on examining how the human body responds to the Ebola
virus. This should enable the identification of a unique pattern of response,
based on the proteins and nucleic acids that the human body produces very early
in an Ebola infection and that are not produced during other diseases. This work
should enable the development of new diagnostic assays for Ebola that can detect
the disease early in the infection. Early detection methods will result in
earlier treatment, and better chances to limit the spread of this disease.

Technical: This NSF Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will support a
systems biology approach to identifying early biomarkers of Ebola virus
infection. Current strategies for definitive determination of Ebola virus
infection are based on the ability to detect and/or amplify Ebola virus nucleic
acids or the ability to detect Ebola virus capsid glycoproteins in blood or body
fluid. Both methods of detection have limitations especially when deployed in
resource poor environments such as those associated with the current Ebola
outbreaks in West Africa. The work proposed here will use a systems biology
approach to examine available data on the human response to Ebola virus
infection, focusing specifically on early gene and protein expression. Unique
patterns of gene and protein expression from the host early in the Ebola disease
could be the basis for the development of novel point of care diagnostics for
early Ebola infection. The PIs hypothesize that they will be able to identify
patterns of host protein and gene expression that occur early after Ebola virus
infection, and that are distinct from patterns of protein and gene expression
associated with other diseases. Detection of this set of mRNAs or proteins would
then be the basis of a novel multiplex assay for point of care diagnosis of the
disease.