* 1513806
* The flexibility of language comprehension: Adapting to changes in internal state and external environment
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Meredith Brown, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2017
* USD 278,543.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising scholar in the interdisciplinary
field of psycholinguistics, focusing on the flexibility of language
comprehension. Individuals' external environments and internal cognitive and
emotional resources are in a constant state of flux, from day to day and even
from moment to moment. This variability presents major challenges for effective
communication. For example, interacting with people from different cultural and
linguistic backgrounds exposes listeners to massive variability in accents, word
choices, speech rates, and inflections. In addition, changes in individuals'
internal processing resources have strong effects on how they approach and
interpret sensory information. These include not only moment-to-moment shifts in
cognitive goals and emotional states, but also listeners? perceptual abilities,
which vary considerably from person to person and are also subject to change on
both short and long time scales (e.g. due to environmental noise or aging). To
truly understand language use in context, it is necessary to characterize how
listeners adapt to pervasive variability in their linguistic environments and
internal cognitive, emotional, and perceptual states. Investigating factors that
make listeners more or less able to adapt to speakers with different speech
patterns or to shifts in their own internal states may point to ways to foster
these capabilities in both healthy listeners and those with clinical disorders
associated with language and/or emotional processing abnormalities, such as
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Importantly, we are committed to providing
research and educational opportunities to high school and undergraduate
students, particularly students from minority groups underrepresented in the
sciences. Materials from the proposed research will be used to create
pedagogical materials and activities involving pre-processed behavioral and/or
electrophysiological data, to provide students with hands-on experiences with
real data and to spark broad interest in psycholinguistics and affective
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges recent developments in
psycholinguistics, neuroscience, and affective psychology to explore the effects
of external and internal variability on predictive processing during language
comprehension. Study 1 uses event-related potentials (ERPs) to ask whether and
how temporal expectations can lead to false perceptions of words that, in turn,
influence higher-level syntactic predictions in the brain. Study 2 investigates
effects of variability in the external linguistic environment, examining whether
exposure to speakers with disfluent speech-timing characteristics leads
listeners to adapt and update their predictions. Study 3 shifts the focus to
listener-internal variability: This study investigates whether variation in
listeners? mood states affects the extent to which they rely on contextual
prediction vs. stimulus features during sentence processing, building on an
emerging literature suggesting that mood alters cognitive processing in other
domains. Finally, Study 4 explores effects of individual differences in
perceptual abilities on the engagement of predictive mechanisms. In all these
cases, listeners are hypothesized to maintain a flexible balance between
contextually-driven predictive processing and bottom-up stimulus processing, to
adapt to variability in their external environment and internal states. Findings
from these studies will elucidate how people navigate both external and internal
variability to successfully communicate in ever-changing real-world situations.
The proposed research thus takes an important step toward investigating the
neural mechanisms of language processing across linguistic and affective
contexts.