* 1513126
* II-New: A Research Platform for Heterogeneous, Massively Parallel Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Sagar Pandit, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 679,798.00

The world of computing has entered the multi-core age. In addition to multi-core
CPUs, co-processors containing thousands of computing cores in a single chip
have become popular platforms for general-purpose computing. With the aggregated
computing capabilities increasing at a steep rate, computing communities are
still in an early stage in developing software systems, frameworks and
applications to take full advantage of these new platforms. The co-existence of
several different multi-core systems, including the Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs), Intel?s Many Integrated Core (MIC) cards, and Accelerated Processing
Units (APUs), further complicates the issue. This, on the other hand, provides
opportunities for interesting research that spans different layers of the
software stack. This infrastructure will support multiple, coordinated research
projects that will develop frameworks and software systems enabling a new class
of applications requiring high-performance computing
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to build a
computer cluster with heterogeneous, massive parallel computing capabilities to
accelerate existing research and enable ground-breaking new research that shares
the same need for intensive computation at the University of South Florida
(USF). This project brings together eight USF investigators with research
projects in several core disciplines of computer science and engineering: big
data management, scientific computing, system security, hardware design, data
mining, computer vision and pattern recognition. Specifically, the requested
cluster supports research in: &lt;br/&gt;(1) design and optimization of a novel
data stream management system architecture in a heterogeneous many-core hardware
environment; &lt;br/&gt;(2) coarse-grained molecular simulation approach that
allows accurate simulation of large-scale atomistic systems; &lt;br/&gt;(3) new
system to deploy security policies that excel in both policy composition and
runtime performance; &lt;br/&gt;(4) efficient modeling and design of energy-
efficient and secure hardware systems; &lt;br/&gt;(5) automated interpretation
of activities using pattern theory; &lt;br/&gt;(6) fast large scale clustering;
and &lt;br/&gt;(7) pattern identification from biomedical image
data.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project derives from the
innovations of the individual projects and from the potential cross-disciplinary
ideas it can germinate in the future. The infrastructure is expected to
facilitate collaboration and cross-pollination of algorithms, models,
representations, and data sets across individual project areas, building a
collaborative network across the investigators. Furthermore, the cluster is
expected to impact over a dozen application domains via on-going and planned
research projects among the investigators and their collaborators throughout the
USF system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct benefits to education and research will
also be extended to the larger community through the applied aspects of
projects, teaching and training. Project results and media content of the
cluster will be showcased in the popular USF Engineering EXPO event, which seeks
to educate and motivate K-12 students on math, science, engineering, and
technology subjects.