* 1513719
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: A Data-Centric Architecture for Pervasive Edge Computing in Heterogeneous Extensible Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2020
* USD 541,540.00

The project aims to develop a novel data-centric architecture and accompanying
protocols/algorithms to enable peer based data discovery, dissemination and
processing for future mobile sensing applications among heterogeneous edge
devices (e.g., smartphones, tablets) without relying on any centralized backend
as is currently done.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project uses named data to
enable direct data sharing and processing among vast numbers of heterogeneous
edge devices. The research systematically investigates: 1) Naming structures and
constructs suitable for precise reference and characterization of various kinds
of data; 2) Data discovery and name matching mechanisms for devices to find what
data are available and acquire desired ones; 3) Transparent processing that
derives and extracts new data from raw sensing samples. The project combines
architecture, protocol and algorithm design, optimization, testbed
implementations and software simulations for a full-scale study on the above
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable a future generation of
mobile sensing applications no longer requiring a centralized backend, thus
completely eliminating the associated monetary, manpower costs, and dependence
on the availability and performance of Internet connectivity. The PIs are
developing a new graduate course, training graduate students, and reaching out
to undergraduate and high school students to build futuristic applications.
Joint explorations with leading research and development organizations are
conducted to apply the research results. The publications, software and
experimental data are shared with the community to foster further research on
this architecture.