* 1513409
* Nonlinear dynamic factor models and dynamic factor driven functional time series models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Rong Chen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2019
* USD 230,000.00

Time series analysis comprises methods that allow for the discovery of dependent
and dynamic structures in observations taken over time and that provide accurate
predictions of the future. Time series data occur in many important application
fields including economics, finance, environmental studies, neuroscience,
ecology, and meteorology. In this age of Big Data, with advanced data collection
capability, researchers routinely encounter large panels of time series data.
How to effectively analyze the common dynamic feature of these time series, how
to discover their interconnection, how to make accurate predictions, and how to
assess the overall risk are important questions. The project aims to answer
these questions by investigating statistical methods that extract common
features from a large number of time series. The project will also describe
methods to analyze data in the form of curves or images observed over time. This
project provides advanced data analysis tools for solving many real world
problems, and paves the way for developing a new research area in statistics.
The project includes activities related to education and research training of
graduate and undergraduate students, and plans for recruiting women and
underrepresented minority students into the field of statistics. Results will be
disseminated through conference presentations, publications, and distribution of
software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on two closely related
topics: (i) developing a class of nonlinear dynamic factor models, along with
associated statistical inference procedures and derivation of the theoretical
properties of the proposed estimators; and (ii) developing an efficient
nonparametric inference procedure for functional time series based on dimension
reduction using dynamic factor models. Modeling and analyzing high-dimensional
time series requires efficient dimensional reduction tools, with factor models
being one of the most commonly used techniques. The project extends standard
linear dynamic factor models to nonlinear models in order to capture the
nonlinearity often encountered in practice. When functional or distributional
observations are observed over time and exhibit dynamic behaviors, time series
models in the functional space become a necessary and useful tool for analyzing
such data, as well as making predictions of the future. New nonparametric
approaches to modeling functional time series utilizing factor models as a
dimension reduction tool will be developed. The two research topics are rapidly
gaining importance as more and more applications involve such types of data. The
combination of these two closely related projects builds a comprehensive
framework for modern time series analysis. For each project, statistical
properties of the underlying models, statistical inference and predictions for
these models, and theoretical properties of the inferential and prediction
methods will be studied.