* 1513313
* CI-P: Shared Open-Source Tools in Support of Multimedia Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Wu-chi Feng, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2018
* USD 80,874.00

This Community Infrastructure-Planning (CI-P) project will focus on planning for
a community infrastructure project to develop a multimedia toolkit to help
catalyze multimedia systems and networking research. The proposed multimedia
toolkit will solve a number of problems faced by the multimedia systems
community. By providing a toolkit that is focused more on readability,
modularity, and ease of modification, we expect that such a toolkit will help to
decrease the time it takes to train new graduate students to become multimedia
researchers and allow them to more readily create new technology rather than
making modifications to highly-optimized, brittle software tools that are used
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early multimedia toolkits such as the Berkeley
MPEG-1 tools or Open Mash tools from the 1990s helped to catalyze research in
the multimedia community by providing a set of tools that made it relatively
easy to experimentally deploy, test, and measure multimedia systems. The
succession of video compression standards like H.264 / MPEG-4 and H.265 / HEVC,
however, has had a negative impact on the ability to do experimental video
systems and networking projects as well as the ability to use recent standards
in an educational setting due to the high complexity of the compression tools.
This project will address this through a multimedia toolkit with the following
goals:&lt;br/&gt; - Significantly reduce training time to bring students up to
speed on the latest video compression and decompression tools,&lt;br/&gt; -
Enable more rapid modifications to video coding algorithms and provide the
ability to more quickly build new multimedia systems, and&lt;br/&gt; - Provide
several profiles for the research community to use so that results across
different research projects can be more readily
compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning phase of this open source tool in
support of multimedia systems includes: (i) surveying and gathering the needs of
the research community with respect to their research and the education of their
students, (ii) designing the overall architecture, and (iii) soliciting further
feedback from the community with regards to the toolkit.