* 1513395
* Constructing Empirical Public Decision-Making: The Application of Situated Data to Development in Consolidated Informal Settlements
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Kristine Stiphany, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 253,317.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports interdisciplinary research that draws on
statistical and mixed method approaches in collaboration with community groups
in two large consolidated settlements. The fellowship will significantly advance
the professional training of the postdoctoral fellow, due to the mentorship
provided by two exceptional scholars at the University of Texas at Austin whose
pioneering work has been instrumental to urban planning, development, and
sustainability studies in Texas and the urban Global
South.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will (1) identify the factors that
informal settlement residents, planners, architects, and policy makers believe
contribute to successful development; (2) apply criteria to a participatory
post-occupancy evaluation of the processes and outcomes of four development
typologies shared by the two settlements; and (3) input data findings to a
parametric framework through which to test possible community development
outcomes. The combined use of assessment criteria, evaluation, and the
parametric tool offer significant potential to: (1) synthesize the efforts
undertaken by diverse actors and institutions involved in development; (2)
increase citizen participation and project equity; (3) visualize the fusion of
policy goals and diverse user needs; and (4), better align the goals and actual
achievements of policies that guide urban development. The study advances
current research by (1) contributing to urban planning's emerging interest in
the relational analysis of social and spatial data; (2) producing a modifiable,
participatory framework for evaluating development impacts and applying data to
concrete outcomes; and (3) exploring how to practically transform the
development of informal settlements from a housing-centric, expert-driven
enterprise to an evidence-based platform that increases citizen participation
and addresses the multiple risks that afflict cities in the developing world.
The broader impacts of this research include the empowerment of community groups
with data development and its application to graphic formats that can visualize,
and thus help to catalyze, long-term change. Furthermore, the parametric
framework facilitates a common, data driven language through which community
groups, planners, architects, and policy makers can test and discuss possible
future development scenarios.