* 1513807
* Modulation of Plant Transcription Factor Function by Small Molecules
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Erich Grotewold, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2018
* USD 810,000.00

The goal of this project is to reveal insights into a novel type of feedback
regulation (a mechanism by which a small chemical molecule can regulate its own
production) mediated by the binding of a molecule to the master protein
regulator controlling the production of that molecule. The project will
contribute to the scientific and professional development of postdoctoral
fellows and will provide research experiences for undergraduate students in
research. The project includes the development of a Summer Practical Workshop in
Quantitative Biochemistry, which will benefit both undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral researchers, and junior faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
corn, the R protein is a transcription factor that activates transcription of
genes encoding enzymes in the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway for purple
anthocyanin pigments. Preliminary data suggest that binding of flavonoid
molecules to R, through a specific protein domain (the ACT domain), modulates
the protein-protein interactions and the DNA-binding abilities of the R protein,
leading in turn to differential recognition of promoters in the genes involved
in the flavonoid pathway. Experimental tests of this model will: 1) Establish
the in vivo consequences of the interaction of R with flavonoids that have been
identified to bind to the ACT; 2) Investigate ACT-small molecule structure-
function relationships, by defining which other small molecules bind to the ACT,
identifying the ACT residues relevant for the small molecule interaction, and
establishing how general the results are for ACT domains in other plant
transcription factors; and 3) Analyze in vivo the dynamic associations
controlled by the ACT domain of R, by combining genetic resources with cellular
approaches to investigate where and which interactions occur, in the presence
and absence of flavonoids or other small molecules. The work is expected to
reveal a new type of feedback regulatory mechanism (metabolite binding
regulating a transcription factor responsible for synthesis of the ligand),
which could serve as a model for how other small metabolites might regulate
their own synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences; Plant Genome Research Program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems) and by the Directorate for
Mathematics and Physical Sciences (Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry).