* 1513668
* EAPSI:Investigating Magma Ascent Rates and Eruption Styles at Kîlauea Volcano Using Diffusion Modeling of Element Zoning in Olivine Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kendra Lynn, Lynn                    Kendra         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Modern activity at Kîlauea Volcano (Hawai'i) has been dominated by effusive lava
flows and spectacular fountaining events. However, recent work reveals a history
of explosive eruptions, which killed large numbers of Hawaiians near the
volcano's summit. These eruptions were drastically different compared to modern
activity that has made Kîlauea seem like a relatively safe, quiet volcano. To
understand and predict the frequency and style of volcanic eruptions at basaltic
volcanoes like Kîlauea, knowing the amount of time magma resides within the
volcano is crucial. This work will use the chemical composition of the most
common mineral from Kîlauea (olivine) to determine how quickly magma ascends to
the surface for explosive versus effusive eruptions. Comparing magma storage
histories for different eruption types will contribute to understanding the
long-term evolution of Kîlauea's magmatic plumbing system. Most importantly,
this work will address how and when hazardous explosive eruptions can occur. The
study will be conducted at Nanyang Technological University in collaboration
with Dr. Fidel Costa Rodriguez, a leading researcher using olivine chemistry to
calculate magma residence times at volcanoes around the world.

This project aims to (1) characterize magma residence times for two summit
reservoirs at Kîlauea using recent effusive eruptions, and (2) evaluate the
relationship between olivine residence time and eruption style by comparing
diffusion histories from effusive and explosive eruptions. Major and minor
(electron microprobe), plus trace (laser ablation mass spectrometry) element
analyses of olivine crystals, in combination with crystallographic orientations
(electron backscatter diffraction), will be used as model inputs to calculate
residence times of olivine in eruptions of different styles and chemistries.
Timescales will be determined using a finite difference diffusion modelling
scheme. The volcanic implications will enhance understanding of the dynamic
nature of Hawaiian volcanoes. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the National Research Foundation of Singapore.