* 1513526
* CRM 2015 Thematic Semester: AdS/CFT, Holography, Integrability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Alexander Its, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports participation by US-based researchers in two workshops that
are parts of a Thematic Semester on the Anti-de-Sitter/Conformal Field Theory
(AdS/CFT) correspondence. The Thematic Semester will be held at the Centre de
Recherches Mathématiques (CRM) in Montreal, Canada. The term "AdS/CFT
correspondence" refers to a remarkable connection between two major directions
in modern theoretical physics, string theory and Yang-Mills theory. The study of
this correspondence is intimately related to some of the most fundamental
questions in contemporary theoretical physics, such as the formation of black
holes and early-universe cosmology. The topic also has applications to quantum
chromodynamics and condensed matter physics. The objective of this project is to
support the participation of junior US researchers in two workshops organized
within this thematic semester: "Positive Grassmannians: Applications to
integrable systems and super Yang-Mills scattering amplitudes," held July 27 -
31, 2015, and "Module spaces, integrable systems, and topological recursion,"
held January 9 - 13, 2016. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned semester at the
Centre de Recherches Mathématiques will represent the state of the art in the
studies of the Anti-de-Sitter/Conformal Field Theory (AdS/CFT) correspondence. A
special focus will be those aspects of the AdS/CFT correspondence that allow for
exact solutions, such as the appearance of integrability in the planar limit of
super-Yang-Mills theory, lower dimensional models, higher-spin theories, as well
as topological field and topological string theories. The semester will be a
unique forum that brings researchers with expertise in the AdS/CFT
correspondence together with experts in integrability. This interdisciplinary
activity will involve participation of many distinguished mathematicians,
physicists, and mathematical physicists. The semester will provide training in
these very important domains for a significant number of junior US researchers
(postdocs, junior faculty, and graduate students) who participate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More detailed description of the workshops supported by
this award can be found in the webpages:
&lt;br/&gt;http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2015/Amplitudes15/index_e.php
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2016/Moduli16/index_e.php &lt;br/&gt;The description
of the entire thematic semester is presented in the webpage:
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/Holography2015/