* 1513896
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of Lead-free Nanosolder Paste for Micro/Nano-Electronics Assembly and Packaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Zhiyong Gu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Soldering is widely used in electronics manufacturing. Traditionally, tin/lead
(Sn/Pb) solders are most widely used. Recently, due to the toxicity and health
concerns of lead, Sn/Pb solders are being phased out and Pb-free solders are
more widely used. However, most Pb-free solders have a higher melting
temperature than Sn/Pb solders and thus impose thermal stress and reliability
issues for the printed circuit boards (PCBs) and electronic devices. Nanosolders
have the potential to replace or improve the existing micron-sized Pb-free
solder powders and to meet the increasing demand in the electronics sector.
Furthermore, with the electronics industry's focus on further miniaturization
and push to 'nanoelectronics', nanosolders are expected to play a key role in
assembling nano-components into nanoelectronics and nanosystems. The successful
adoption of nanosolder materials will initiate a new epoch in micro/nano-
electronics manufacturing. The smaller sized solder bumps will also promote the
revolution of industrial soldering and electronics assembling methods. The lead-
free formulation will reduce the usage of toxic material and provide a
sustainable approach for future electronics manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this I-Corps proposal is to investigate
the commercialization feasibility of lead-free nanosolder paste, which has great
potential as a new soldering material for micro/nano-electronics assembly and
packaging applications. Specific aims include the development of a technology
transfer plan, determination of industrial target and market value of lead-free
nanosolder materials, and completion of a detailed commercialization plan for
the potential application of lead-free nanosolder materials and nano-soldering
technique. Recently, the lead-free nanosolder formulated paste has been
developed as the direct replacement of the typical microsolder paste. This
innovation is able to satisfy the current solder paste printing technology which
has been widely adopted by the electronics manufacturing industry. The
mechanical property studies showed that the nanosolder composed solders resulted
in enhanced strength&lt;br/&gt;when compared to the currently commercial
formulated solder paste. For the next generation nanoelectronics, multiple
nanocomponents, such as nanowire, nanotube and graphene, can be effectively
jointed by applying nanoscale solder materials to form a functional device.