* 1513556
* Intermittency and Physical Properties of Stochastic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Daniel Conus, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,995.00

This project studies physical properties of the solutions to stochastic partial
differential equations (SPDEs), which have been a growing topic of research in
probability over the last decades. These equations are partial differential
equations involving a random component, known as the noise. They mathematically
model dynamical systems in a wide spectrum of fields. Physics is the most
important of these and was the origin of the use of SPDEs. These equations
appear for instance in models for growth at interfaces (the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang
equation), models for the movement of galaxies, and polymer models, and also in
models of randomly forced propagation of waves, such as the movement of DNA in a
fluid. SPDEs also appear in biology, for instance in predator-prey models and
models for growth of bacterial populations. They are also a tool of importance
in the modeling of interest rates in mathematical finance. This project focuses
on study of the property of intermittency for solutions to SPDEs: the fact that
the solution develops high-valued peaks (atypical of the average behavior)
concentrated on small spatial regions. This phenomenon and its conjectured
connection to turbulence and chaos has been very carefully described by
physicists, who conjectured many results, only a very few of which are
mathematically proved. This research project aims to obtain a more profound
understanding of this phenomenon. This field being relatively young, some effort
will also be invested into popularizing these ideas among the scientific
community, in particular among students and future researchers.

More specifically, this project will focus on equations related to the Kardar-
Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) equation of physics, which is the central component of the
KPZ universality class, a class of probabilistic models appearing in many
instances of interface growth phenomena, such as percolation of a liquid in a
porous medium, development of a population of bacteria, or the movement of cars
in heavy traffic. In order to establish and understand the intermittency of
solutions, several new techniques, such as stochastic Young inequalities, moment
estimates, and scaling properties have been developed in recent years. These
techniques have been successful in specific cases, but more general and more
precise results are still sought. Knowledge of the quantitative behavior of the
moments of the solution to the SPDE, as well as almost-sure behavior of this
solution, are extremely important when it comes to careful study the peaking
phenomenon, for instance the position, size, movement, and fractal dimension of
the peaks. The project will develop new methods, such as the use of Galton-
Watson type processes. The main objective is to carefully understand the impact
of the noise on the physical properties of the solution. Thus, the project aims
to compare the impact of different types of noise (e.g., white, colored,
fractional) on properties of the associated equations.