* 1513834
* Discovering Words in Speech
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Viridiana Benitez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 144,000.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship trains a young scientist exploring &lt;br/&gt;the early
process of language learning by studying how young infants discover words in
spoken language. This project also assesses how language experience affects the
word discovery process by studying bilingual-learning infants and adults. By
including infants, results from the project further knowledge about how learners
acquire linguistic regularities from spoken language and provide insights into
the mechanisms underlying early language development, both of which inform
efforts to understand language impairments. Additionally, by including bilingual
and adult populations, the project highlights how bilingualism changes the
process of language acquisition, particularly early on in development. Beyond
the scientific contributions, this fellowship also 1) supports the mentorship of
undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds, 2) engages the local
community, including populations typically underrepresented in research, through
direct participation in the research and through presentation of the results by
the fellow, and 3) supports the fellow?s outreach plan to broaden the
participation of students from diverse backgrounds in the sciences. Finally,
this fellowship supports the training and development of the fellow, a Mexican-
American woman and first generation college graduate that holds a personal
commitment to advancing underrepresented populations in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquiring the words of the native language(s)
typically begins by discovering them in speech. This process starts in the first
year of life and is critical for language development. However, identifying the
sounds that compose the words in spoken language is not trivial for the young
child. The patterns that define words in natural languages are complex: they
consist of multiple features and vary in their degree of reliability.
Additionally, spoken words rarely occur in isolation, or with pauses to signal
where they start and end. How do infants discover the structure of words given
the complexities of spoken language? How does this process change as learners
gain experience with language? To address these questions, this research
manipulates the complexity of the language input, together with the language
experience of the learner, to understand how infants discover words in speech.
The studies in this project use an artificial language learning approach to
study these questions. Study 1 examines how monolingual English learning infants
(8 to 10 months of age) acquire a novel, complex word pattern embedded in fluent
speech. Studies 2 and 3 assess how language experience affects learning by
testing bilingual-learning infants (Study 2), and adults (Study 3). These
studies outline how typically developing infants acquire linguistic patterns
from spoken language, which is a necessary endeavor for understanding early
language development. This project also informs efforts to understand
communication and language disorders, and has the potential to be used in the
future as a framework to study children with language and developmental delays.