* 1513438
* Collaborative Research:   ELOKA Phase IV: Optimizing Data Management Support for Community-Based Research and Observations Contributing to Arctic Science
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Shari Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,802,999.00

The mission of the Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic
(ELOKA) is to provide data management and user support services to facilitate
the collection, preservation, exchange, and use of local observations and
knowledge of the Arctic. Collecting, documenting, preserving, and sharing
knowledge is a cooperative endeavor, and there is an urgent need to manage Local
and Traditional Knowledge so that: (1) the information is not lost, but rather
protected and preserved; (2) the information is discoverable, and (3) the
information has influence on environmental research, policy, and public
awareness. Local and traditional knowledge and community-based observations are
critical components of Arctic science, a comprehensive Arctic observing network,
and informed management and policy. Numerous studies and operational projects
clearly demonstrate the value of community data in understanding recent
environmental, social, and cultural changes in the Arctic based on knowledge and
observations that are not readily available through scientific methods. Examples
of this knowledge are fine-scale observations of change from areas not
monitored, and knowledge from areas that pre-date mapping and satellite records.
ELOKA?s research and products result in lasting broader impacts, including
making community data available to support research in a number of areas
including social sciences, health research, environmental science, adaptation
studies, and others and supporting environmental and wildlife management. The
focus on user-friendly interfaces will allow the general public to easily access
community data, increasing public knowledge and literacy of Arctic Indigenous
peoples, science and the environment; one example are projects that support
Indigenous language and cultural preservation and maintenance. Publications and
the education and training activities will result in improved Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) training and education while
supporting Indigenous peoples, an underrepresented minority in STEM. ELOKA has
and will continue to focus on partnerships between academia and other sectors
including Indigenous organizations and science and observing coordination
bodies.

In its fourth phase, ELOKA project will achieve three primary objectives in
collaboration with researchers and Arctic Indigenous communities, including, (1)
Provide and optimize core services, including advising on ethical community data
management, documenting and publishing data, making data discoverable, further
developing a data management platform that can be used to support many different
applications, and preserving data over the long-term; (2) Build local capacity
and leadership: Building on its network development activities, ELOKA will focus
on knowledge exchange and capacity building to support communities, researchers,
and other to play a larger role in populating and maintaining the system over
time, and (3) Fully enable interoperability: Further develop a system that can
interact with different data resources, across information and knowledge
domains, and across key geographic scales. ELOKA fills a critical gap in Arctic
science by providing support and infrastructure to community-based research
projects that are often mandated to make data discoverable and accessible, but
have limited options for support.