* 1513443
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: DataHub - A Collaborative Dataset Management Platform for Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Samuel Madden, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 333,333.00

The rise of the Internet, smart phones, and wireless sensors has resulted in a
vast trove of data about all aspects of our lives, from our social interactions
to our personal preferences to our vital signs and medical records.
Increasingly, "data science" teams want to collaboratively analyze these
datasets, to understand trends and to extract actionable business, scientific,
or social insights. Unfortunately, while there exist tools to support data
analysis, much-needed underlying infrastructure and data management capabilities
are missing. To this end, "DataHub", a collaborative platform for cleaning,
storing, understanding, sharing, and publishing datasets, will be developed.
DataHub will be a publicly accessible platform that will host private user
datasets as well as public datasets retrieved from online sources. DataHub will
serve as the common substrate for data science, freeing up end users from
tedious dataset book-keeping tasks, and instead supporting them in their search
for useful insights. DataHub will be deployed on a large scale at MIT;
partnerships with organizations and groups from a variety of sectors will be
leveraged upon to show benefits for real data scientists and to ensure that the
proposed techniques meet real-world big data challenges. The curriculum
development part of this project will lead to the training of new data
scientists, and the project will also provide opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in research and learn how to do
collaborative research.

Unlike most systems that focus on improving performance or on supporting even
more sophisticated analyses, DataHub will instead focus on simplifying and
automating many fundamental book-keeping operations that are a pre-requisite to
data science. Key features of DataHub will include: (1) a flexible, source code
control-like versioning system for data, that efficiently branches, merges, and
differences datasets; (2) new data ingest, cleaning, and wrangling tools
designed to automate data cleaning process; (3) the ability to search for
"related" tables and to integrate them into the analysis process; and (4) the
ability to selectively share and collaborate on data sets across users and
teams. Overall, DataHub will significantly reduce the amount of effort involved
on the part of data scientists for preparing, analyzing, sharing, and managing
data.

For more information, see the project website at: http://data-hub.org