* 1514936
* EAPSI: Investigating First and Second Language Perception of Tone and Accent in Mandarin Chinese
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Eric Pelzl, Pelzl                   Eric
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

Learning Mandarin Chinese is a major challenge for adult native speakers of
English. One reason for the difficulty is the need to perceive lexical tones'
pitch changes that affect word meanings in Mandarin. This research will be done
in collaboration with Dr. Taomei Guo at the State Key Laboratory for Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning at Beijing Normal University, and will take advantage
of the large number of advanced second language learners in Beijing, China. By
measuring neural responses to spoken Mandarin sentences, the research will
address two questions: First, how well can advanced second language learners
perceive lexical tones? Second, how sensitive are native listeners to non-native
speakers? tone errors? The answer to the first question will shed light on the
difficulties adult second language learners have when attempting to reach
advanced proficiency in Mandarin. The answer to the second question will clarify
the practical importance of clear tone production in making second language
speech comprehensible to native Chinese listeners. Results could lead to
improvements in teaching and learning tones, and to the appropriate
prioritization of tone mastery in an individual?s language learning regimen.

Using event-related potential (ERP) experiments, we will examine the N400
response to semantic and phonological errors in auditory stimuli. The N400 is a
negative-going ERP component that peaks at approximately 400ms after the onset
of stimuli and has been shown to display an increased amplitude in response to
unexpected words in auditory stimuli. By examining N400 responses in first and
second language listeners, we will attempt to determine whether they are equally
sensitive to semantic and phonological errors, and whether that sensitivity is
dependent on the identity of the speaker. Results will contribute to our
understanding of the acquisition of lexical tones by second language learners
and the role of accent in speech perception by native speakers of Chinese. This
NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded
in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.