* 1514637
* EAGER: BIOMAPS: Understanding Microbiological Intricacies and Developing Modeling Strategies to Estimate Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Urban Engineered Green Infrastructures
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Steven Burian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 95,418.00

1514637&lt;br/&gt;Goel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Understanding Microbiological
Intricacies and Developing Modeling Strategies to Estimate Nitrous Oxide
Emissions from Urban Engineered Green Infrastructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Academy of Engineering published a report entitled "NAE Grand
Challenges for Engineering." One of the 14 challenges was to "manage the
nitrogen cycle." The importance of this project is to develop a better
understanding of the nitrogen cycle in storm water retention ponds. This will
enable scientists studying the nitrogen cycle to better account for this
potentially important source of nitrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioretention
ponds have evolved as an excellent option in the form of green infrastructure to
manage nutrients in storm water runoffs. Very recent research efforts have
evaluated the contribution of biological processes, such as nitrification and
denitrification, on the fate of nitrogen in bioretention ponds. However, the
information on the kinetics of these biological processes and most importantly,
the information on the potential of nitrous oxide gas, N2O, formation from these
green infrastructures are completely missing. This project aims to get the first
information on the potential of nitrous oxide fluxes from prototype bioretention
field scale facilities located at the University of Utah Campus. The results
will be utilized to formulate conceptual model to predict these fluxes at a
regional scale. The research objectives proposed in this project are exploratory
as well as high risk as biological N removal in bioretention ponds is not well
understood and little information is available on nitrous oxide emissions from
these urban green infrastructures. This project is expected to lead to a new
area of research linking microbiological processes in green infrastructure to
urban site scale hydrologic processes, with eventual upscaling to the watershed
level.