* 1514927
* EAPSI: Determining the Effect of Ammonium on Algae and their Physiology in the Waters of the Hangzhou and Taihu Regions of China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Melanie Jackson, Jackson                 Melanie
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,111.00

China?s marine and freshwaters are among the most nitrogen polluted in the
world. Nitrogen pollution has been linked with severe water quality impairment,
ranging from nuisance and toxic algal blooms, oxygen depletion, loss of
fisheries, and changes in biodiversity. Although the effect of total nutrient
loading has been well explored in terms of promoting the growth of algae (algal
blooms), the effects of changing nitrogen forms and proportions on algal
community composition and productivity are poorly understood in systems
experiencing prolonged nutrient loading. In this study, it is hypothesized that
nitrogen in the form of ammonium will favor the development of harmful algal
blooms, including cyanobacteria and will reduce primary production, compared to
when nitrogen in the form of nitrate is available. This project will involve a
series of experiments on natural waters collected from the Hangzhou and Taihu
regions of China to assess the physiological response of algae to the addition
of changing nitrogen forms. This research involves collaboration with Dr.
Mengmeng Tong, well known for her expertise in toxic algal blooms, at Zhejiang
University, Ocean College.

Eutrophication observed in China is of particular concern, considering nutrient
loads are rising and relative nitrogen (N) forms reaching aquatic ecosystems are
changing, resulting in increasing reduced (e.g. NH4+) compared to oxidized forms
of N (NO3-). Not all algae have the same response to nutrient enrichments, and
some algae have preferences for different nutrient forms. Natural samples will
be variably enriched with NH4+ and NO3- and will be incubated under natural
light and temperature conditions for several days during which phytoplankton
community composition, biomass accumulation, and productivity will be tracked.
Recognizing that the classic limiting nutrients nitrogen and phosphorus (P) are
typically available in excess in these nutrient impacted systems prompts this
study to focus specifically on how changing N form in the presence of adequate
nutrient supplies alter phytoplankton community composition and physiology. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science
and Technology.