* 1514580
* Petascale Adaptive Mesh Simulations of Milky Way-type Galaxies and Their Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Brian O'Shea, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 31,452.00

This project seeks answers to several pressing questions about the formation and
evolution of galaxies. It does so by using the Blue Waters supercomputer to
perform a suite of sophisticated supercomputer simulations. The investigators
will address such questions as: (i) How did the earliest progenitors of the
Milky Way galaxy form, and where can we find their stellar remnants today? (ii)
How does the ionizing radiation produced by massive stars escape from galaxies,
and how does it affect the properties of neighboring galaxies? (iii) How does
the gas that is critical for star formation get from the cosmic web into the
central regions of galaxies, and how is gas returned to the intergalactic
medium? (iv) How are magnetic fields seeded and amplified in galaxies, and how
are they ejected into (or amplified in) the intergalactic medium?&lt;br/&gt;The
team includes experts in astrophysics as well as in high performance computing,
and is united in the use of a sophisticated numerical tool (the Enzo AMR code)
that has already demonstrated its performance on Blue Waters. The team will work
with observational astronomer collaborators to apply these simulations to the
interpretation of measurements of both local and distant galaxies from current
astronomical surveys, and to motivate future observations by the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope and the James Webb Space Telescope.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
promises to have significant impact on scientists in training, who will learn to
use cutting-edge numerical tools at the largest possible scale. The project will
involve undergraduate students at Michigan State University (through MSU?s REU
program, which targets women and under-represented minorities) and postdoctoral
researchers in the research efforts. Scientific results from this program will
be visualized by staff at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications,
and will be disseminated to the public via pre-existing collaborations with
planetaria and museums, and via the Internet. In addition, these visualizations
will be used as part of outreach talks given by members of this project.
Finally, the simulation data produced as a result of this project will be used
in computational science courses at Michigan State University, where it will be
used to train students in scientific visualization and data analysis techniques.
The resulting curricular materials will be made available to the public via the
World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research methods
used in this project include the creation of an extensive library of simulated
Milky Way-like galaxies and their environments that can be used to explore a
wide range of observable astrophysical phenomena. This will be the first study
to perform cosmological simulations of galaxy formation and evolution that
include self-consistent treatments of radiation transport and/or
magnetohydrodynamics for a statistically significant number of galaxies, and to
apply these calculations to the interpretation of recent observations relating
to the intergalactic and circumgalactic medium, galactic and extragalactic
magnetic fields, and high redshift galaxy formation. Furthermore, the simulation
data produced during the course of this project, as well as a wide range of data
products, will be made publicly available via the nascent National Data Service.
This data will be usable by the astrophysical research community, and will
enable researchers to address a much broader range of questions regarding galaxy
formation and evolution than can be done as a part of this project alone, thus
leveraging the computational resources available on Blue Waters.