* 1514929
* Mathematical Methods to Enable Accurate Parameterization of Density-Dependent Structured Population Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* H. Thomas Banks, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,999.00

The methodology developed in this research project will provide important
computational tools, broadly applicable to biological modeling, to study
population dynamics across many species. In particular, the modeling results
will provide a deeper understanding of fundamental processes underlying
population response of Daphnia magna to changes in the environment. The findings
will have important implications for environmental sustainability, since D.
magna is a toxicologically sensitive species that plays a vital role in
freshwater ecosystems as feeders on phytoplankton and as a source of food for
other invertebrates and fish. The investigators will hold interdisciplinary
workshops to ensure broad application/adaptation of the computational tools
developed in this research to other species, stressors, and biological
scenarios. These workshops, designed to share the innovative efforts with
graduate students, postdoctoral associates, faculty, and researchers in the
ecology, toxicology, and mathematics communities, will be held at the National
Institute for Mathematical and Biological Synthesis. The investigators will
train graduate and undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented
minority groups, in multi-disciplinary research involving population biology,
toxicology, computer science, statistics, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structured population models (SPMs) are well
characterized for describing aggregate ecological data across a wide variety of
species and have utility in estimating population-level responses to natural
changes in the environment (e.g., climate change) as well as anthropomorphic
influences on the environment (e.g., ecotoxicological risk assessments). Yet,
the uncertainty involved in parameterizing SPMs using only population-level data
(e.g., longitudinal size or age distributions) can be unreasonably high, thereby
limiting the practical utility of such models to understand and predict future
population change. A fundamental problem associated with this high uncertainty
is that inter-individual variability can influence population-level dynamics and
may be difficult to estimate from population level alone. The overall objectives
in this research include three aims: (Aim 1) To test the ability of a novel
parameter estimation framework (involving random differential equations and the
Prohorov metric) to estimate inter-individual variability in demographic rates
for SPMs from population-level data. (Aim 2) To develop a parameter estimation
framework for estimating inter-individual variability in demographic rates for
SPMs that utilizes both organismal-level and population-level data. The
investigators will quantify the effect of using organismal-level data within
this framework on estimating demographic rate distributions and reducing
parameter uncertainty. (Aim 3) To extend optimal experimental design theory for
application to SPMs within a statistical framework that estimates inter-
individual variability. Using this extended theory, the investigators will test
the effect of experimental design complexity on the reduction of parameter
uncertainty for SPMs using organismal-level and population-level data. To
validate these methods, the investigators will collect experimental data using a
species of water flea, Daphnia magna, an ecologically important organism in the
context of evolution, toxicology, ecology, and genomics. The investigators aim
to develop a novel methodology that quantitatively connects and propagates the
assessment of D. magna organismal responses (i.e., to environmental change, to
the population level), thereby enabling the causal association of organismal
responses to ecosystems adversity.