* 1514711
* EAPSI:  Pattern Formation on Liquid-Air Interfaces Due to Resonance
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kevin Ward, Ward                    Kevin          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

When a stacked two fluid system is shaken in a direction perpendicular to the
fluid interface, patterns on the fluid interface will develop as a result of
resonance. This phenomenon is known as Faraday instability. Experimental
research in collaboration with Dr. Satoshi Matsumoto at the Japanese Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA) will allow the PI to study and validate theoretical
calculations for the development of patterns generated on a liquid-air interface
through the use of electric fields. This collaboration offers access to both a
unique experimental apparatus and a world-class research staff. The apparatus
has been used previously to perform successful preliminary trials. The
understanding of interfacial pattern generation will lead to advancements in a
multitude of industrially relevant processes, including semiconductor crystal
growth, microfluidic mixing enhancement, and oil recovery techniques.

Electrostatic parametric forcing offers a unique approach to the generation of
Faraday instability within multi-fluid systems. Through the application of
nonlinear dynamics, researchers will delineate the underlying physics of this
instability when generated via electrostatic oscillations. Experiments conducted
in JAXA will allow for the validation of the stability thresholds for systems of
multiple fluids and geometries obtained through a linear stability analysis that
rigorously treats viscosity. The research will complement traditional studies on
mechanically forced Faraday instability, offering additional insight into the
physics of surface forcing. This knowledge will translate into the understanding
of self-induced oscillations that occur in interfacial convection, interfacial
evaporation, and phase transformations such as solidification and
electrodeposition. The separation of the scales that govern surface forcing and
bulk forcing will advance the understanding of other instability phenomena where
both bulk and surface forces participate. Direct applications of the research
include microfluidic mixing enhancement, a deeper understanding of liquid
sloshing dynamics, and the potential for enhanced oil recovery when using
hydraulic fracturing. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).