* 1514944
* EAPSI: Learning and Memory in Aged Common Marmosets
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Emily Munger, Munger                  Emily          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Learning and memory processes are believed to be similarly organized in human
and nonhuman primates. Therefore, understanding human learning can be enhanced
through behavioral and cognitive studies in nonhuman primates. Of particular
interest are the effects of age on learning and memory, as age is indicated as a
predominate risk factor for many neurodegenerative diseases. Compared to all
other nonhuman primates, humans have remarkably increased life spans. This
extended longevity is associated with a decline in cognitive function and
increased susceptibility to neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer?s
disease. Therefore, research that works to enhance knowledge of the mechanisms
of aging, especially how it affects learning and memory, is of immense
importance. This project will work to advance scientific understanding of the
processes of aging through comparison with a nonhuman primate model (common
marmosets). This research will be conducted at the Primate Research Institute
(PRI) in Japan where an established colony of common marmosets presently
resides. Research will be completed under the guidance of Dr. Katsuki Nakamura,
whose expertise in cognitive neuroscience and aging in common marmosets will be
invaluable to the project.

Common marmosets have been suggested as a new model for analysis of age-related
changes as this species displays markers associated with neurodegeneration.
However, the effects of aging are not well defined within common marmosets.
Therefore, this project will be the first to examine the effects of age on
cognitive function within common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus) through visual
discrimination tasks and reversal learning. Four common marmosets, 10 years or
older, will take part in this study. The results from this study will be
compared to data collected from previous cognitive tests on a group of younger
marmosets, ages 1 year 7 months to 4 years 3 months. Older marmosets are
expected to not be able to complete the cognitive tasks at the same rate nor
with the same level of success as the younger group. Importantly, this project
will help elucidate the mechanisms of aging in relation to learning and memory.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS).