* 1514665
* EAPSI:Understanding the Formation of Local Identities in Relation to Foreign Military Bases
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kyle Kajihiro, Kajihiro                Kyle
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This project will investigate how the tensions between Okinawans and the
Japanese national government over the expansion of a U.S. military facility in
northern Okinawa may affect the way residents articulate and enact their local
identities. This study will examine whether the galvanizing effect of the bases
protests may signal an emerging trend toward Okinawan identification as a
distinct national or indigenous group, as opposed to a Japanese ethnic minority,
and what the broader implications of such a shift might be. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Kosuzu Abe, an expert on social movements
at the University of the Ryukyus. Through interviews, participant observation,
and discourse analysis of news media, this study will seek to identify emerging
trends in Okinawan cultural and political identity formation in the context of
the military bases controversy.

U.S. military bases in Okinawa have been a source of tension since the end of
World War II. Yet aside from periodic waves of intense protest against the
bases, Okinawans have generally accommodated the bases. However, since the 1995
rape of an Okinawan schoolgirl by U.S. marines, and most recently, after the
national government commenced land reclamation activities in Henoko, protests
against construction have intensified, and anti-base candidates swept the most
recent elections. Political geographers are interested in the phenomenon of
national identification, how large collectivities of people coalesce into an
imagined community around a shared set of cultural ideas and practices,
political and economic interests, and territorial claims. The mobilization of
national identities into political movements can have profound implications for
states as evidenced by independence referendums in Scotland and Catalonia and
separatist conflicts in the Ukraine and Iraq/Syria. This EAPSI award is funded
in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).