* 1514568
* EAPSI:Understanding Cloud Security-Architectural Analysis Using Security Patterns
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Priya Anand, Anand                   Priya
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,242.00

In recent years, cloud storage has provided ubiquitous and easily accessible
remote data repository possibilities to clients. Applications of cloud computing
require security assurances but there are many shortcomings in the current cloud
security. Current approaches, like encryption, digital signatures and
cryptographic keys generally negatively affect the performance of clouds. This
project will identify a catalog of security patterns for the cloud computing
environment. Security patterns provide design solutions to recurring security
problems and define a way to express requirements and solutions concisely, as
well as provide a communication vocabulary for designers. This project will be
conducted in collaboration with Professor Hyoungshick Kim at the Security Lab,
Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea. The collaboration affords a U.S. graduate
student an opportunity to learn about unique cloud security strategies developed
for the Korean cloud computing environment, enabling new insights to identify a
set of security patterns.

Using Category Theory and an interpretive epistemology, this project will design
a prototype to implement the PI?s pattern-based architectural solution to a
widely used cloud Dropbox or Amazon S3. The research will provide a statistical
data model to prove the statistical significance rendered by a new security
pattern-oriented cloud design developed by the PI. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with National Research Foundation of Korea.