* 1514726
* CIMBLE: Conference on Integrating Math into Informal Building Learning Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Andee Rubin, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 07/31/2017
* USD 248,237.00

Over the last decade there has been a proliferation of out-of-school
environments that foster building, making, tinkering, and design activities,
creating an unprecedented opportunity to engage a wide range of participants in
mathematics that is both purposeful and powerful. To date, this opportunity has
been almost universally unexploited. The conference, which will take place at
and in collaboration with the New York Hall of Science, will gather fifty
researchers and practitioners from informal mathematics education and the
burgeoning "making and tinkering" movement for two days to collaboratively
generate approaches to integrating mathematics in making and design environments
and programs. The project, which includes pre- and post-conference activities,
will produce a sampler of Math in Making activities, a guidebook, a white paper
for research and practice, a retrospective online discussion, and further
dissemination of project deliverables. It is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through the conference and pre- and post-conference activities, the
project team will: &lt;br/&gt;- Initiate and sustain conversations between
researchers and practitioners; &lt;br/&gt;- Establish collaborations that lead
to changes in the way math is framed and highlighted in making and design
environments; &lt;br/&gt;- Create resources to help people in the making/design
community highlight the math in their environments; and &lt;br/&gt;- Frame a
research agenda to guide studies of mathematical reasoning and attitudes towards
math in making and design environments.&lt;br/&gt;The work includes an extensive
evaluation process of the conference and of pre- and post-conference activities.