* 1514457
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Security and Privacy for Wearable and Continuous Sensing Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Wagner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2019
* USD 350,341.00

This research project studies security and privacy for wearable devices.
Wearable computing is poised to become widely deployed throughout society. These
devices offer many benefits to end users in terms of realtime access to
information and the augmentation of human memory, but they are also likely to
introduce new and complex privacy and security problems. People who use wearable
devices need assurances that their privacy will be respected, and we also need
ways to minimize the potential for wearable devices to intrude on the privacy of
bystanders and others. This project is identifying the risks in greater depth
and developing new technologies and techniques to protect against these risks.
The project is building a scientific and engineering basis for making wearable
computing trustworthy; the growing adoption of wearable computing makes this
research important to society.

Several unique features of wearable computing pose new challenges that require
novel research. It seems likely that continuous audio and video capture will
enable many valuable uses of wearable computing, but they open up new attack
vectors through these new input channels. Audio and video capture also present
new privacy challenges; for instance, third-party applications may need access
to this data, but the data is sometimes highly sensitive (e.g., capturing
intimate moments, sensitive documents, embarrassing social situations, etc.).
This project studies: how to empower users and enable them to control how apps
on wearable devices can access audio and video resources, how to use privilege
separation and the least-privilege principle to mitigate risks associated with
third-party applications that run on wearable devices, how operating systems for
wearable devices can be architected to prevent applications from collecting
extraneous data, and new threats from wearable computing and how each of these
threats could be countered with secure platform designs. To protect privacy, the
researchers are conducting user studies to improve our understanding of what
data users find most sensitive; the findings from these user studies is helping
the researchers to design techniques to prevent applications from accessing
sensitive data inappropriately.