* 1514890
* Collaborative Research: An Evidence-based Informal STEM Learning (ISL) Professional Framework
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Dennis Schatz, Pacific Science Center Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2019
* USD 158,800.00

There is a growing body of evidence that informal learning environments focused
on science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines cultivates an
interest among young people in STEM careers and promotes understanding of STEM
content knowledge and the scientific process. This project centers on the
creation and validation of a theoretically grounded and empirically derived
framework for professional growth and learning within the informal STEM learning
(ISL) field ("Framework"). The Framework will be useful to ISL practitioners at
any stage of their education or career by laying out the necessary skills,
knowledge, and dispositions to guide their professional growth. While the
immediate beneficiaries of the project will be ISL professionals themselves, the
ultimate beneficiaries of the work will be the children, youth, teachers, and
general public that engage with STEM experiences designed and implemented by a
skilled and knowledgeable ISL professional workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Association of Science-Technology Centers, Oregon State University's Center for
Research on Lifelong STEM Learning, Pacific Science Center, University of
Washington Museology Department and the Lifelong Learning Group of the Center of
Science and Industry in Columbus, OH (COSI Columbus) will collaborate to develop
the ISL professional framework. The Framework will be built from qualitative and
quantitative empirical analyses of actual practices used by staff of science
centers and ISL institutions, assessing perceived and actual needs at various
career stages, as well as an analysis of the creation and use of similar
learning frameworks in other professions. The project will be conducted in three
phases: (1) Literature review, research synthesis, and "Developing a Curriculum"
(DACUM) workshops to develop a preliminary framework; (2) Stakeholder review and
feedback in order to improve the preliminary framework; and, (3) Creation of an
online platform to share the final framework draft and conduct iterative testing
for utility and ISL community acceptance. The project will address two current
and pressing issues: (1) Ensuring that professionals working in science center-
type settings have the necessary knowledge and skills to apply the substantial
and growing evidence base in ISL, and (2) Understanding and supporting the needs
of the full range of ISL professionals during their basic education and at
particular points throughout their careers. Effective support for ISL
professionals requires, at the most basic level, a fundamental understanding of
the knowledge, skills, and dispositions needed by working professionals at
critical points along their career pathway if they are to use evidence-based
practice in their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments.