* 1514970
* EAPSI: Statistical Methodology for Estimating Health Effects of Exposures to Complex Metal Mixtures, with a Focus on Identifying Time Windows of Susceptibility to Exposures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Shelley Liu, Liu                     Shelley        H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research aimed at developing a novel statistical methodology
to be applied to environmental health research. The statistical approach will
investigate how time-varying exposures to complex metal mixtures affects child
health. The existing scientific literature shows that exposures to metal
mixtures during early life can impact cognitive function. Furthermore, there may
be certain developmental time windows during which there is an increased
vulnerability to metal mixture exposures. However, there is a lack of
statistical approaches to accurately determine how the health impact of metal
mixture exposures depends on exposure timing. Therefore, this project will
develop a novel, flexible statistical methodology to address these concerns. The
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Matt Wand, Distinguished
Professor of Statistics and world leader in variational approximate Bayesian
inference, at the University of Technology Sydney in Sydney, Australia. Fast
approximation approaches will be implemented in the statistical model to ensure
computational efficiency. This novel statistical approach could be used to
analyze a variety of environmental health studies. It will help identify the
sensitive time windows of exposure to metal mixtures during early life. This
information could guide the development of regulatory policies to help the most
vulnerable populations.

This project will implement variational approximations to a Bayesian
hierarchical model. The Bayesian model estimates how the effects of mixture
exposures change with the exposure window, and accounts for complex non-linear
and non-additive time-varying mixture effects. By developing computationally
efficient Bayesian inference in a large-data setting, the method will be
scalable to longitudinal studies with large number of subjects and time points.
This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is
funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.