* 1514851
* EAPSI: Investigating Cultural and Instructor Influences on Student Argumentation and Conceptual Understanding in Chemistry Classrooms
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Courtney Stanford, Stanford                Courtney       L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports aimed at understanding how cultural norms and instructor
implementation of course materials influence student argumentation and
conceptual understanding of chemistry. It is important to analyze the nature of
the communication used by both the students and the instructor. The team will
investigate student ability to generate scientific arguments and the conceptual
level (macroscopic, sub-microscopic, and symbolic) at which they discuss
chemical concepts. The role of the instructor in encouraging student
conversations and helping students make connections between the different
conceptual levels will also be explored. Further analysis of the arguments will
be used to describe classrooms norms. Analysis of classroom interactions will
provide insight regarding the nature of classroom conversations, the influence
of cultural norms, the nature and quality of student generated arguments, and
students? conceptual understanding of chemistry. This research will be conducted
at National Taiwan Normal University in collaboration with Dr. Hsin-Kai Wu, an
internationally recognized expert on analyzing interactions between teachers,
students, and technology in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcripts of
student dialogue in the classroom will be analyzed using Toulmin's Model of
Argumentation to examine students' ability to generate scientific arguments. The
representational levels for the arguments will then be identified using
Johnstone's triangle. In addition, the Inquiry Oriented Discursive Moves
Framework will be used to investigate the role of the instructor in encouraging
student discourse and translation between different representational levels.
Analysis of the course materials will help to examine the relationships between
the nature of the materials and student reasoning, particularly with respect to
the use of representations. Together this will allow the determination of the
intertextuality and the links among the different aspects of a classroom
learning environment. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S.
graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.