* 1514455
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining Changes in Ecology and Bifacial Flake Reduction Patterns during the Pleistocene-Holocene Transition
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* William Andrefsky, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2017
* USD 23,394.00

Human response to environmental change is as relevant today as it was 10,000
years ago. We can choose to adapt our technology, change our subsistence
practices, migrate to new locations, or seek other alternatives to environmental
shifts. This study examines the relationship between ecological fluctuations and
human groups in Alaska during the Pleistocene-Holocene Transition and the
Younger Dryas cooling event. We look specifically at how humans adapted their
technology to stresses created by abrupt environmental change. Using three-
dimensional imagery of stone tools from previously excavated museum collections
we attempt to address questions related to ecological changes and human
technological responses to those changes by examining three artifact complexes
present in Alaska after initial colonization of the New World. This research is
significant as the methodological approaches used in this project for
paleoenvironmental reconstruction and three-dimensional imagery of technology
have the potential to be tailored to address specific questions relevant to
different areas of the world and for different time periods, allowing us to
better understand the complex relationship between humans and a changing
environment.

This research focuses on ecological responses to the onset of the Younger Dryas
climatic perturbation ~12,800 cal yr BP as an enabling factor in technological
change seen in the Arctic and subarctic of Alaska. Understanding how ecological
fluctuations affected the cultural groups of Alaska during the Pleistocene-
Holocene Transition can provide insight into the shifts seen in the lithic
technological organization and the relationships between the people who produced
the Nenana, Denali microblade, and Northern Paleoindian artifact complexes. The
first step is to reconstruct the ecological shifts during this time period and
the distributions between plant biome boundaries. By identifying the most
predictive variable(s) for modern boundaries between shrub and herb tundra
communities correlations defined by discriminant function analysis can be used
to examine where these boundaries were located during the Pleistocene-Holocene
Transition.

This will lay the foundation for the second part of my research, which is to
examine the relationship between the culture groups of the Nenana, Denali, and
Northern Paleoindian artifact complexes located in Eastern Beringia at the onset
of the Younger Dryas. Under the assumption that flintknapping strategies and
knowledge are socially transmitted, this project will apply new analyses from
three-dimensional imagery of bifacial tools to empirically ascertain the
relationships between early culture groups from the flake scar patterning on
bifaces. These data will be used to determine whether changes in technology seen
in the archaeological record are the result of in situ adaptation, or
immigration of new peoples due to ecological changes at the onset of the Younger
Dryas. While three-dimensional imagery holds the potential for a number of
analyses, this study focuses on flake scars resulting from the final stages of
bifacial production. This analysis has the potential to help archaeologists
examining lithic technologies understand the relationships among different human
cultures not only in Alaska but also across the New and Old World.