* 1514575
* Pressure-Based Mapping of Protein Free Energy Landscapes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Catherine Royer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,149,837.00

Title: Pressure Based Mapping of Protein Free Energy
Landscapes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are the molecules in our bodies and in
all other living organisms, plants, bacteria, fish, animals, that do most of the
work to maintain and reproduce life. They are chains of small chemicals, called
amino acids that are linked together. The number and order of the amino acids
defines the shape or structure of the protein and also its function. Proteins
fold up into compact shapes, but to do their jobs like digesting food or
generating the force that makes birds and insects fly, they have to change their
shape. This research is aimed at understanding how the sequence of amino acids
defines the folding of proteins and how they change their shapes to function.
Understanding how protein sequences control their shape and function will be of
great use in designing new proteins for applications in biotechnology. For
example, better, more active and more stable proteins can be designed for green
chemistry bioreactors to make the chemicals used in daily life without harming
the environment. Proteins are nano-machines and nanomaterials that will find
numerous applications in electronics, computing, biosensing and nano-
fabrication. All of these technological advances will be based on the
understanding of the relationship between protein sequence, stability and
function. The strong international collaboration on which this research is based
will provide the students with a world-view of the scientific endeavor, and help
them establish international networks that will aid them as they pursue their
careers. The graduate and undergraduate students who will participate in the
research will be immersed in a comprehensive interdisciplinary environment,
incorporating multiple experimental and computational approaches. The large NMR
data sets generated by the research are shared with the NSF sponsored
undergraduate educational program in the undergraduate computer science major at
RPI, the Data Analytics Through-out Undergraduate Mathematics program (DATUM).
Support will be provided for the undergraduate research program run by the
Center for Biotechnology. The research will also involve the RPI high school
internship program run by the Center for Biotechnology for Troy area high
schools (with a large minority population). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to map experimentally the folding free energy landscapes for
selected model proteins, and to identify the sequence and structural
determinants of their folding cooperativity, initiation and pathways. This will
be accomplished by exploiting the advantages of pressure perturbation coupled
with site specific NMR, fluorescence, SAXS and other biophysical approaches. The
underlying premise of the present proposal is that pressure, due to its unique
mechanism of action, can provide exclusive insights into protein folding. Within
the framework of the main objective, three specific questions will be addressed:
How does sequence code for protein folding cooperativity. How are protein
cooperative interactions linked to their volumetric thermal expansion. How do
residual native interactions in pressure unfolded states affect folding
mechanisms. This project will address central outstanding issues in protein
folding and conformational dynamics, first by significantly and systematically
increasing the experimental database of detailed protein folding energy
landscapes. Secondly, it will provide experimental scenarios describing how
sequence defines folding routes and cooperativity. Finally, it will reveal how
sequence specifically controls access to excited states on folding landscapes.
This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics in
the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.