* 1514671
* RAPID Proposal: Ebola virus stability in the environment - Implications for outbreak control
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2015
* Yoshihiro Kawaoka, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This research will test the persistence of the Ebola virus on various material
surfaces, environmental settings and types of biological samples, as well as
test the efficacy of common household disinfectants in decontaminating these
materials. Understanding how a pathogen survives on a surface and in the
environment is critical to minimizing and stopping the spread of an infectious
disease. Inanimate items contaminated with Ebola virus, such as bedding,
furniture, and clothing, could play a major role in the spread of disease and
yet there is surprisingly very little information known about the stability of
the Ebola virus outside of a host organism. This research will have immediate
impacts on the 2014 Ebola virus outbreak. It may reveal previously unknown
sources of infection and in turn, offer new strategies to prevent viral
exposure.

The investigators will utilize a biologically contained Ebola virus model system
that they have previously developed. In this model system, the Ebola virus has
been modified and lacks the gene that encodes for an essential viral protein.
The resulting modified virus is morphologically indistinguishable from the
authentic virus, yet it is non-pathogenic to animals such as mice, guinea pigs
and nonhuman primates so that the research can be conducted in a biosafety
level-3 containment facility. The research will determine the viral persistence
on common household surfaces such as glass, metal and plastic, environmental
materials such as water, soil, and sewage, as well as biological materials such
as stool, urine, blood and vomit. Researchers will assess the viral persistence
for different incubation periods, as well as for variable levels of temperature
and humidity. Furthermore, the efficacy of common disinfectants will be tested
in the model system. Results from this research will provide critical
information for the current Ebola virus outbreak and will help curtail the
spread of Ebola virus in the future.