* 1514284
* CCF: Medium: Collaborative Research: SHF: Cascode: Supporting and Leveraging Voltage Stacking in Future Microprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Jose Renau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 285,000.00

Power dissipation is increasingly becoming the central issue in almost all
computing and communication systems from mobile devices to warehouse-scale
systems. This project investigates a technology that can shave off at least a
few percent of chip energy of all chips by targeting one particular aspect of
power consumption that has not received as much attention as others: power
delivery. In addition to the team of investigators, the project will involve
graduate and undergraduate students, include members of underrepresented groups
and will thus help enlarge the nation?s workforce in information
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's chips operate at low voltages (about
1V) to reduce power consumption. However, delivering the power at low voltage is
problematic. For instance, it results in more delivery loss (in the real world,
electricity is transported at voltages thousands of times higher than that of
the usage voltage). This project will be investigating a solution called the
Cascode power delivery system, which stacks multiple planes of circuit to
naturally increase the effective usage (and therefore delivery) voltage. This
design is not only likely to bypass some fundamental problems with other means
of increasing power delivery voltage (such as using on-chip voltage converters),
but also to creates new architectural opportunities such as improved
communication circuits with higher voltages and better capabilities to
compensate variations in the fabrication process.