* 1514946
* EAPSI:Investigating the Role of Organizational Identification and Collective Support in Fostering Workplace Resilience
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Danielle King, King                    Danielle       D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

As most individuals and collectives will experience challenges throughout their
lives, including shared crises (e.g. terrorist attacks, natural disasters),
learning how these negative experiences can be linked to adaptive outcomes may
be beneficial to all. More specifically, as organizational membership is a
crucial element in the lives of many, investigating the role organizations can
play in recovery offers relevant knowledge. The current research will
investigate resilience in the workplace following shared adversity by examining
the potential for reaching desired end states through the use of organizational
identification and collective support. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Joana Kuntz, a noted expert on employee and
organizational resilience and founder of the Employee Resilience Research Group
(EmpRes), at the University of Canterbury, in Christchurch, New Zealand. New
Zealand serves as the ideal location to examine collective adversity and
organizational resilience, as many organizations are currently undergoing the
?Canterbury Rebuild? due to recent earthquake devastation. Such shared
adversities, paired with the expanding business industry, make New Zealand a
unique and ideal place to investigate current hypotheses and also an area that
may benefit greatly from research findings.

The current work integrates resilience research with other theoretical
frameworks (i.e. social identity theory, organizational behavior, and
occupational health) in an attempt to go beyond individual-level factors and
examine multilevel effects that can be used to inform research and recovery
efforts. This investigation is novel and also potentially useful because it will
examine collective and organizational factors that may assist workers,
especially those who would likely not ?bounce back? from experienced hardships.
This work aims to further the promise of resilience research to redress human
suffering by extending previous findings to collective adversity and
incorporating an examination of the organizational resources that can assist
groups and individuals in coping with collective strain. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.