* 1514174
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Computational Tools for Extracting Individual, Dyadic, and Network Behavior from Remotely Sensed Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Margaret Crofoot, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 409,937.00

Recent technological advances in location tracking, video and photo capture,
accelerometers, and other mobile sensors provide massive amounts of low-level
data on the behavior of animals and humans. Analysis of this data can teach us
much about individual and group behavior, but analytical techniques that lead to
insight about that behavior are still in their infancy. In particular, these new
data can provide an unprecedented window into the lives of wild animals,
augmenting the traditional time-consuming first-hand observations from field
biologists. Unfortunately, the interpretation of low-level (i.e., unprocessed)
data from animal-borne electronic sensors still poses a significant bottleneck
in leveraging all of the available data to better understand the individual,
pairwise, and group behavior of animal populations. This project will develop
tools for scaling the expert knowledge needed to interpret high-level behaviors
from low-level sensor data using tools from statistical machine learning and
network analysis. These data and analytical tools promise to fundamentally
change our understanding why animals do what they do, at high resolution and
across multiple scales, from individuals to entire populations. The results of
the project will be applicable in many settings where massive sensor data is
overwhelming traditional insight derived from observational approaches. As part
of the project, unique data on primate behavior that will bridge the low-level
data and expert knowledge will be collected at Mpala Research Centre, Kenya.
Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students from computer science and
animal behavior will collaborate across continental and disciplinary boundaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of this project include developing
structured prediction methods that improve behavior recognition at multiple
levels (individual, pair-wise, and group), using network properties to improve
the identification of group activities, and advancing active learning in the
structured prediction setting so that "expensive" expert knowledge and
supplemental data collection will be judiciously utilized for maximum benefit in
learning behavior recognition models. Recognizing animal behavior from low-level
sensor data is hierarchical in this approach, with individual activities
recognized directly from data and the context of these data, the inferred
individual activities informing pair-wise behavior recognition, and inferred
pair-wise behavior informing group-level activity recognition. The benefits of
improving the accuracy of individual and pair-wise behavior for recognizing
group-level behavior will enable expert annotations to be requested that improve
behavior recognition the most across all levels. These advances will enable
field-biologists to investigate new hypotheses about fundamental evolutionary,
ecological, and population processes at scale without the burdens of complete
manual annotation of collected data. The methods will be applicable beyond field
biology to understanding the hierarchy of behavior from individual entities to
groups, from humans to cells, in scientific, educational, and business contexts.
The team will leverage the interdisciplinary and international nature of the
project to continue its ongoing work to increase participation of women and
minorities in STEM research at undergraduate and graduate levels.