* 1514997
* EAPSI: The Effect of Increased Ocean Temperatures on Species Diversity in Cauliflower Corals (Pocillopora spp.)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Andrea Chan, Chan                    Andrea         N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Healthy coral ecosystems are beneficial to island nations, providing significant
revenue from tourism and protecting their coastlines from erosion due to wave
action and storms. In addition, coral reefs support a high diversity of other
taxa, and thus maintaining coral ecosystems directly sustains marine
biodiversity. Corals are sensitive to changes in their thermal environment, with
sustained increases of a few degrees above the summer maximum causing their
algal symbionts to leave their tissues (coral bleaching). Reef-building corals
rely on these symbionts for a large proportion of their metabolic needs, and if
temperatures remain elevated the corals perish. Recent studies have demonstrated
the merit of using natural experiments to predict how climate change could
affect reefs. Dr. Chaolun Allen Chen of Academia Sinica, has successfully used a
high temperature reef site near the outlet of a nuclear power plant in Southern
Taiwan to investigate the effects of chronic warm waters on juvenile cauliflower
coral (Pocillopora spp.) diversity. This award supports research under Dr.
Chen?s mentorship that builds on this work by examining the diversity of the
adult cauliflower corals at two sites: one near the nuclear power plant and one
farther away with normal water temperatures.

For this natural experiment, tissue samples will be collected from both sites,
and the mitochondrial open reading frame (ORF) will be sequenced. The ORF
regions will be used in subsequent phylogenetic analyses, and the diversity
between sites will be compared using standard biodiversity indices. If the
relative proportion of Pocillopora species differs between the warm site and the
normal temperature site, then this would indicate differential resilience to
increased temperatures between species. An absence of significant differences in
Pocillopora coral diversity between these sites would point to other mechanisms
for maintaining physiological performance (e.g. gene expression, alternate algal
symbionts, or microbiome differences). Because this coral genus is globally
distributed, our findings will be useful for coral conservation beyond the
boundaries of Taiwan. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.