* 1514934
* EAPSI: Quantifying Biomechanical and Muscular Changes Due to Fatigue in Young Male and Female Runners of Varying Pubertal Status
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Susan Basile, Basile                  Susan          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Youth long distance runners and their injuries have been understudied,
particularly when compared to the amount of existing and ongoing research
regarding adult runners. Physical burnout and overuse injuries can have a
lasting effect, contributing to medical costs and preventing young athletes from
remaining physically active. The findings of this investigation will have
applications across youth development and activity, and will lead to a richer
understanding of the biomechanics of long distance runners between genders and
across maturational levels. The proposed research will capitalize on Drs. John
Cronin and Jon Oliver?s study of youth and adolescent athletes at the Sports
Performance Research Institute of the Auckland University of Technology, and
will generate a more holistic picture of the interaction between biomechanics,
neuromechanics, and fatigue in growing athletes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
aims to analyze changes due to fatigue in the biomechanics and neuromuscular
control of male and female long distance runners of varying maturational status.
This research will result in a profile of how muscle activity, leg stiffness,
and stride length change with fatigue, as these can all be predictors of injury.
To achieve this goal, kinetic and kinematic data will be collected during a
training run on a treadmill. Leg stiffness and muscle activity will be compared
before and after runs using EMG and force measurements. Potential uses of this
research include a biomechanical risk prediction model to provide guidelines for
safe volume and frequency of running by pubertal stage. The methods employed can
also be extended to protect young athletes in other sports where overuse
injuries are common, such as baseball. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.