* 1514189
* CAREER: Combating Performance Bugs in Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2014,05/31/2017
* Shan Lu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 05/31/2017
* USD 238,925.00

Performance bugs cause unintended performance degradation and energy waste in
mainstream software. These bugs can easily slow down production software for
several times and are posing increasing threat to software quality with the
meager increases in single threaded performance in multi-core era and an
increasing emphasis on energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous works
for performance bugs, including testing and profiling, mostly treat software as
a black-box, and are usually too late or ineffective in preventing the damage of
performance bugs. This NSF CAREER research project seeks to develop systems and
tools that take a white-box approach to addressing the open problem of
performance bugs. First, it conducts an empirical study to enrich the
understanding of performance bugs in real-world. Second, it develops tools that
can automatically detect performance bugs before, during, and after bug
manifestation. Third, it designs a testing framework to expose performance bugs
before software release. Finally, it also looks at the performance bug issue in
multi-threaded programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education focus of this
project is to broaden the software curriculum to bring students more awareness
and exercise of performance and correctness issues in software, especially
multi-threaded software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve the
understanding of performance waste problem in software, provide substantial tool
support to help lower software development and performance testing costs, and
improve software users' everyday experience through faster software. It will
also help improve the energy efficiency of production-run software and protect
environment in the field.