* 1514137
* Developing Effective Strategies for Confronting Racial Bias in Interpersonal Interactions
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Margo Monteith, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 213,556.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising scholar in the field of social
psychology researching racial bias. There are many perspectives about the
operation of racial bias in society, and yet, people often shirk away from
conversations about racial issues-of-the-day because they can be tense and
uncomfortable. Indeed, disagreement during conversations about racial bias
typically engenders defensiveness, anger, and withdrawal?other-focused emotions
that inhibit perspective-taking and downstream attitudinal and behavioral
change. This research program combines social psychological scholarship on
confronting racial bias, self-regulation, and interracial interactions to
identify strategies that will temper these feelings of defensiveness. More
specifically, this project explores how Whites respond to different styles of
feedback (i.e., confrontation) during conversations about bias. Additionally,
this project explicitly tests whether self-regulation training that provides
insight into one?s own propensity for racial bias will improve Whites? reactions
to confrontation. Achieving greater insight into how confrontation targets feel
and respond in face-to-face interactions, and whether this differs based on the
race of the confronter or the style that individual uses, can inform ways to
engage majority group allies when working toward racial equality and social
change. An additional benefit of this work is its applicability for creating
diversity and inclusion workshops that promote self-driven change, instead of
ones that result in other-focused (i.e., defensive) reactions that can lead to
backlash. Taken together, this research will provide practical knowledge about
how to confront and discuss racial bias in ways that will motivate individuals
toward social change and foster mutual understanding of the relevance and
prevalence of racial bias in today?s society.

The present studies advance social psychological theory by exploring how people
respond to different types of racial bias confrontation. Building on self-
determination theory and the self-regulation model of prejudice, four
experiments empirically test how Whites respond to confrontation that emphasizes
compliance with social norms (i.e., a controlling strategy) compared to
confrontation that emphasizes compliance with personal egalitarian standards
(i.e., an autonomy-supportive strategy). The first study uses a free-recall
paradigm to explore whether Whites spontaneously distinguish between autonomy-
supportive and controlling confrontations, and how this affects their attitudes,
behavior, and perceptions of racial bias confronters. The subsequent experiments
test whether safety cues from the confronter (i.e., shared racial group) and
safety cues from the self (i.e., training that emphasize one?s propensity for
racial bias and self-regulation) temper negative reactions to controlling racial
bias confrontation. The final study mimics real-world conversations about race
by examining how Whites respond to face-to-face confrontation, and whether
safety cues (from others, and the self) encourage more positive, perceivable
differences in the confrontation target?s behavior. In sum, the present research
extends past work by identifying when and why racial bias confrontation
interferes with self-regulatory processes, and by creating ways to intervene to
encourage engagement in future intergroup contact.