* 1514357
* AF: Medium: A High Performance Computing Foundation to Whole-Genome Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 774,000.00

The premise of personalized medicine is based on prediction of an individual's
genetic risk to disease. Modern animal and plant breeding programs select
individuals or lines based on genotypic information which circumvents the costly
process of progeny testing, leading to greater efficiency. In these scientific
areas, the ability to translate genotypic information into a quantitative
prediction of the risk to disease or breeding targets is a matter of utmost
importance. To address the technical barriers in the prediction using a whole-
genome sample of genetic markers, there is urgent need for new statistical
models and high performance computing foundations that allow the concurrent use
of millions of genetic markers and a large variety of variables describing a
disease (or a breeding target). This project proposes to solve several such
barriers by an integrative approach combining and developing techniques for data
reduction, parallel computing and Bayesian inference. This interdisciplinary
project provides educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students to get first-hand research experience in computational aspects of
genomics data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand how
genome-wide markers help to predict not-yet-specified phenotypes of individuals
and how the total genetic contribution can be better estimated for a phenotype.
The primary goals of the proposed research are to develop: (1) parallel
algorithms to reduce data that comprises millions of genetic markers into lower
dimensions; (2) sparse predictive modeling with correction for the uneven
tagging issue due to linkage disequilibrium; (3) fast algorithms for multi-locus
mapping problems; and (4) collaborative prediction methods to jointly predict
multiple phenotypes. The proposed solutions will be tested in the analysis of
large-scale biological data, including a dairy cattle database collected by US
Department of Agriculture and a dataset aggregated from multiple genetic studies
of human diseases. This project will yield user-friendly software tools that can
be broadly deployed to biological research areas that study genetics of complex
phenotypes. The validated methods and software will be disseminated through the
PI's laboratory website.