* 1514269
* SHF: NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: The Power of Less Wiring: Wireless NoC-enabled Voltage-Frequency Islands (VFIs) for Energy-Efficient Multicore Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Behrooz Shirazi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 172,019.00

Parallel processing via massively integrated multicore systems can offer
unprecedented levels of performance for many real applications, e.g.,
networking, e-commerce, scientific computing, entertainment, etc. However, the
design of such multicore platforms is dominated by the power and thermal
constraints that need to be addressed in order to make them practical. Indeed,
the increasing power and thermal dissipation represents a major concern due to
its impact on performance, temperature, reliability, scalability, and
environmental impact. Consequently, this project targets an interdisciplinary
research-based curriculum for power and thermally efficient multi-core system
design meant to raise awareness and increase the number of students attracted to
this area of engineering. Towards this end, this project also aims at involving
underrepresented groups in research through REU and IGERT projects via
catalyzing the creation of more sustainable
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of technical aspects of the
research, this project defines an integrated theory-implementation-evaluation
framework, which aims at developing new algorithms, architectures, and tool-sets
to design and evaluate sustainable multicore systems while provisioning the
system resources for the necessary power/performance/thermal trade-offs. The
research objectives target the development of a new communication network
consisting of both traditional wires and emerging on-chip wireless links
suitable to support voltage and frequency scaling, new algorithms for
distributed resource management and hierarchical control under multi-kernel
operating systems, and unified power-performance models for extended range
dynamic voltage and frequency scaling with validation of power/performance
trade-offs.