* 1514371
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Atomic scale to circuit modeling of emerging nanoelectronic devices and adapting them to SPICE simulation package
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Mikhail Erementchouk, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,622.00

Aggressive scaling of CMOS technology and concomitant inventions of nanoscale
nascent technologies have fueled the growth of computer, information,
communication and consumer electronics industries of the 21st Century by
leveraging the ground-breaking discoveries in nanoscience and nanotechnology.
The workhorse of multibillion-dollar semiconductor industry, the CMOS technology
is approaching its scaling limit due to the strong quantum-mechanical effects
present at the nanoscale. To sustain the accelerated pace of economic growth
during the post-CMOS era, this multi-university collaborative research proposal
envisages building the roadmap of VLSI technology in two significant ways.
First, the research is mooted to extend quantum transport principles to simulate
emerging nano-devices based on novel semiconductor and 2-D layered materials by
exploiting non-charge based degrees of freedom, electron spin controlled
magnetization, interaction between electromagnetic waves and semiconductors in
metamaterial structures, and topological states in topological insulators.
Second, the research will systematically scale these properties from their
fundamental atomistic limits to circuit level integration by developing
industry-graded SPICE-compatible compact models for heterogeneous circuits that
will define the landscape of beyond Moore?s Law VLSI systems. Integrative
education, training, and outreach activities envisioned in this collaborative
proposal will encompass K-12, undergraduate, graduate, female, minority, and
postdoctoral fellows by leveraging the existing outreach activities of
participating universities in order to advance science and engineering education
in broader segments of the society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using density-
functional theory (DFT), time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT),
time-dependent density-matrix functional theory (TD-DMFT), to phenomenological
Extended Huckel to effective mass, in conjunction with non-equilibrium Green?s
function (NEGF) methods, quantum field theory, and finite-difference time domain
(FDTD) methods, a wide variety of computational methods are going to be
developed to tackle the modeling of multiscale circuits in future VLSI systems.
The software packages and multiscale modeling tools resulting from the proposed
research activity are going to provide computer chip designers and manufacturers
the ability to model complex hybrid substrates comprising nanoscale electronic,
spintronic, opto-electronic, and plasmonic devices. The resulting software is
going to be written with a view to enabling researchers from universities and
practicing engineers in industries to develop their own modules that will
engender improved system functionality, integration density, and operational
speed.