* 1514859
* RAPID collaborative proposal:  Will corals recover from bleaching under ocean acidification conditions?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Andrea Grottoli, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2016
* USD 158,420.00

Following the second hottest month on record since the 1940s, water temperatures
near the main Hawaiian Islands reached 30 °C in October 2014. The result of this
2 °C increase above normal temperatures has been a severe bleaching event across
the Hawaiian Archipelago. In Kaneohe Bay, 75% of the dominant coral species are
bleached. Bleaching is a stress response whereby corals lose their symbiotic
algae and turn white. Prolonged bleaching can lead to disease, decreases in
coral growth and reproduction, and even death. In addition, rising atmospheric
levels of carbon dioxide cause the oceans to become more acidic and potentially
less hospitable to coral reefs. By the end of this century, seawater is
predicted to be twice as acidic as it is today. The current bleaching event in
Hawaii provides a rare opportunity to test the ability of corals to recover
under the acidic ocean conditions expected by the end of this century. This
research compares the recovery rate of bleached corals in normal seawater to
those exposed to more acidic seawater. The results will inform which species or
reef regions are more resilient to global change conditions and thus better
targets for protection. The results will be particularly relevant to management
of the Papahanaumokuakea Marine National Monument and World Heritage site. It
will also provide critical data input for models that project the persistence of
reefs in the future. Educationally, the research will provide a dynamic learning
and training environment for students and a post-doctoral researcher. Minority
students will be recruited and trained in marine science providing them with
excellent career options in STEM disciplines. Results will be broadly
disseminated through publications, classroom visits, public outreach and online
media.

Coral reefs are among the most diverse ecosystems on the planet, housing an
estimated 25% of marine species. Massive coral bleaching poses a substantial
threat to the integrity of coral reef habitats, and is predicted to be the major
source of mortality for reefs under future climate model scenarios. Although
previous work on the recovery of corals from bleaching sets the groundwork for
this project, it remains to be seen how recovery from bleaching will be impacted
by climate change and ocean acidification. This project takes advantage of the
natural difference in baseline temperature and seawater acidity conditions
between Kaneohe Bay and Waimanalo Bay, HI. Both these sites are impacted by the
massive bleaching event. This research will test the recovery rate of bleached
corals in normal seawater to that of bleached corals exposed to more acidic
seawater. Three questions will be addressed: 1) Will ocean acidification slow
rates of recovery from bleaching?; 2) Does zooplankton feeding minimize the
impact of bleaching?; and 3) Do corals acclimated to warmer, more acidic
conditions (Kaneohe Bay) recover more quickly than corals at present day mean
oceanic conditions (Waimanalo Bay)? The project integrates techniques across the
disciplines of ecology, physiology, evolution, and genomics. The research will
help to identify characteristics of resilient coral species or populations that
are more likely to survive bleaching events in the future.