* 1514835
* Measuring the effects of dust attenuation on the luminosities and morphologies of disk galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Eric Bell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 307,235.00

Precisely how galaxies initially form and how they change throughout their
lifetimes are among the least understood problems in astrophysics. Such
understanding is necessary to uncover how our Universe evolved and to gain
insight into the origin of our own Milky Way Galaxy. Many projects are centered
on unraveling these mysteries and depend on interpreting observations. This
project focuses on how dust in galaxies affects observations. Dust profoundly
affects essentially all of the observable diagnostics of galaxies, such as their
brightnesses and colors, structures (disks, bulges), color gradients and stellar
mass estimates. Previous work demonstrated that more luminous disk galaxies tend
to suffer more dust attenuation than low-luminosity galaxies and that their
central parts suffer more dust absorption than their outer parts. Yet, two
critical questions remain unanswered: (1) How does global dust attenuation---and
attenuation gradients---depend simultaneously on the entire set of relevant
parameters (luminosity or stellar mass, star formation rate, density or scale
length, and structure)? (2) How in detail are commonly-used measures of galaxy
structure affected by dust attenuation as a function of galaxy parameters? This
project will study these questions by assembling samples of intrinsically
similar galaxies (stellar mass, star formation rate, density,
structure).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the principle investigator will
lead a collaborative effort to widen the use and assess the impact of effective
student-centered pedagogy in University of Michigan introductory undergraduate
astronomy classes (e.g., inquiry-based activities, lecture tutorials, think-pair
share, diagnostic assessments and learning analytics). This project also
involves training of a graduate student, including mentorship and teaching
skills; the development of undergraduate research skills in the context of this
research project; and involvement in outreach, including in a local elementary
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, because the samples of similar
galaxies are viewed from random angles and edge-on galaxies are much more
strongly affected by dust attenuation, studying how the optical properties vary
with inclination enables a model-independent measurement of relative dust
attenuation as a function of galaxy parameters. However, this crucially depends
on the ability to assemble samples of truly similar galaxies, and many previous
works use at least some selection criteria that are biased by dust attenuation.
This results in samples where the high and low inclination members are not truly
similar, and this inclination-dependent cross-sample contamination significantly
affects conclusions about the dependence of dust attenuation on galaxy
parameters. A critical advance of the investigators' work is that they are
developing a set of selection criteria that enables the assembly of samples of
similar galaxies in a manner that is unaffected by inclination bias. This
advance enables the comparison of the observed properties of samples of truly
similar galaxies with unprecedented accuracy. Therefore, the goals of this
project are two-fold: (1) To use wide-area near-infrared surveys and this novel
inclination-independent measures of galaxy structure to select samples of truly
intrinsically similar galaxies in a way that is independent of inclination to a
degree never before achieved. (2) To use these samples to measure the dependence
of dust attenuation on all relevant galaxy parameters in a complete, unbiased,
robust and detailed manner to measure for the first time the effects of dust
attenuation on SDSS-based measures of galaxy structure and to measure for the
first time the radial gradients in dust attenuation as a function of galaxy
properties. The investigators will release their catalogues of structural
metrics and other measurements to the public.