* 1514706
* Investigation of RNA-Processing Protein Dynamics with Simultaneous High-Resolution Optical Traps and Single-Molecule Fluorescence
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Matthew Comstock, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 645,029.00

Title: Investigation of RNA-processing protein dynamics with simultaneous high-
resolution optical traps and single-molecule
fluorescence&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will develop optical
methods that will enable direct observation in real-time of the activity of
protein machines that are involved in processing RNA. RNA is one of the
essential carriers of cell information, and its production and degradation are
tightly controlled by RNA protein interactions associated with protein machines.
The overall goal of this project is to investigate how both the cooperation and
competition between different molecular machines lead to the careful regulation
of information in the cell. The techniques developed in this project will apply
beyond the protein machines involved in RNA processing to include a broad
assortment of complex protein systems. This project will leverage optical
methods development and the strong art and science connection at Michigan State
University to develop an education and outreach program centered on hands-on
interactions with biophysical science at the individual cell and RNA molecule
level. The PI will create a video game lab experience aimed at students and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate RNA-processing
protein dynamics of single proteins and larger protein machine assemblies by
developing and applying high-resolution, multi-modal single molecule techniques.
Specifically, the PI will investigate the yeast nuclear RNA helicase Mtr4p and
the associated TRAMP protein complex. Mtr4p and TRAMP have emerged as key
players in nuclear RNA surveillance and processing in part via precise
modification of RNA for degradation by the exosome. How these machines
coordinate or compete to achieve function is controversial in large part due to
their highly dynamic, multi-degree of freedom interactions on the scale of only
5-10 nucleotides of RNA. The PI will address the fundamental questions regarding
how Mtr4p and TRAMP function using single-molecule and high resolution optical
tweezers and fluorescence. Advanced techniques combining high-resolution optical
trapping and multi-color fluorescence will apply broadly across all biophysical
molecular dynamics investigations towards the emerging need for tools to
investigate protein-nucleic acid interactions beyond the individual molecule
scale towards multi-protein, multi-degree of freedom complex systems.