* 1514494
* The STEM Ambassador Program: A Scientist-Driven Public Engagement Model
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Shelley Goldman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,358,146.00

This project's interdisciplinary team will carry out research and training that
will identify ways for professionals in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) to engage with public audiences that currently lack the
community connections, resources, time, or know-how to gain access to science
education and to scientists. The project will create real and on-line materials
for scientists to convey the excitement, content, and relevance of their own
research to public groups whose values, professions, or aesthetic and cultural
backgrounds are connected to that research topic. The project will also foster
ways for scientists to understand that members of the public can provide
valuable input to science. Research and evaluation on the development of this
innovative public engagement model "the STEM Ambassador Program (STEMAP)" will
be conducted to provide insights into the effectiveness and extensibility of the
STEMAP model. This approach integrates three existing elements of science
engagement that have previously not been linked: design thinking, informal
science education communication skills from museum work, and connecting
scientists' research with the existing values of particular community groups.
Robust evaluation will enhance effectiveness of in-person and online trainings;
research will provide understanding of how different science learning models can
be integrated and enhanced for public audiences and for scientists. This project
is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science and society need innovative and
transformative ways to interact synergistically. Given the deep knowledge and
contagious passion for their research, STEM professionals can bring unique
assets to directly engage public audiences, especially important the
traditionally underserved public groups. Members of the public in turn have the
potential to provide novel ideas, data, and insights to support researchers. The
project's exploratory research will help understand how STEM professionals can
broaden participation by themselves engaging unengaged publics with the
excitement of science and science knowledge in ways that are congruent with
academic rewards. The project team will integrate three existing NSF-funded
models: a) Research Ambassador Program, b) Portal to the Public, and c) Design
Thinking. A cadre of faculty and graduate students will be trained in "STEM
Ambassadors" workshops, in which social scientists and community group
representatives will help STEM Ambassadors identify public groups with interests
that connect to the scientist's research. Engagement events will occur in
community venues, e.g., churches, factories, and day care centers, etc. Case
studies and evaluation instruments answer research questions about: the role of
empathy in the formation and change of identity; relationships between public
audiences, mode of engagement, and identity shifts; and motivational drivers for
STEM Ambassadors and public audiences. The intellectual merit is the training
and evaluating of 50 STEM Ambassadors (via 100 outreach events involving
approximately 5000 individuals from community groups); strategies that encourage
STEM professionals to engage with underrepresented publics; and insights on how
to integrate multiple education models. STEMAP will disseminate its findings and
new resources through the STEMAP website. In addition, the dissemination efforts
will be extended through: collaboration with the NSF-funded PoPNet Expansion
Project and the Centers for Science and Mathematics Education (CSMEs);
presentations at national science professional organizations, such as the AAAS,
as well as through the CAISE Wiki and the National Alliance for Broader Impacts
(NABI). STEMAP will create a process for other NSF PIs to generate, evaluate,
and articulate their research and its applications to public groups that lie far
outside academia.