* 1514958
* EAPSI: Novel Metal Nanoparticles to Improve the Efficiency and Reduce the Cost of Fuel Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Samantha Sweeney, Sweeney                 Samantha       W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

With the advent of the industrial revolution, more and more natural resources
are being depleted due to the burning of fossil fuels. As a resolution to this
problem, there have been increasing efforts in studying more sustainable forms
of energy. One of these research topics is in the area of fuel cells. Fuel cells
are very promising because their main by-product is water, therefore not causing
any extra damage to the environment. However, only expensive metals are
efficient enough to be used in these devices and that limits the commercial
availability of these products. The goal of this research project will be to
produce metal nanoparticles that will improve the efficiency and lower the cost
of fuel cells. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor
Shi-Gang Sun at Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. Professor Sun's laboratory is
one of the top electrochemical research laboratories in the world and would be
an ideal place because of the access to top-notch equipment and materials. The
specific research plan is to create multi-faceted nanoparticles as catalysts for
the formic acid oxidation reaction. The nanoparticles will by synthesized using
electrochemical pulse treatment, which Professor Sun's laboratory specializes
in. We will specifically studying how changing the parameters of the pulse
treatment will affect the nanoparticles. They will also be capped with aliphatic
ligands derived from diazonium salts. These ligands change the electron density
surrounding the metal and therefore affect the binding energy of fuel
intermediates, therefore enhancing the oxidation ability. The effects will be
tested electrocatalytically, specifically for the formic acid oxidation
reaction. The reaction's kinetics are sluggish and hopefully they will be
improved by these nanoparticles. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a
U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry
of Science and Technology.