* 1514836
* EAPSI: Electrochemical Studies of the Transformation of the Solid-Liquid Interface
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Anthony Lucio, Lucio                   Anthony        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award focuses on studying the fundamental behavior of the solid-liquid
interface. The solid-liquid interface is a microscopic region formed at the
boundary between a metal electrode and the surrounding fluid electrolyte. The
molecular structure of this region for aqueous systems has been continually
refined, but the recent advent of ionic liquids as a new, advantageous class of
electrolyte fluids requires new measurements. Ionic liquids are room temperature
liquid salts that will play key roles in a myriad of applications from batteries
to biocatalysis, but research on the interfacial region is necessary before
technological advances can be made. Several other models have been described,
and each has received criticism and undergone subsequent revision. Additionally,
the effects of water at the solid-liquid interface in ionic liquids are widely
unknown. Yet, the majority of ionic liquids studied are known to contain
significant levels of water within their bulk liquid. In electrochemistry, this
portion of water is known to be highly active. This research will systematically
vary the concentration of water in ionic liquids and use electrochemistry to
analyze water?s role at the solid-liquid interface. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Alan M. Bond, a pioneer in ionic liquid
electrochemistry, at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia.

Traditional models do not describe the behavior in ionic liquids, and
experiments to uncover ionic liquid structure at the solid-liquid interface is a
growing field in chemistry. One relatively new and powerful tool useful for
exploring the solid-liquid interface in ionic liquids is large amplitude Fourier
transform alternating current (FT-ac) voltammetry. Unlike most techniques, FT-ac
voltammetry allows the separation of unwanted background signal from the signal
of interest. This collaboration affords an opportunity to have access to a
unique instrument, available only at Monash University, and enable new insights
into this interfacial region in ionic liquid electrolytes. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.