* 1514654
* EAPSI: Color-Linked Hormonal and Behavioral Patterns in the Polymorphic Gouldian Finch (Erythrura Gouldiae)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Stephen Ferguson, Ferguson                Stephen        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Animal behavior studies have placed increasing importance on individual
behaviors and the reliability with which individuals follow certain strategies.
In many species, these behavioral types are related to hormone patterns and
allow the prediction of individual phenotypes. The Gouldian finch (Erythrura
gouldiae) is a critically endangered Australian finch that presents three
distinct color morphs. Each head color presents reliable hormone and behavioral
patterns but no studies have attempted to directly relate these traits. A series
of experiments to link individual personality traits with steroid hormone
patterns will be conducted using a captive population of finches. The work will
be done in collaboration with Dr. Simon Griffith at Macquarie University in
Sydney, Australia. Dr. Griffith is a noted expert on Australian finch behavior
and physiology and one of only a few researchers to have studied Gouldian
finches in captivity. While in Australia, the Fellow will further interact with
the international scientific community through a contributed talk at a major
conference and an invited seminar at Deakin University in Melbourne, Australia.

The researchers will use a capture-restraint protocol to evaluate the
corticosterone response of individuals to handling stress and each individual
will be observed to score aggression, exploratory behavior, and neophobia. They
will attempt to link individual hormone profiles with their behavioral scores on
the bold-shy spectrum to test whether head color reliably predicts hormone-
behavior patterns. This will be one of the first studies to explore such
hormone-behavior relationships across different morphs of any polymorphic
species. Results of this project will be of interest to diverse fields such as
ornithology, stress physiology, and evolutionary biology, and may contribute to
ongoing recovery efforts in wild populations of the Gouldian finch.

This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaborationwith the Australian Academy of
Science.