* 1514844
* Astrochemistry: Hydrodynamics, Cosmic ray induced ice chemistry, and Complex Molecules
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Eric Herbst, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 369,982.00

Astrochemistry is the study of the types of molecules and their chemistry
throughout the universe. Molecules in far-away regions are interesting in
themselves and as probes of the physical conditions in various regions,
especially regions known as dense interstellar clouds. Stars and planets form in
these clouds, which are full of molecules, some quite exotic by terrestrial
standards. The investigators will study the chemistry that occurs as
interstellar clouds collapse and warm up. They will determine which chemical
reactions are most important and simulate the changes in the chemical
composition of these regions.

The final products of the cloud collapse are low-mass stars, like the sun, as
well as high-mass stars, which are far brighter than the sun. The synthesis of
organic (carbon-containing) molecules is of special interest, since these
molecules can become part of nascent planets and are often associated with life.

One critical aspect of astrochemistry is the use of chemical simulations to
reproduce observational studies of molecular abundances in the gas and on dust
particles, and so learn about source lifetimes and physical conditions in the
interstellar and circumstellar media. The chemical simulations involve the
solution of so-called coupled kinetic differential equations, which yields
columns, abundances, or even spectra of many molecules as functions of density,
temperature, and degree of heterogeneity. Our primary interest will be to study
star formation. Given current and future interferometers, emphasis will be
placed on studying the dynamics and heterogeneity of sources undergoing star
formation, both the low-mass and high-mass categories. In particular, three-
dimensional hydrodynamics will be combined with chemical simulations with the
initial goal of understanding the chemistry that occurs during the formation of
protoplanetary disks in low-mass sources, and infrared dark clouds, high-mass
protostellar objects (HMPOs), and hot cores in high-mass sources. A detailed
understanding of the chemistry should yield much information about the details
of star formation.