* 1514826
* Collaborative Research: Kinetic Models of Aggregation and Dispersion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Jian-Guo Liu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 223,484.00

In many mathematical models of physical reality, coherent structures are formed
and maintained by a balance of competing influences. On the one hand, focusing,
concentration, or aggregation effects are typically produced by nonlinear
mechanisms. These effects are often counterbalanced by other processes that
disperse, defocus, fragment, or spread things out in some way. This proposal
aims to develop several novel and useful mathematical tools for analyzing how
such competing effects achieve dynamic balance. The particular models of
aggregation and dispersion to be studied arise specifically in studies of:
animal ecology, crowd dynamics, shape matching, hydrodynamics, and mass
transportation. The mathematical lessons learned are expected to be fundamental,
and contribute to a body of understanding that promises to be useful to
researchers across a range of disciplines. Further, the investigators plan to be
substantially engaged in training and interacting with students and young
researchers, at summer schools, lecture series, and disseminating results at
conferences, workshops, and seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
focuses on the study of dynamic behavior in four areas strongly motivated by
applications and the theory of partial differential equations. The first area
considers a fundamental coagulation-fragmentation model without detailed
balance, coming from Niwa's scaling analysis of a large body of empirical data
on fish school size in the mid-ocean. The second area will develop metrics and
geodesics for crowd-configuration paths and related hydrodynamic problems for
shape distances proposed by image analysts. The third area focuses on the long-
time dynamics and gradient structure in a new model of nonlocal dispersion and
nonlinear concentration, related to fixed-point equations for solitary wave
profiles. The final area considers random sticky particle dynamics, seeking to
build on recent advances in PDE theory that tie sticky particle dynamics to
singular solutions of conservation laws, and on related progress for random
shock clustering. Real-world applications include the fields of animal ecology,
image analysis, fluid dynamics, and stochastic interacting particle systems.