* 1514750
* RAPID:  Panic &amp; Pandemic: Information, Diffusion Dynamics, and the Management of Public Health Crises
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Skyler Cranmer, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 154,286.00

During a public health emergency such as the Ebola outbreak, effective
management of the information environment is critical not only for preventing
public panic but also for getting citizens to receive and retain information
about the disease that can help to alter their behavior, thus lowering their
risk of infection and ultimately helping to halt the spread of disease. It is
widely established that information coming to individuals via their social
networks has a strong e^ect on their beliefs, attitudes, and behavior. To
examine the complex interplay between o;cial (e.g. from CDC) and social
information, this experiment will manipulate both the amount of so;cial
information subjects receive and also the social topology network in which they
are embedded. The micro-level processes identi ed by this experiment will then
be used to simulate the interplay of offi;cial and social information on the
population level using agent based models. The study will (1) provide a precise
time-series of information and attitude spread; (2) provide a precise
distribution of the number of social reinforcements necessary for an individual
to update their beliefs; (3) provide a clear measure of the e^ect that the
volume of communication from public health agencies has on individual attitudes;
(4) provide a clear measure of the e^ect that communications from health
agencies have on public trust; (5) provide a clear measure of the e^ects of
network structure and density, having the possibility prescribing di^erent
informational interventions in di^erent network topologies. Finally, the agent-
based simulations conducted using the experimental results can provide public
health managers with an effective way to (6) forecast the spread of information,
(7) anticipate the population-level effects of theirinformational interventions,
and (8) understand and manage the spread of panic amidst a possible
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experiment follows a 3 by 4 design in which
the participants are randomly assigned into groups of high, low, or random
social clustering as well as high, low, or no exposure to Ebola-related
information from a public health source. Each type type of treatment group will
be run for two trials, meaning that the diffusion-of-information process will be
performed, observed, and repeated a total of 24 times. The experiment will be
conducted online and run for three weeks. Subjects will log in daily to a
dedicated website where they will receive Ebola information from a public health
agency and be able to see their social contact's attitudes related to the Ebola
virus (e.g. their degree of concern, their trust in the government and public
health responses, their answers to several factual questions about the disease
and short Twitter-like posts about their views). On a daily login, subjects will
view any informational messages they receive (as determined by treatment
category) and read the opinions pro^ered by their social connections. This
design allows one to track the diffusion-of-information process in great detail
over the social network as well as produce an understanding of how and when
information from a public health source can change individuals' attitudes and
beliefs. The results from the controlled experiment can be used to simulate the
spread of information among the general public.