* 1514390
* RAPID:  Computational Methods for Quantifying Regional Ebola-Specific Resource Coverage
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2015
* Armin Mikler, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2015
* USD 119,834.00

Federal, state, and local agencies must understand the availability of regional
Ebola-specific resources to develop effective response plans. This research
shall result in the development of methodologies to integrate data pertaining to
available regional health infrastructure with population-specific information to
identify capabilities and resources for mitigating a potential Ebola outbreak.
The primary focus is the design and implementation of computational tools that
facilitate the quantification of the availability and distribution of resources
across regional healthcare infrastructure, specifically resources that pertain
to the isolation and treatment of Ebola patients. This research will have
broader impact by improving best practices for the allocation of limited health
resources to mitigate the effects of emerging or reemerging infectious diseases,
which may threaten the United States. The resulting computational framework may
become an integral component of the national chemical, biological, radiological,
or nuclear (CBRN) preparedness effort. Further, the proposed research will
involve students, providing them an opportunity to conduct research in an
interdisciplinary STEM project.

The proposed computational methods will construct a hierarchy of regional
healthcare facilities and their corresponding Ebola-specific capabilities.
Geospatial partitioning algorithms, such as Voronoi tessellation and uniform
partitioning (UPAS) shall form the basis for delineating service regions
corresponding to available healthcare facilities, thereby quantifying the per
capita resource availability. This will enable agencies to address existing
resource constraints and develop strategies for the effective allocation of
Ebola-specific resources to achieve adequate regional coverage. Resource
constraints can be expected to affect mitigation efforts differently at
different levels of outbreak magnitude. As the magnitude of the outbreak
increases, adequate local and regional resources must be made available to
reflect the increased demand. The proposed computational methods shall provide
the necessary functionalities to estimate the required levels of resource
availability for different levels of outbreak magnitude. The design and
implementation of new methods to augment an existing planning framework (RE-
PLAN) will extend its applicability to the geospatial allocation of health
resources pertinent to Ebola mitigation.