* 1514953
* EAPSI:  Using mobile devices to study craving, emotions, and attention in Korean smokers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Edwin Szeto, Szeto                   Edwin          H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

Decades of policy and clinical interventions have led to declining cigarette
smoking rates in Western countries. Worldwide, however, the number of smokers is
actually increasing, and cigarette smoking remains a leading preventable cause
of disease and death. In Korea, 40 to 50% of men and 4 to 8% of women self-
identify as smokers, with an increasing trend for female smokers. People from
different cultures may differ in their smoking behaviors, and Ecological
Momentary Assessment (EMA) is an innovative methodology for examining smoking
behavior in the natural environment. EMA researchers often leverage the power of
mobile technologies (e.g., smartphones). However, most EMA studies have been
conducted in non-Asian regions. This project will investigate if EMA methods can
be feasibly applied with South Korean smokers and generate valid data. The
project will be hosted jointly by Dr. Se-hoon Joeng at Korea University and Dr.
Sooyeon Suh at Sungshin Women's University, both in Seoul, South Korea. Dr.
Jeong is a psychologist specializing in mobile technology use and health
behaviors and Dr. Suh is a clinical health psychologist with expertise in the
interaction of behavioral and psychological factors with physical health.

In this 1-week observational EMA study, each participant will be given a mobile
device at the first lab visit to carry around with them as they go about their
daily lives. The device will prompt them at random times (random assessments;
RAs) to complete brief questions and a reaction time test. These RAs will assess
negative and positive affect, craving, culturally-specific attitudes, attention
to smoking cues, and number of cigarettes smoked. The first specific aim will
examine the feasibility of EMA research, such as participant compliance to
complete RAs, in Korean smokers. The second specific aim will examine mood,
cognitive performance, and behaviors in Korean smokers. Predictor variables will
include demographic variables, technology readiness, cultural variables,
mindfulness, and smoking dependence. Ultimately, a greater understanding of the
cultural influences on smoking behaviors may improve smoking cessation
interventions for this population. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of
a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Korea.