* 1514765
* RCN: The Coordinated Plant Science Research and Education Network
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Crispin Taylor, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 901,935.00

Plants provide us with food, feed, fiber, medicines, fuel and other bioproducts,
and in so doing sequester carbon dioxide, create habitat, stabilize landscapes
and encompass an extraordinary biodiversity. Both environmental preservation and
human uses of plants require knowledge of plant form and function, from the
molecular to ecosystem perspectives, and spanning single-celled, aquatic
organisms to domesticated agricultural species and their wild relatives, to the
tallest trees. Plant research underpinned the Green Revolution, and is now being
called upon to address a range of challenges in food, health and the
environment. Because of the breadth of plant science and its associated
experimental technologies, the field faces significant headwinds to address
multilateral, multidisciplinary experimental questions. This project will form
the Coordinated Plant Science Research and Education Network, a network of
research and education societies with involvement in plant science research that
continues and amplifies a successful effort to unite a broad spectrum of plant
scientists around a strategic plan called the Decadal Vision that was published
in 2013. The Network has two major goals: (1) to catalyze interdisciplinary
training and research by encouraging and facilitating information exchange among
its six founding member societies, a number intended to grow; and (2) to use
dedicated workshops to seek novel solutions to broaden participation in plant
sciences, and to re-examine how postdoctoral fellows should be trained in the
plant sciences. Improved cross-talk between different stripes of experimental
plant scientists, and with those contributing enabling technologies from imaging
to robotics to informatics, promises to enrich and enliven the plant community,
while leading to exciting and empowering fundamental discoveries about the
wonders of plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By serving as a forum through which
plant science constituencies coordinate their efforts to advance plant science
research, education, and innovation, the Coordinated Plant Science Research and
Education Network will coordinate and facilitate a successful effort by the
broader plant community to establish a consensus-driven set of priorities which
culminated in the 2013 publication of "Unleashing a Decade of Innovation in
Plant Science: A vision for 2015-2025". The founding members of the Network are
the American Society of Plant Biologists, the Alliance of Crop, Soil and
Environmental Science Societies, the American Phytopathological Society, the
American Society for Horticultural Science, the Botanical Society of America,
the Genetics Society of America, and the Council on Undergraduate Research. The
Network will be open to any interested scientific professional associations and
will proactively engage other organizations with an interest in the study of
plants. One of the main goals of the Network is to serve as a clearinghouse for
the research, education and outreach activities and opportunities for its
members and the wider plant science community. Expected outcomes include new
collaborations among societies and scientists, including new interdisciplinary
collaborative research projects that will advance the frontiers of plant
sciences, and innovative recruitment and training strategies for the next
generation of scientists required for excellence in U.S. plant science research.
The Network will also convene two workshops, on broadening participation and
postdoctoral training that aim to catalyze career building and diversification
within the plant science workforce. To communicate the wonder and importance of
plant research, the Network will develop a shared set of consistent messages to
the public, including authoritative, science-based information on key societally
relevant topics. Internal and external communication for the Network will be
through Plantae.org, a modular web interface custom designed to serve the needs
of the Network and members of the broader plant science community.