* 1514942
* EAPSI: Understanding Plant Responses to Global Change Through the Lens of Evolutionary History
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* R Wooliver, Wooliver                R              C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Global change, including nitrogen (N) eutrophication, represents a primary
threat to biodiversity worldwide, yet we lack the ability to accurately predict
which species will fare well, and which will decline, in rapidly changing
environments. The goals of the proposed research are to determine whether
species responses to increasing rates of N eutrophication of soils are
associated with variation in functional traits, and to uncover past evolutionary
mechanisms that have shaped the evolution of these traits. This work will be
conducted using the group of 30 functionally unique Eucalyptus tree species that
are native to the island state of Tasmania, Australia, in collaboration with
Professor Brad Potts (University of Tasmania), a world authority on eucalypt
ecology and evolution.

This project will be the first attempt to test a long-standing theory in plant
functional ecology, the ?worldwide economics spectrum,? in a global change
framework. This theory postulates that environments with higher resource levels
have selected for leaf, stem, and root functional traits that increase the
capacity for resource use. First, the researchers will use recently developed
phylogenetic comparative methods to model the multivariate evolution of
functional traits within the Tasmanian eucalypt group according to soil- and
climate-based selective gradients across their natural ranges. The researchers
will then quantify species growth responses to predicted rates of N
eutrophication of soils using a controlled greenhouse experiment to determine
whether evolved variation in functional traits predicts responses to simulated
global change. Ultimately, results from this research will serve a dual role of
integrating the fields of evolutionary ecology and global change biology while
taking the first steps to predict the performances of endangered or
agriculturally important plant species in rapidly changing environments. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of
Science.