* 1514372
* SHF: Medium: Automating robot programming through constraint solving and motion planning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2021
* USD 815,999.00

The project aims to develop a high-level programming framework, called
Robosynth, for personal robots. Here, rather than writing low-level code that
defines how a robot must perform a task, the user of the robot writes a
specification that defines what is to be accomplished. Given this specification
and a model of the robot's environment, Robosynth automatically synthesizes a
program that can be executed on the robot. So long as the environment behaves
according to the assumed model, all executions of this program are guaranteed to
satisfy the user-defined requirements.This approach and its derivatives can make
robot programming accessible to a vast untapped body of inexperienced
programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical highlights of the project are
the specification language using which users interact with Robosynth, and the
algorithms that Robosynth uses for automatic code synthesis. These algorithms
simultaneously reason about a logical task level that is concerned with the
high-level goals of the robot, as well as a continuous motion level concerned
with navigating and manipulating a physical space. At the task level, Robosynth
leverages recent methods for analyzing complex systems of logical constraints,
for example SMT-solving and symbolic solution of graph games. Motion-level
reasoning is performed using sampling-based motion planning techniques.