* 1514626
* RAPID: Remote Monitoring of Ebola Patients and Their Treating Physicians
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Kelvin Lim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2016
* USD 146,001.00

Proposal #: 15-14626&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Papanikolopoulos, Nikolaos; Lim, Kelvin
O.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
(UMN)&lt;br/&gt;Title: RAPID: Remote Monitoring of Ebola Patients and Their
Treating Physicians &lt;br/&gt;Project Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, melding
proven technologies, aims to assist in an immediate challenge now facing those
engaged in direct patient care in the ongoing Ebola epidemic. Namely, employing
interactive machine vision technologies and intelligently encoded protective
gear to proactively assist health care providers (e.g., adhering to their
required NIH/CDC (Center for Disease Control) Safety Procedures-the explicit
movement sequences required for the proper donning of sterilized, protective
coverings, and afterwards for the safe, step-wise and controlled removal and
subsequent disposition of these now potentially lethal items). The crucial
importance of this very high standard was underscored recently by the infection
of two Dallas-area nurses where protocols were thought breached, and then by the
CDC?s response, which next imposed an enhanced buddy system to better ensure
future compliance. Notwithstanding, human monitors can sometimes lapse,
especially when procedures become routine, as time pressures mount. Fortunately,
incorporating respective lessons learned in the creation of an automated and
interactive buddy is a readily achievable next step, given the advances in
automated human activity and gesture recognition, with experience of the strict
procedures evolved in conjunction with tele-operational assistance methods for
domains such as surgery, and with modern graphical and human-friendly man-
machine interfaces. Obviously, this new knowledge serves a useful
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The relatively low cost in the
longer term should be noted. Even portable extensions to any environment can be
disproportionally costly or even catastrophic, particularly when participants
fail to adhere to strict standards (usually tedious and unwelcome). In industry
(e.g., clean rooms, nuclear sites, etc.), in medicine (e.g., operating
theaters), in the military, and in some research areas, the cost of recording
and registering sessions that compel the full compliance to required safety
measures might easily be offset by better outcomes, fewer accidents and reduced
insurance rates. This project contributes in building a coalition of large NSF
awardees to jointly address public health problems of national and global
significance using the state of the art in Computer Science. The UMN team will
assist in the urgent data collection regarding the effectiveness of the
protective gear used in Ebola-infected regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will enable the development of new quantitative crisis maps to
approximate local regional rates of infectious Ebola virus spreading in near
real time thereby enhancing the effective distribution of limited availability
of recently developed vaccines to mitigate the spread of Ebola. Furthermore, it
will provide a mechanism for validating and improving operational forecast
models of the CDC by comparisons with regional social media observations. It may
allow for disease surveillance and early detection among our third world
countries. Moreover, this project is expected to be generalizable to other
infectious virus conditions; the research enables exploiting social media health
data from future hand held devices. Although enough speculation exists about the
role of the gear, little data is available to push for changes in the protocols
or the gear itself. Beyond the present issue of Ebola, the proposed methodology
and the coalition building effort will support solutions in a wide range of
public health issues.