* 1514258
* RI: Medium: Robotic Assistance with Dressing using Simulation-Based Optimization
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Greg Turk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,199,987.00

The aging population, rising healthcare costs, and shortage of healthcare
workers in the United States create a pressing need for affordable and effective
personalized care. Physical disabilities due to illness, injury, or aging can
result in people having difficulty dressing themselves, and the healthcare
community has found that dressing is an important task for independent living.
The goal of this research is to develop techniques that enable robots to assist
people with putting on clothing, which is a challenging task for robots due to
the complexities of cloth, the human body, and robots. A key aspect of this
research is that robots will discover how they can help people by quickly trying
out many options in a computer simulation. Success in this research would make
progress towards robots capable of giving millions of people greater
independence and a higher quality of life. In addition to healthcare
applications, this research will result in better computer tools for fruitful
collaborations between robots and humans in other
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses efficient physics simulation
and optimization tools to substantially automate the design of assistive robots
for dressing. The approach considers the robot to be an assistive device that a
human learns to use. The system optimizes the assistive robot based on what a
particular human with impairments is capable of doing comfortably, rather than
what he/she typically does. This approach automatically optimizes personalized
assistive controllers for a particular user and article of clothing via
simulation. Due to frequent line-of-sight occlusion and the importance of
controlling forces applied to the user's body, controllers that use data-driven
haptic perception are trained using simulation-generated data. These
capabilities critically depend on advancements in the efficient physical
simulation of cloth, robots, and humans, as well as the discovery of appropriate
human motions for a given assistive robot. This work advances the state of the
art in assistive robotics, haptic perception, human modeling, optimization and
efficient physical simulation. Evaluation of the system is in simulation and in
the real world with test rigs that model aspects of dressing, a PR2 robot
dressing a humanoid robot, and a PR2 dressing able-bodied participants with
restricted motion.