* 1514965
* EAPSI: Understanding Habitat Use and Response to Human Settlement by Small Carnivores
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Stephanie Shih, Shih                    Stephanie
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research to understand how and why some of Taiwan?s small
carnivores adapt quite well to human disturbance, while others are less
successful. Carnivores are essential to functioning, healthy ecological
communities, so it is important to understand how they are doing in any
particular ecosystem. The study will investigate how these animals adjust their
diet, choice of habitat, and schedules, among other factors, depending on
proximity to human development. Taiwan, despite its relatively small size, is
richly diverse ecologically, but much of the island has been heavily deforested
for agriculture and urban development, which has reduced and fragmented wildlife
habitats. Nevertheless, Taiwan, like countries and cities all over the world,
continues to be under constant pressure to develop, leaving its remaining
forests vulnerable to further reduction and fragmentation. This research will be
conducted as part of an ongoing Ph.D. research project under the mentorship of
Dr. Pei-Jen Lee Shaner at National Taiwan Normal University. The methods and
principles of this project can be easily applied in order to understand the
ecology of urban landscapes, how human actions can alter wildlife, and how to
manage urban wildlife here in the United States.

Data regarding the activities of small carnivores and their prey will be
collected by camera trapping, gathering and analyzing scats, and recording scat
sample locations along transects in field sites. Scat analysis will be completed
using next-generation sequencing of scat samples, revealing genetic information
and diet composition, among other data. Our analysis will help reveal what
factors (e.g. canopy cover, vegetation type, prey availability, etc.) influence
distribution and niche use; the extent to which niches of different species
overlap and how they compare in pristine areas versus unprotected/developed
areas; and what factors explain success or failure in human-dominated habitats.
This project will employ inexpensive, noninvasive, and effective methods, and
contribute to existing literature on urban ecology. This NSF EAPSI award
supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration
with the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.