* 1514943
* EAPSI:Using Molecular Techniques to Understand Virulence of the Amphibian-Killing Fungus, Batrachochytrium Dendrobatidis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Caitlin McDonald, McDonald                Caitlin        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,378.00

The pathogenic fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), is responsible for
ongoing global amphibian population declines. It is capable of infecting over
500 amphibian species, however its ability to cause disease in such a diverse
range of hosts is still not fully understood. This is in part because there is
extensive variability within the fungal lineage. While some fungal isolates
cause severe disease and death, others appear to have little effect on the host.
In order to better understand this variation, this project will identify fungal
gene and protein expression corresponding to virulence in a range of Bd strains
from eastern Australia, a region of both high Bd prevalence and impact. This
research will be conducted at James Cook University in association with Dr. Lee
Berger, who has remained a leading expert on Bd since publishing the first
report of the pathogen in 1998.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As next-generation
sequencing technologies have become more accessible to studies involving non-
model systems, our understanding of Bd pathogenicity has improved. There is
growing evidence that secreted proteases and peptidases are involved in Bd?s
ability to invade and persist within the amphibian host. Moreover this reliance
on secreted virulence factors has been demonstrated in a range of other
dermatophytic fungal species. Because such mechanisms may play a key role in Bd
virulence, this study will quantify the Bd secretome, or the complete profile of
all proteins secreted by a cell or organism. Pathogenically and evolutionarily
distinct Australian Bd isolates will be grown under a variety of substrate
conditions. Using RNA sequencing-directed shotgun proteomics, the secretome of
each isolate will be characterized. Differential protein secretion will then be
quantified, and changes in the secretome will be correlated to known strain
virulence. This study will identify targets for future proteogenomic and
functional protein studies, in turn informing host-pathogen-environment dynamics
and related amphibian conservation efforts. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.