* 1514510
* Reducing Neural and Immune Threat Reactivity During Intergroup Mentoring in STEM
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jordan Leitner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 190,490.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship trains a young scientist exploring the strategies for
mitigating certain threats that arise due to intergroup mentoring, which is
often the case for under-represented minorities in the STEM fields. This
fellowship support is under the "Broadening Participation" track of the SBE
postdoctoral fellowships program.

Under-represented minorities (URMs) perform lower than their majority-group
counterparts across STEM domains. One factor that may contribute to URMs?
underperformance is that they are typically mentored by majority-group members,
a result of the numerical underrepresentation of URM faculty and upper-level
management in STEM. Critically, the intergroup nature of these mentoring
relationships is likely to activate discrimination-related threats and negative
affect for both mentors and mentees. Specifically, majority-group individuals
often worry about being perceived as prejudiced, and URMs in historically
stigmatized contexts often worry that they will face discrimination.
Consequently, rather than creating an opportunity for professional growth,
intergroup mentoring may present a threat for both mentors and mentees, and
impede progress for URMs in STEM. The goal of the current research is to promote
academic and professional success for URMs in STEM, and thus increase rates of
URM participation to generate a larger and more diverse STEM workforce.

The current research attempts to mitigate the threats experienced during
intergroup mentoring through self-distancing. Self-distancing is a self-
regulatory strategy wherein a person observes and analyzes the self from a 3rd
person perspective, and has been shown to reduce negative affect, and improve
communication skills. In the current studies, White and URM participants adopt
the role of mentors and students, respectively, and interact with one another.
Additionally, we manipulate the degree to which participants view their
mentoring interaction from a self-distanced perspective. To understand the
physiological mechanisms through which self-distancing influences mentoring
outcomes, the current research examines neural and immune reactivity.
Furthermore, to test the longer-term behavioral consequences of neural and
immune reactivity during a mentoring interaction, participants return to the lab
for a one-week follow-up session. These studies have the potential to reveal
basic mechanisms that drive important outcomes in interracial mentoring
relationships.