* 1514852
* EAPSI: Modifying Proteins to Investigate Key Intermediates in Oxygen Binding Enzymes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Matthew Wolf, Wolf                    Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Iron-containing heme proteins catalyze a wide variety of reactions in biology,
including binding and activating oxygen towards reacting with many molecules in
the body. These reactions are important for respiration, metabolism of drugs and
toxins, and breaking down hydrocarbons, among other functions. Although there
has been much research focused on trying to understand these reactions, little
is still known about the reactive "iron-oxo" intermediates that are crucial in
these mechanisms. This project aims to investigate these reactive intermediates
by modifying of the metal center and the protein scaffold of the stable heme
protein myoglobin and binding oxygen species to the metal center. This research
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Takashi Matsuo at the Nara Institute
of Science and Technology (NAIST). Dr. Matsuo's lab has years of experience in
protein modification and studying reactive oxygen intermediates, and the
expertise of his lab will be invaluable to the project.

By expressing the myoglobin mutants H64A and H64D, the active site pocket of
myoglobin will be opened up and a potential hydrogen bonding interaction with
the oxo or peroxo species can also be introduced. In addition to the active site
mutations, the native heme in myoglobin will be removed and ruthenium, rhodium,
and iridium porphyrins will be incorporated into the protein. Oxo and peroxo
transfer reagents such as hydrogen peroxide and meta-chloroperoxybenzoic acid
will be added to form high-valent metal-oxo and peroxo species. The larger
transition metals may stabilize the bound oxo and peroxo species, and allow
these species to be studied by a variety of spectroscopic methods. Finally, the
reactivity of the oxo and peroxo species will be studied through the addition of
appropriate substrates and measuring the total turnover numer and the rate of
substrate oxidation or oxygenation over time. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.