* 1514876
* EAPSI: Improving the Safety and Durability of Cable-supported Bridges in Wind
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Maria Gibbs, Gibbs                   Maria          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

Long span cable-supported footbridges are particularly vulnerable to wind-
induced failure due to their light and flexible nature. This project seeks to
identify key characteristics of a standardized suspension footbridge in order to
predict how the structure will respond during a wind event. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Ge Yaojun, a noted wind engineering
expert. State of the art wind tunnel facilities at Tongji University in Shanghai
will afford the unique opportunity to perform full-scale deck section wind
tunnel experiments which will be used to assess safety of this type of bridge in
the event of a wind storm and provide guidelines for span limits and wind
mitigation strategies. The dynamic characteristics of these footbridges are
widely unknown and no previous experimental investigation of the structures
under wind loading has been performed. Discovering their fundamental
characteristics will lay the groundwork for the structures to serve as a test
bed for the investigation of non-linear features in the behavior of flexible
bridge structures.

Developing a predictive wind analysis framework and ultimately a design standard
which incorporates wind vulnerability for flexible footbridges hinges on the
identification of bridge deck aerodynamic characteristics. The framework will
incorporate a numerical model built in ANSYS which uses flutter and buffeting
forces reliant on section model wind tunnel tests. Bridge deck motion will be
modeled with two degrees of freedom in the vertical and rotational directions.
These wind-induced loads will be modeled using both traditional and updated
schemes. These schemes require aerodynamic coefficients and aerodynamic and
aeroelastic transfer functions measured using section model tests in the wind
tunnel Access to full scale monitoring data from a number of existing
footbridges which incorporate this standard deck detail will allow for an
unprecedented look at how one can model these types of bridges in a hybrid wind
tunnel/computational approach and also the prospect of capturing any scaling
error that may distort response predictions compared to the observed behavior of
the actual structure under wind loads. This NSF EAPSI award support the research
of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.