* 1514512
* Modeling rich inter-image relationships in big visual collections
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Alexei Efros, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,906.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship supports a rising scientist in the interdisciplinary
area overlapping computer vision and psychology, with a research project that
investigates the web of relationships within visual data in both humans and
machines. To a human observer, no photograph is an island: it is connected to
the rest of the visual world by a web of similarities, associations, and other
relationships. For example, two photos of Paris share a certain similarity;
images of boats are associated with images of water; a photo of a tadpole and a
photo of a frog show the same organism at two stages of life. In each of these
cases, a human can readily reason about the link between two images. Not only
can people identify that a relationship exists, but can also identify the nature
of this relationship. These relationships shed light on how the human brain
organizes visual information, and also give insight into how to build
intelligent systems that automatically make visual connections. The latter will
bring the field closer to producing an intelligent visual web, able to organize
visual information in the same way as the current Internet is able to organize
text.

Computer vision scientists and psychologists have both studied relationships
between visual data, but from different directions. In computer vision, the
focus has been on models of natural image similarity. These models handle
complex stimuli but are usually limited to one simple kind of relationship,
namely similarity in appearance. Psychologists have studied a richer set of
relationships - association, causation, analogy, antonymy, transformation, etc.
- but their models usually only apply to simple, artificial stimuli. This
project unites the best of both fields by modeling subtle visual relationships
between complex, natural images. The objective is to model both which images
humans consider to be related and how are those images related. An additional
objective is to study how certain relationships, such as visual associations,
can arise in an unsupervised manner from natural visual experience. This will
help explain how humans might learn about the relationships in the first place.
Better models of inter-image relationships will have deep implications across
cognitive psychology. In particular, similarity and association play fundamental
roles in theories of human learning and memory. A sense of similarity underlies
our ability to learn from one visual experience and then apply our knowledge in
a future, similar setting. The associations made from the experience
additionally impact human memory of it. The present project also has
applications toward computer vision systems. Reverse image search has recently
become a popular tool. However, current systems are only able to retrieve look-
alike images. If the computer is instead able to retrieve images linked by more
diverse kinds of relationships, many possibilities open up. For example, one
could imagine a system that lets users navigate through artistic styles, or that
recommends shoes that match a pair of pants. If successful, this project could
pave the way toward a world-wide web of visual connections that parallels the
current web of hypertext connections.