* 1514460
* CAREER:  Management of Unstructured Information During Software Evolution
* CSE,CCF
* 08/10/2014,07/31/2016
* Andrian Marcus, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 140,451.00

Software is comprised of a multitude of artifacts; some of them are intended to
be read by the compiler, while many others are intended to be read by
developers. The user centric information is often expressed in natural language
and it is usually much larger in size than the source code. Given the amount of
unstructured data present in existing software systems, tools are necessary for
its storage, retrieval, and analysis, before it is delivered to the users. This
type of information is essential during software evolution, when developers need
it to understand the software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will define and
evaluate an infrastructure for the management of the textual information present
in software systems. The infrastructure will make use of Information Retrieval
techniques in combination with statistical and rule-based Natural Language
Processing methods and other text analysis techniques. The infrastructure will
be used do define a new type of conceptual model of a software system that will
complement the structural, behavioral, and architectural models, which can be
extracted and built with traditional analysis and modeling methods. The new
conceptual model and infrastructure will be used to define novel methodologies
and build tools to support a variety of software evolution tasks, such as:
change propagation in software, traceability link recovery between software
artifacts, error and change prediction, quality measurement, concept location,
refactoring, and program comprehension in general. The planned infrastructure
will offer a platform for researchers from different areas of computer science
(such as, software engineering and computational linguistics) to use state of
the art results from each field. The empirical work will result in a repository
of software artifacts and analysis data of textual nature from software to be
used to support rigorously controlled experimentation and benchmarking in the
research community.&lt;br/&gt;