* 1514503
* TWC: TTP Option: Medium: Collaborative: MALDIVES: Developing a Comprehensive Understanding of Malware Delivery Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Phillip Porras, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2021
* USD 649,777.00

The cybercriminal community is inarguably more organized, better resourced and
more motivated than ever to perpetrate massive-scale computer infections across
the Internet. The malware distribution systems that they control and operate are
characterized by their use of highly specialized suppliers and commoditized
malware services. As a consequence of this development, criminals with little
technical expertise can deploy and administer sophisticated exploit kits, and
instantiate malicious-content advertising (malvertising) campaigns that
surreptitiously infect hundreds of thousands of innocent victims. The MALDIVES
project is developing a new generation of technologies to provide deeper
insights into how these malware distribution systems are deployed, operated, and
interlinked with open web sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MALDIVES project is
organized as a sequence of five attack observation lablets (ATOLLs) which are
collectively designed to acquire an in-depth understanding of the key stages in
contemporary malware dissemination infrastructures. The Platform Acquisition
Observatory (PLATO) is focused on studying the deployment phase of the server-
side infection infrastructures. This observatory extends web-application-
vulnerability mimicry systems with a dynamic exploit-kit interrogation system,
and adds automated intelligence tools to understand subsequent victim infection
strategies. The Victim Enticement Scheme Evaluation Lablet (VESSEL) is focused
on studying the targeting phase of the malware infection lifecycle. It develops
tools and conducts measurements on various enticement schemes, such as Search
Engine Optimization (SEO) poisoning and malvertising. The Traffic Redirection
Observation Lablet (TROLL) is focused on the delivery phase and builds active
and passive techniques to measure malware-related traffic redirection chains.
The Exploit Kit Interrogation Environment (EXPLORE) builds automated probes to
facilitate the detection and measurement of professionally designed automated
infection services. The Defensive Strategies Investigation Lablet (DISTILL)
investigates novel malware-defense capabilities based on the insights acquired
from prior lablets.