* 1514689
* Self-Assembly of Block Copolymer Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Karl Glasner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 247,998.00

This award supports the research program of the Principal Investigator in the
area of pattern formation in block copolymer systems. Block copolymers are
molecular structures formed by bonding together two or more different polymers.
Incompatibilities between different blocks lead to a variety of patterns and
organization on nanoscopic scales, which in turn leads to a number of different
material properties. This project builds and studies theoretical models for the
assembly of block copolymers into a variety of microscopic architectures. This
will lead in turn to the development of formulas that connect molecular
properties of polymers to mechanical and morphological behaviors at a larger
scale, which will allow prediction and engineering of new materials formed from
patterned copolymer phases and aggregates. There are a number of nanoscale
fabrication and biotechnological applications of this approach, including
nanolithography, photonics, electronic storage systems, molecular-sized
machines, controlled drug delivery, and synthetic biological
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Defect evolution of bulk copolymer phases and
orientational ordering is studied in the context of computations performed with
reduced dimensional models for hexagonal and lamellar geometries. The effects of
external fields will also be incorporated into this model-reduction framework.
Copolymer aggregates such as micelles and vesicles will be studied using
analytic techniques for stability and bifurcation, as well as large scale
numerical simulation. Models for amphiphilic bilayers and heterogeneous
membranes will also be constructed and analyzed in a similar framework. The
project will broadly impact experimental investigations and the design of
manufacturing processes, as well as provide educational opportunities for
graduate and postdoctoral researchers.