* 1514704
* RAPID: Value of Information and Structured Decision-Making for Management of Ebola
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2017
* Ottar Bjornstad, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

During an infectious disease outbreak, such as the 2014 outbreak of Ebola virus
in West Africa, numerous mathematical models are created to predict the
magnitude, breadth, and spatial extent of disease and to inform public health
officials on how to best utilize and distribute resources. Depending on the
models and the parameters of the data, they can predict vastly different
outcomes. This poses a significant challenge for policy-makers to interpret and
apply these tools. This research team will utilize the strengths of existing
prediction models and will quantify the uncertainty in decision-making for each
of the various models. The investigators will simulate alternative public health
interventions using current published prediction models for the 2014 Ebola
outbreak. This method will not only provide an immediate tool for the current
outbreak, but it establishes a formal framework for comparing projections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses scientific uncertainty across
numerous published Ebola virus models and will evaluate the ability of each
model to achieve its stated objective. The researchers will systematically
identify the areas of uncertainty in the models to target key sources of
disagreement in management recommendations. This will be done using value of
information theory and applying value of perfect information analysis. The
research team plans to expand the scope of their work to include new Ebola
models as they become published. The results will not select or produce a single
?best? model, but will rather articulate and reduce the uncertainty that impedes
success in each of the models.