* 1514351
* EAGER:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Developmental mechanisms of perception and language in the infant brain
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2017
* Richard Aslin, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 04/30/2017
* USD 215,815.00

Understanding what infants understand about objects and words that they
encounter in the world has been an important goal in developmental science, but
the field understands relatively little about how infants perform either of
these two tasks. Several neuroimaging methods have been used to determine how
adult brains recognize familiar objects and words, but most of these methods are
not suitable for use with infants. The goal of this research project is to
deploy two neuroimaging methods that are amenable for use with infants, as a
novel way to gain insights into the fundamental brain mechanisms that enable
object recognition and word understanding in 3- to 12-month-old infants. One
technique, electroencephalography (EEG) involves measuring electrical activity
generated by the brain from sensors on the scalp. The other, functional near-
infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), shines near-infrared light through the skull and
measures how it is absorbed by the brain at each location as an index of how
active that part of the brain is. Recording both these measures while infants
watch and listen to stimuli will provide important insights into how the infant
brain processes this information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EEG has been in use with
infants for many years, whereas functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is
a relatively newer non-invasive neuroimaging technique ideally suited for use
with infants. fNIRS, like fMRI, provides a signature of metabolic activity in
localized regions of the brain but is more suitable for infants because it
delivers light to the scalp via a tight-fitting cap. In this project, EEG and
fNIRS will be used to measure electrical and metabolic activity in the brain as
infants watch objects of various categories such as vehicles or furniture, or
listen to words that they know or do not know (or nonsense words). The key
analysis tool is a suite of machine-learning algorithms from the field of
computer science that take the EEG or fNIRS signals to determine which
components of these signals best predict, on a trial by trial basis, what the
infant was seeing or hearing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the proposed
research will localize in the brain where encoding of visual objects and spoken
words takes place and over what time period after stimulus onset that processing
occurs. These are fundamental aspects of object and language processing have
eluded study in the human infant because of methodological challenges.
Establishing protocols for analyzing data generated by these two methods will
contribute to analytic techniques available for future infant brain research.
Identifying normative properties of these processing mechanisms in the infant
brain will set the stage for future research investigating how the developing
brain is affected by variations in early experience, by compensation after
injury, and by a variety of genetic anomalies.