* 1514254
* NeTS: Medium: Provisioning, Enforcing, and Pricing Temporal Service Differentiation in Virtualized Networked Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Roch Guerin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 610,228.00

Cloud computing has transformed how we approach computing. Its uses range from
large-scale scientific computations, to e-commerce, to data-intensive
applications, to web-hosting. This diversity is a measure of its success, but
also represents one of the major challenges it faces. Cloud computing strength
is through the sharing of computing resources, but sharing must be controlled.
Imagine financial transactions or real-time medical imaging processing
experiencing slow-downs because of, say, a high volume batch application.
Current solutions control sharing at a very coarse level, e.g., the number of
processor cores an application is entitled to, or how much memory or network
bandwidth it can consume. This coarse control has been shown insufficient to
offer strong response time guarantees. This project will design and implement
solutions that address this short-coming, and in the process extend the cost and
performance benefits of cloud computing to critical applications with real-time
requirements. The project will provide a comprehensive understanding of the
dependencies that exist among cloud computing resources (CPU, memory, network
bandwidth, etc.), and devise scheduling and resource management solutions that
account for those dependencies to provide fine grain control of the response
time afforded to cloud users. A prototype implementation and a testbed will be
used to demonstrate the applicability and feasibility of the
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore the complex resource
interactions that arise in virtualization technologies at the core of cloud
computing solutions. The focus is on enforcing service guarantees for I/O
operations in virtualized systems, as they play a critical role in delivering
end-to-end computing guarantees. Specifically, the project will characterize the
resource dependencies involved in I/O operations in a virtualized environment,
and develop mechanisms to manage them effectively. Sample questions the project
will investigate include the relationship between I/O performance and the number
of CPU cores allocated to I/O operations, the overhead of assigning different
threads to traffic from different VMs and traffic classes, the impact on
performance of different interrupt handling strategies, etc. The implementation
cost (overhead) of different scheduling and resource management mechanisms will
also be quantified to enable informed trade-offs between efficiency and resource
guarantees. A prototype implementation will be carried out in the Xen
environment, and demonstrated over a local testbed consisting of eight 16-core
computers with network connectivity ranging from 1Gbps to
40Gbps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Cloud computing already plays a
major role in our modern society, but it has the potential to grow even further
in scale and scope (e.g., optimizing the efficiency of our electrical grid or
controlling the flow of traffic to minimize congestion in urban settings).
Realizing the cloud's full potential, however, requires that it evolves to offer
predictable guarantees. This project will develop solutions towards realizing
this goal, and in the process extend the benefits of cloud computing to new
applications of vital importance to our society. Transfer of those solutions to
commercially used cloud systems will be pursued through the delivery of modules
aimed at the open-source Xen system (on which Amazon EC2 is based). The project
will also target improving students' ability to leverage cloud computing. It
will develop educational lab modules that give students direct hands-on
experience with the complex interactions that arise in virtualized environments.
The project will also be used to foster students' interest in cloud computing
research by offering summer research opportunities to undergraduate students.
Special emphasis will be given to recruiting women and under-represented
minorities.