* 1514612
* Seeing Scientifically: Scaffolding Observation of Complex Visual Phenomena
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Kevin Eliceiri, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,981.00

The Seeing Scientifically project will research a new way of supporting museum
visitor experiences so they can have authentic scientific observation of live
microscopic specimens. By adapting existing computational imaging techniques
from current biological research, the project aims to encourage and support
visitors in observing scientifically, that is, in asking productive questions,
interpreting image-rich information, and making inferences from visual evidence
that increasingly characterizes current biological research. The scaffolding
(e.g., visual cues or information supporting learning) will consist of a system
of virtual guides and prompts that are responsive to what visitors see. The
scaffolding prompts will be overlaid on a real time, high-density image of a
live sample that the visitor is investigating with a research grade microscope.
Project research will contribute early knowledge on ways to scaffold informal
learners in the practice of authentic scientific observation with the complex,
dynamic visual evidence that scientists themselves see using the equipment and
techniques they use. Project research and resources will be widely disseminated
to learning science researchers, informal science practitioners, and other
interested audiences through publications, conference presentations and sharing
of resources via the NSF-supported informalscience.org website and other
relevant websites.

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants. The project
will prototype an innovative microscope exhibit that scaffolds visitors in
scientific observation of live specimens and their biological processes. The
overarching hypothesis is that scientific observation of real-time visual
phenomena can deeply engage learners with the content, tools and practices of
modern science, which increasingly rely on image-based data. Through three
rounds of iterative prototype development and evaluation, the project will
generate early findings for the following related questions: (1) what are
promising ways of scaffolding observation of live specimens at an unmediated
exhibit; (2) How can computational imaging techniques be integrated into a
microscope exhibit to engage and scaffold learners to ask productive questions,
interpret what they see, and make evidence-based inferences from complex,
dynamic images. Data will be collected and analyzed by coding think-aloud
interviews with visitors concerning their interest in and description of the
biological phenomenon observed; coding of think aloud transcripts of visitor
questions types and answers, relevant features noted, inferences and scaffold
use; and statistical comparison of holding time, questions asked, answers,
inferences, and scaffold use. Project findings will seed more rigorous research
on the combination of scaffolding and computational imaging techniques effective
for supporting scientific observation in image-rich areas of science.