* 1514606
* EDT: Mathematical Methods for Water Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Ning Lin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This project provides graduate students with tools needed to recognize
opportunities for development of mathematical approaches to challenges related
to global environmental change, from physics to biology to society, using as the
common denominator the subject of water. These environmental and societal
challenges involve many complex factors, and students will be trained to apply
and implement mathematical strategies that effectively address these
complexities. Essential to the training will be opportunities afforded by visits
to important European policy centers, such as the International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis (Austria) and the Stockholm Resilience Center, where
policy issues are articulated and integrated with scientific analyses. The
overarching goal of this project is to offer an avenue to train talented
mathematical scientists to contribute substantively to the understanding of the
interactions between society and nature and to formulate well-founded strategies
to manage these interactions to assure a sustainable future. This project has
received co-funding from the Global Venture Fund of the Office of International
Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical modeling of the
problems addressed in this project involves a variety of tools, from game theory
and network theory to deterministic and stochastic partial differential
equations. The application of powerful analytical and numerical methods to the
challenges of modeling water as a societal resource promises significant
advances in policy and planning. On the other hand, the questions raised by
societal challenges related to water will require new directions of research in
game theory and stochastic and deterministic partial differential equations,
contributing to advances in mathematics. The interactions among mathematicians
and scientists in this project will bring to bear powerful new mathematical
perspective and techniques to societal problems surrounding the crucial resource
that is water.