* 1514545
* I-Corps:  Integrated Electronic Curriculum for Imaginative, Reasoning, and Inquiry-based Science Learning (eIRIS)
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Sue Carter, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

While many schools are now adopting interactive electronic books (eBooks) to
reduce cost and increase the interactiveness of textbooks, these textbooks are
largely designed to teach science terminology and facts that meet the
requirements of standardized testing. These books are largely decoupled from the
interdisciplinary data-oriented analysis prevalent in modern scientific careers.
In addition, eBooks and the internet have perpetuated the replacement of hands-
on labs with simulated labs in order to further cut costs,which undermines the
teaching of scientific discovery, error, and ethics. This limited approach to
science learning does not take advantage of new technology and big data
resources that make low cost science equipment and real scientific data readily
available to everyone. The technology developed by this I-Corps team proposes to
connect these two science education tools together into one affordable
package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed eIRIS technology includes
interdisciplinary electronic books focused on solving real scientific challenges
using math skills, technology tools, and big data available on the internet or
taken by the students themselves, accompanying digital teacher aids, including
web-based training classes and lecture slides, and lab supplies bundled by lab
activity, including digital scientific sensors used by scientists, all
integrated into one affordable package. eIRIS will provide everything that the
millions of homeschool students and K-12 public school communities with
affordable hands-on interdisciplinary science education currently lack. The
impact of this technology will be the emergence of new generation of young
scientists that are more prepared with the interdisciplinary, analytical, and
technical skills to succeed in college-level science classes, increasing
diversity and reducing the cost of higher education through reduced time-to-
degree.