* 1514940
* EAPSI: Understanding How and Why Visual Exposure Reduces Prejudice
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* David Lick, Lick                    David          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Despite decades of research and applied efforts, prejudice continues to occur at
epidemic rates around the globe, resulting in serious mental and physical health
deficits for victims. Recent evidence suggests that repeated visual exposure to
several members of a disadvantaged social group reduces prejudice against the
group at large. However, the causal mechanisms driving this effect remain
unclear. How and why does visual exposure reduce prejudice? Working in
collaboration with a leading expert on the effects of visual exposure to human
features (Dr. Gillian Rhodes; University of Western Australia), the funded
project will test whether visual exposure reduces prejudice by enhancing the
ease with which perceivers can process members of disadvantaged social groups.
Perceptual ease is generally associated with favorable evaluations, so to the
extent that visual exposure enhances perceptual ease, it should result in
prejudice reduction. Data in support of these hypotheses will provide the first
evidence for a causal mechanism by which visual exposure improves social
evaluations, offering novel information that is crucial to the development of
techniques aimed at reducing prejudice and its harmful consequences.

The researcher will investigate perceptual fluency as a mechanism by which
visual exposure reduces prejudice against disadvantaged groups. In recent years,
scientists have documented two facts relevant to this topic: (1) visual
adaptation molds preferences, such that repeated exposure to a given stimulus
causes that stimulus to appear normative and subsequently enhances evaluative
judgments of it, and (2) stimuli that are easy to process (perceptually fluent)
tend to be evaluated more favorably than stimuli that are difficult to process
(perceptually disfluent). Two studies aim to unite these observations by
examining fluency as a proximal mechanism by which visual adaptation reduces
prejudice. Study 1 will test whether visual adaptation to gender-atypical female
faces enables perceivers to categorize the sex of those faces more easily,
thereby enhancing evaluations of them. Study 2 will experimentally manipulate
fluency by obstructing gender-atypical faces with visual noise, testing whether
visual adaptation fails to enhance interpersonal evaluations of gender-atypical
female faces that are intentionally made to be disfluent. Collectively, these
studies will provide new information relevant to social psychological theories
of impression formation, cognitive psychological theories of visual adaptation,
and applied research aimed at prejudice reduction. Indeed, evidence that visual
adaptation enhances evaluations of stigmatized social groups by increasing
perceptual fluency would aid in the development of cost-effective interventions
that reduce the widespread prevalence and harmful consequences of interpersonal
bias. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and
is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.