* 1514673
* RAPID: Optimal allocation of both non-pharmaceutical and pharmaceutical interventions toward controlling Ebola virus transmission in West Africa
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2014,02/29/2016
* Alison Galvani, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 199,890.00

This research will evaluate the success of various pharmaceutical and public
health strategies in the 2014 West Africa Ebola outbreak in order to most
effectively control and reduce the spread of disease. The investigators will
develop a mathematical model that considers variability in a person?s
infectiousness, the variation in transmission that occurs in a hospital or
community setting, as well as the differences in transmission due to geography
and spatial variation. This proposed tool will utilize current data from the
outbreak in West Africa to accurately reflect the on-the-ground situation.
Consequently, results from this research will provide immediately relevant and
real-time information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are utilizing
contact tracing data collected by the Liberian Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare. This dataset of 1360 cases and 7400 traced contacts from the current
outbreak will be used to parameterize the model. The data will provide
information on individual behavior changes in response to disease spread,
between-community movement and self-quarantining measures. Pharmaceutical data
including experimental vaccines, as well as community based antiviral therapies
such as ZMapp and favipiravir will be evaluated in the model. The following non-
pharmaceutical public health interventions will be evaluated in the model:
quantity of public health personnel and ambulance services, magnitude of
treatment center capacity, and the allocation and efficacy of household
protective kits. This tool will offer important information to public health
professionals to assist them in making critical decisions on resource allocation
in order to maximize impact and public health outcomes.