* 1514994
* EAPSI:Studying Diversity and Evolution of Hakes, a High Priority Group for Fisheries Conservation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Adela Roa-Varon, Roa-Varon               Adela          Y
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Even though hakes are some of the most important commercially harvested fishes
in the world, identifying their species remains a very problematic task due to
their conserved morphology, which results in difficulties in assessing species
distributions and stocks. The results of this study will provide a necessary
underpinning to conserve biological diversity and optimize the use of fisheries
resources in a sustainable way. This is particularly timely because of dramatic
declines in hakes abundance and commercial landings. The research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Chenhong Li at the Shanghai Ocean
University. Dr. Li is a noted expert in molecular genetics who has developed the
molecular technique that will be used in this study.

No comprehensive phylogenetic analysis that includes representatives of all the
families among Gadiformes and all species of Hakes (Family Merlucciidae) has
been conducted. This limits the understanding of the extent of the family, its
taxonomic composition, and its phylogenetic placement within the Gadiformes.
Many aspects of hake biology and management are hindered by the confusing
taxonomy of the group. The potential of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
approaches for molecular data collection in systematic studies has yet to be
realized, and we expect that this study, using Gadiformes and hakes as a model
clade, will result in identification of new loci that are phylogenetically
informative at different hierarchical levels of fishes by combining a larger
taxonomic sampling and the state-of-the-art molecular techniques (sequence
capture probes combined with NGS). This study will result in a better
understanding of the evolution of commercially valuable fishes, which is
necessary for effective fisheries management and the preservation of
reproductive and genetic diversity. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research
of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.