* 1514778
* EAPSI:Transgenerational Impacts of Coral Bleaching on Larval Dispersal and Recruitment Success
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Alyson Kuba, Kuba                    Alyson         G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Coral reefs are diverse and valuable ecosystems; however, coral reefs are
experiencing degradation due to many stressors, including ocean warming. As a
result of ocean warming, corals become stressed and can bleach. Coral bleaching
occurs when the symbiotic algae living in the coral tissues are expelled,
causing the coral to appear white and lose its major source of food. Previous
studies show that bleaching negatively impacts coral reproduction. However, it
remains unknown if different timings of bleaching events equally affect coral
reproduction. Additionally, the transgenerational impacts of coral bleaching
have never been quantified. This project will assess the impact of bleaching at
different times of the reproductive cycle on reproduction, larval survival,
larval dispersal, and juvenile survival and growth. This research will be
conducted at Sesoko Marine Station in Okinawa, Japan in collaboration with Dr.
Saki Harii at University of the Ryukyus. Dr. Harii is an expert is coral ecology
and will provide field access and facilities for the research. The research
outputs will contribute to transform existing predictions of the persistence of
coral populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral populations recover from
disturbances through asexual and sexual reproduction; however, as increased
temperature affects coral reproduction, larval survival and dispersal potential
the transgenerational effects of bleaching will dictate the future rates of
recovery. This project will assess the transgenerational impacts of coral
bleaching in the brooding coral Pocillopora damicornis. Larval survival and
competency dynamics data will be used to calibrate dispersal models and project
self-recruitment and dispersal potential. It is hypothesized that bleaching will
decrease the energy allocated to eggs, leading to reduced larval survival and
potentially alter rates of acquisition of competency. These changes in survival
and competency dynamics would have significant impacts on dispersal potential
and recruitment success, thus influencing population dynamics and recovery
rates. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.