* 1514052
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Exposing and Mitigating Cross-Channel Attacks that Exploit the Convergence of Telephony and the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Roberto Perdisci, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,939.00

Rapid advances in technology now enable simultaneous access to both telephony
and Internet services from smart phone devices that people carry with them at
all times. Although this convergence of telephony with the Internet offers many
benefits, it also provides cyber criminals the ability to develop increasingly
sophisticated attacks that combine resources from both the telephony and
Internet channels. For instance, text messages containing Internet links can
direct unsuspecting users to malicious websites, inexpensive or free voice
services can be used to carry out phone fraud campaigns, and caller-ID spoofing
and autodialing services can be used to make calls to launch large-scale attacks
that are difficult to detect and trace. Such attacks often remain undetected for
long periods of time, thus undermining the higher level of trust that has
traditionally been associated with the telephony
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a ground-truth driven
approach to study and understand cross-channel attacks that make use of both the
Internet and telephony channels. A key goal is to expose any overlap in tactics
and infrastructure used in cross-channel attacks with the extensively observed
and studied Internet-only threats. Several data sources of cross-channel abuse
are used in this study, including crowd-sourced intelligence and telephone-
honeypot data. Much of the currently available telephony abuse information is
unstructured and its accuracy or completeness is not known. The researchers are
mining multiple sources of abuse information and introduce new methods to better
understand, detect, and track attacks that are carried out across the telephony
and Internet channels. The effectiveness of correlating threat intelligence
available from each of these channels to improve defenses for both is also
investigated. By studying the properties of the malicious infrastructure that
facilitates cross-channel attacks, this project will enable both researchers and
operational communities to gain increased situational awareness and develop
techniques for mitigating and defending against this new class of threats.