* 1514964
* EAPSI: Understanding Crystal Cluster Origins in Magmas Erupted from Toba Caldera, Earth's Youngest Supervolcano
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Olivia Barbee, Barbee                  Olivia         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Supereruptions, the most violent volcanic eruptions on Earth, are fed by magma
reservoirs that contain incredibly large volumes of silica-rich magma. Crystals
formed within these magmas and found in their eruptive products contain
important information on the processes that lead to such devastating eruptions.
This project will investigate the storage conditions and dynamics of the silicic
magma reservoir that explosively erupted the voluminous Youngest Toba Tuff (YTT)
74,000 years ago and then quiescently extruded several small rhyolite lava domes
at Toba Caldera (Sumatra, Indonesia). These Toba magmas contain unusual quartz
crystal clusters that likely record important evidence for the development of
their host magma. Quartz clusters have seldom been recognized or studied in
silicic volcanic rocks from other caldera-forming magma systems, and thus the
Toba quartz clusters will be examined to understand their origin and the
implications they have for silicic magma evolution and eruption potential. This
research will be conducted at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore
under the guidance of Dr. Caroline Bouvet de Maisonneuve, an expert on the use
of crystal-scale data to determine magma storage conditions and eruption
dynamics.

Petrography and cathodoluminescence imaging reveal that quartz clustering is an
important process affecting 40-60% of YTT and lava dome crystals.
Crystallographic orientations of individual quartz ?units? within clusters will
be acquired to identify potential mechanisms for cluster formation, as well as
the type of environment from which they originated. Trace element analysis will
be used to chemically fingerprint each unit in a given cluster to determine
whether the individual units formed under similar magma conditions, and thus
potentially at the same time. Results will provide important constraints on the
petrological and rheological evolution and dynamics of the Toba magma reservoir
and are expected to highlight a transition from pre- to post-caldera magma
storage conditions and eruption potential. Toba quartz cluster features will
also be compared to those reported from solidified subsurface magma bodies to
provide insight on the connection between volcanic rocks and their plutonic
counterparts. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Singapore.