* 1514793
* EAPSI: Discovering Novel Functions of Protein Repeats Critical to Gene Expression
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Michael Babokhov, Babokhov                Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Understanding how the genome is read by the cellular machinery to allow the cell
to survive is a major focus of biological research. One specific enzyme of the
cellular machinery contains an unusual region of highly repetitive structure
critical to gene expression. However the reason for having so many repetitions
of the same structure or the specific function of individual repeats is
currently unknown. This project will develop novel genetic tools to investigate
the role of these repeats in controlling gene expression. The development and
application of this approach will be performed in collaboration with Dr. Hiroaki
Kato of the Shimane University School of Medicine in Japan, an expert in the
control of gene expression by the cellular machinery. Results obtained from this
work will drive further understanding of the role of protein repeats during gene
expression in both healthy and sick cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress
through the transcription cycle is tightly regulated by the heptad repeats of
the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. These repeats, numbering 26 in yeast
and 52 in humans, are post-translationally modified to recruit additional
protein complexes to the site of transcription. This project will investigate
specific stretches of repeats to understand if identical protein repeats can
have unique functions in recruiting protein factors. Collaboration with Dr. Kato
will provide access to the fission yeast model organism to complement previous
studies in budding yeast. A new system for studying RNA polymerase II based upon
a method used in budding yeast will be developed in fission yeast. The system
will then be applied to study repeat-specific protein recruitment during
heterochromatin silencing ? a pathway present in fission yeast (and shared with
higher eukaryotes) but absent in budding yeast. This comparative approach will
uncover additional spatial mechanisms of the C-terminal domain repeats in
regulating the activity of RNA polymerase II. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).