* 1514434
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Information Compression in Algorithm Design and Statistical Physics
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Alistair Sinclair, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 286,298.00

The existence of connections between probabilistic algorithms, statistical
physics and information theory has been known for decades and has yielded a
number of unexpected breakthroughs. Recent discoveries of the PIs and other
researchers give clear indications that these connections go much deeper than
previously thought. A key new idea is the realization that stochastic local
search algorithms can be judged by their capacity to compress the randomness
they consume, with convergence following as a consequence of compressibility.
Further exploration of this idea is expected to have significant impact, both
conceptual and technical, in multiple scientific fields. This includes algorithm
design by information theoretic methods, the study of phase transitions in
statistical mechanical systems based on information bottleneck arguments, and
non-constructive proofs of existence of combinatorial objects. The project will
offer a wide range of research opportunities at various levels of sophistication
for graduate and undergraduate students in three state universities.

Information compression arguments have recently found striking applications in
computer science and combinatorics. A glowing example is Moser's proof of the
algorithmic Lovasz Local Lemma, which suggested an entirely new way of reasoning
about randomized algorithms. Inspired by the work of Moser, one of the PIs with
a collaborator has very recently created a general framework for analyzing
stochastic local search algorithms using information compression. The framework
is purely algorithmic, completely bypassing the Probabilistic Method. Besides
helping to analyze the running times of existing algorithms it can also be used
as a powerful new tool for designing novel, non-obvious randomized algorithms.
The proposed research further develops this framework with the aim of unearthing
completely new applications in computer science and combinatorics, while
establishing mathematically rigorous connections to statistical physics.
Concrete examples of such applications to be investigated include new tools for
bounding the mixing time of Markov chains and algebraic connections between
randomized algorithms and the classical theory of phase transitions in
statistical physics.