* 1514969
* EAPSI:Investigating Social Influence Dynamics of Retweet Interactions on Chinese Microblogging Platform, Weibo
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Maria Glenski, Glenski                 Maria
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Society increasingly relies on social platforms such as microblogging sites for
the basis of decision making and as news sources. Reviews, ratings, and comments
on these platforms are used to decide which news story to read, product to buy,
or service to use. The reliance on crowd-sourced opinion and information to make
decisions or form opinions leaves users vulnerable to social influence. The high
use of microblogging sites such as Twitter and Weibo to broadcast and receive
such crowd-sourced and crowd-aggregated information increases the importance of
discovering how social influence impacts users on microblogging platforms. The
project will investigate how social influence affects users of Weibo, a popular
Chinese microblogging platform, through an analysis of how links formed by
retweet interactions evolve over time. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Jie Tang at Tsinghua University in Beijing, China. Dr.
Tang is an expert on social network analysis and will provide access to unique
Weibo retweet data to support the analysis.

Analysis of the evolution of connections over time will be completed using a
graph representation of user connections through retweet interactions. Since
social influence dynamics can affect and be affected by the temporal aspect of
user interactions, these graphs will be time dependent so as to effectively
represent how the connections between users grows over time. Analysis will
consider factors such as the number of shared sibling nodes (in this case, users
who have "retweet" interactions with a given user), the time at which
interactions took place, the time lapse between the original posting and the
reposting of content, and the newly shared sibling nodes after the "retweet"
interaction occurred. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S.
graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of
Science and Technology.