* 1514115
* Toward a Further Understanding and Improved Forecasting of Coastal Quasi-linear Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Kelly Lombardo, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2019
* USD 291,988.00

There has been a considerable amount of study about thunderstorm complexes and
how they intensify and sustain themselves over the continental United States.
Less research has been conducted on how those complexes interact with the
cooler, more stable air of the marine atmospheric boundary layer along coastal
regions. This study will consist of numerical model simulations of thunderstorms
as they move offshore. The importance of this research lies in the fact that
these types of thunderstorm complexes contribute to a significant portion of
severe weather reports in heavily populated coastal areas of the Mid-Atlantic
and Northeastern United States. The main outcome of this project will be an
understanding of the factors that lead to the decay of the thunderstorms near
the shoreline, survival of the storms until just offshore, or whether the
systems can sustain themselves well out into the ocean. The lead researcher will
interact with the National Weather Service and other government and private
entities to ensure that the knowledge is transferred to decision-makers. This
project will also contribute to the future scientific workforce through the
training of a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher plans to
improve understanding and prediction of evolving quasi-linear convective systems
(QLCS) as they move offshore from inland regions and interact with the marine
atmospheric boundary layer (MABL) over coastal waters. The project will
systematically study the storm scale physical processes through idealized
numerical modeling using a cloud resolving model. The magnitude and depth of the
vertical wind shear, the strength of the diabatically generated cold pool
associated with the convective storm, and the structure of the sea breeze-MABL
boundary will be altered in the suite of idealized numerical sensitivity tests.
Some of the scientific questions that motivate the study include: Is the low- or
mid-level shear more influential on the evolution of the QLCS? What is the
source region of the air being ingested into the QLCS? How do the QLCS
characteristics change as the system interacts with the MABL boundary and as it
moves offshore?