* 1514275
* CIF: Medium: Fundamental Properties of Millimeter Wave Networks: Signal, Interference, and Connectivity
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Robert Heath, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2020
* USD 999,923.00

Cellular communication networks have become one of society's most important and
complex technologies. Mobile data usage has been approximately doubling every
year since about 2008, which corresponds to a 1,000 times increase over a
decade. To meet this insatiable demand, much more bandwidth is required for
cellular systems. This requires going to (much) higher frequencies, since there
is very little unused spectrum below about 10 GHz, especially at peak times in
urban areas. Significant amounts of lightly used spectrum is available in the
"millimeter wave" (mmW) spectrum, defined here as being above 25 GHz. There are
numerous fundamental technical challenges in mobile data communication above 25
GHz, and the goal of this project is to explore these fundamental challenges and
build new tools to overcome them. The research undertaken should considerably
impact the telecommunications industry and society as a whole, by enabling an
entirely new paradigm for cellular communication networks. In addition to
theoretical contributions, the investigators will pursue an aggressive
technology transition plan through their numerous government and industry
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new mathematical and
analysis tools that uncover the potential of mmW cellular networks. The research
agenda is built on the belief that the wealth of tools developed for lower
frequency systems are insufficient to capture key mmW signal propagation
features, specifically high directionality and blockage. The research is
structured as three inter-related thrusts, each with several proposed research
tasks: mmW signal strength, mmW interference, and the mmW network connectivity.
The research tasks are unified around several technical themes that cut across
all three thrusts: (1) modeling mmW networks in 3D, including the obstacles for
which statistical blocking models will be developed and validated with real
building data; (2) accounting for signal and interference correlation in
performance analysis, which will be significant in mmW due to their main
randomizing factors being blocking and beam alignment rather than fading and
shadowing; (3) accounting for and addressing the possibly severe effects of
mobility on beam alignment and network connectivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developed theories will be used to devise useful models, parametrized by real
building data to facilitate fast performance evaluation. Features of practical
mmW transceivers like beam adaptation, mobility, and interference cancellation
will be included and used to study key design tradeoffs. The new mathematical
framework developed in this proposal will allow transparent and comprehensive
performance analysis of mmW cellular systems, and enable the development and
fair comparison of new communication techniques.