* 1514591
* EAGER: Fluctuations and dissipation in nonlinear mesoscopic vibrational systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Michael Roukes, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2018
* USD 280,000.00

Non-technical abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's technology allows the
fabrication of devices with sizes on the order of nanometers that are used in a
variety of applications such as light modulation and mass measurements in labs-
on-a-chip. The functioning of these nano electro-mechanical systems, or NEMS,
can currently be fairly well understood using the laws of classical mechanics
first developed by Newton. However, as the device size continues to shrink new
effects will emerge that govern their behavior. For very small devices Newton's
laws are no longer valid and the more mysterious and counterintuitive laws of
quantum mechanics will govern the behavior. In addition, fluctuations and non-
linearity's in the device will become more important. This EAGER brings together
an experimental and theoretical physicist to develop new analytical tools and
experimental methods to understand, predict and control NEMS when fluctuations
and non-linear behavior become important. This will have important practical
consequences as these devices are used for mass, charge and force measurements,
accurate frequency sources and electro-optic modulators. Graduate students
involved in this project will learn state of the art experimental and
theoretical techniques and will gain valuable experience working in an
experimental-theoretical collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEMS are the best characterized platform for studies of
quantum and classical fluctuations far from equilibrium, including such
phenomena as interstate switching and optomechanical cooling and heating.
However, there remain major questions concerning the very origin of the
fluctuations and the mechanisms of dissipation in these systems, as well as the
interplay of fluctuations, dissipation, and nonlinearity. Conventional theories
of open quantum and classical systems are insufficient, as they do not
adequately describe substantially nonlinear vibrations and the effects of non-
Gaussian fluctuations. The research supported by this grant will develop
theoretical and experimental means for separating and identifying eigenfrequency
fluctuations and studying their statistics and spectra. In turn, this will make
it possible to establish their microscopic mechanism. In a broader context, the
proposed studies pave the way to understanding general features of classical and
quantum fluctuations away from thermal equilibrium using nonlinear NEMS driven
by strong periodic fields.