* 1514260
* NeTS: Medium: Connecting the Next Billion: Rethinking Wireless Network Design Principles for the Internet-of-Everything
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Chi-Chih Chen, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 839,952.00

Within the next decade, billions of devices are expected to be connected to the
Internet wirelessly to enable applications like smart homes, body/health
monitoring, and environmental monitoring, among many others. This vast Internet
of Things (IoT) is expected to be active in the hundreds of devices within a
small environment and that send intermittent, but timely data. Existing wireless
technologies are unsuitable for managing IoT application since they are designed
to handle devices such as smartphones that are not very dense in space and
exchange huge amounts of data when they access wireless medium. The research
objective of this proposal is to answer the need for a new IoT architecture
encompassing all layers from Physical and Medium Access Control to Networking.
Proposed design utilizes the unique characteristics (e.g., intermittence, high
density, and user dynamics) of IoT applications to achieve an "interference-
averaging" phenomenon that provides the foundation for more reliable and rapid
service guarantees. This approach is well-suited to IoT applications since its
transmissions are immediate, reliable, and works efficiently under dense
deployments. This project is expected to be a key enabler for low-cost public
access to critical wireless services in environmental monitoring, healthcare,
and smart-living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By 2020, there will be anywhere between
an estimated 25-75 billion devices that will connect to the Internet, making up
the so-called vast Internet-of-Things (IoT). Many of the IoT applications will
be based on a large population of low-cost devices dynamically making
connections with access points or neighboring devices to communicate small
bundles of delay-sensitive data. This contrasts sharply with the typical
wireless local area network (WLAN) setup with intense traffic generated by
relatively sparsely positioned stations. Accordingly, the existing wireless
resource allocation technologies are not well-suited to serve the upcoming IoT
network. Therefore, there is a pressing need for the development of efficient
and practical communication strategies to support a large number of densely-
packed mobile devices generating intermittent and delay-sensitive traffic - a
scenario of increasing significance in the emerging IoT-device
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses this need by undertaking
the well-founded development of a framework for establishing the foundations and
the means necessary for the principled development of "light-weight"
communication and networking strategies that provide low-complexity and low-
overhead solutions for the provably efficient operation of emerging IoT
networks. To that end, this research proposes an interference-embracing paradigm
to accommodate the above non-traditional dynamics of upcoming IoT applications.
Proposed strategy allows many users to share the resources simultaneously,
thereby bypassing the heavy costs of existing wireless solutions. The approach
is novel in that: (i) the physical and network layer operation accounts for the
fast user and intermittent traffic dynamics and the diverse quality-of-service
requirements, as well as their impact on the observed interference by a typical
user; (ii) the multi-user access design combines the strengths of collision-
avoiding and collision-embracing paradigms; (iii) the overhead load is minimized
by reducing or eliminating the signaling requirements for practical real-world
implementation; and (iv) it is supported by a strong experimentation component
with the ultimate objective of instantiating novel theoretically optimal
techniques in practical IoT applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The attainment of
these objectives requires the development of new tools in such diverse areas as
code design, resource allocation, distributed algorithm design, and
implementation. The cross-disciplinary research proposed in this project will
help fill the gap in our understanding on how large scale networks can
effectively manage the emerging device and traffic dynamics. The new approaches
and techniques are in turn expected to make fundamental contributions to the
individual disciplines themselves. Also, the project will help provide
participating students a balanced exposure to a wide variety of theoretical and
applied techniques spanning different fields including wireless networking,
optimization, algorithm design, and wireless systems implementation, and thereby
contribute to the education of a competent workforce.