* 1514444
* CSR: Medium: Dynamic Binary Translation for a Retargetable and Behaviorally-Accurate Cross-Architecture Whole System Virtual Machine
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Antonia Zhai, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 829,165.00

This project focuses on improving the performance, applicability and reliability
of whole system virtualization. Whole system virtualization is an approach that
allows the complete set of software from one kind of computer to run as if it
were a single program on a different kind of computer without any change at the
binary (machine code) level. In particular, it allows software to migrate among
different machines from different vendors with different system upgrades in
large data centers, or between mobile devices and more powerful servers to allow
better power management, system reliability and overall performance enhancement.
Whole system virtualization is also important in other applications such as
software development and system security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic binary
translation is the key enabling technology studied in this project. With dynamic
binary translation, machine instructions in their binary form from one machine
are translated to instructions for another machine with a different instruction
set architecture, so software can run seamlessly across different platforms on
either real or virtual machines. The project will result in a prototype using
the open-source software QEMU as its front-end and LLVM as its back-end in a
client-server environment with ARM-based clients and Intel x86-based servers.
This prototype will provide a test bed to study several issues important to
dynamic binary translation that supports whole system virtualization of multi-
threaded codes on multi-core platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses several technology challenges as it goes from research discovery
toward application. The first is to improve the performance of the translated
multi-threaded code and to reduce the overheads incurred during the binary
translation, in particular in a client-server environment. It also addresses the
challenges related to migrating binary codes across machines with different
memory consistency models, and addresses challenges to verifying the correctness
of the translated code. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;