* 1514955
* EAPSI: Road Zone Effects on Endemic Taiwan Herpetofauna
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kristina Chyn, Chyn                    Kristina
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Expansion of road infrastructure increases connectivity, but also brings
ecological consequence. Reptiles and amphibians (herpetofauna) have the highest
recorded levels of road mortality and are the most threatened group of
terrestrial vertebrate taxa, but road ecology studies are lacking. Due to their
spatially complex lifestyles and urgent conservation need, herpetofauna are
ideal for studying road zone effects across multiple landscape scales.
Additionally, habitat fragmentation due to roads is expected to have especially
dramatic impacts in island ecosystems, such as Taiwan, an island with high
ecological value and twice the road density of the USA. Due to the high-density
road networks and biodiversity, Taiwan is a choice site for research on indirect
road zone effects on endemic herpetofauna. Although some research has documented
direct effects of roads on wildlife in Taiwan, indirect impacts of road zone
landscapes on herpetofauna are unclear. These indirect effects can include
creation of landscapes near roads that may attract herpetofauna, subsequently
increasing herpetofauna vulnerability to road mortality. This study will be
conducted in collaboration with noted Taiwan herpetologist and road ecologist,
Dr. Te-En Lin, from the Taiwan Endemic Species Research Institute.

This project will measure indirect effects of road fragmentation on Taiwan's
herpetofauna across multiple spatial and ecological scales to quantify impacts
of roads on local biodiversity. The hypothesis is that indirect effects of road
zone landscapes will cause declines in biodiversity at multiple landscape and
ecological scales. There are two predicted findings: 1) since road zones can
serve as ecological traps, road-zone landscapes will create attractive, but
dangerous habitat for many species of herpetofauna across spatial scales; 2)
there will be differing rates of road zone utilization across taxonomic groups
due to differing life histories. This project will elucidate unstudied indirect
impacts of road fragmentation across endemic and local Taiwan herpetofauna
communities. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate
student and is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.