* 1514883
* 21st International Conference on  DNA Computing and Molecular Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2015,05/31/2016
* William Shih, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2016
* USD 12,000.00

Life operates on a hardware that is composed of cells enclosing molecular
components and a software encoded by information and programs written in
molecules. With the vision of understanding the natural molecular programs and
further establishing novel molecular programming rules for engineering and
developing synthetic systems, the annual International Conference on DNA
Computing and Molecular Programming has been one of the premier
interdisciplinary forums where scientists with diverse backgrounds (e.g.;
experts in computer science, physics, chemistry, biology and mathematics) come
together to present their highest quality research and discuss new ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for 12,000 USD to support student travel
expenses for the 21st of the conference series (DNA21), to be held at Harvard
University, August 17-21, 2015. The primary purpose of these funds is to provide
assistance to students who are delivering oral or poster presentations at the
conference. The process of selecting the travel award recipients is intended to
give priority to women and underrepresented minorities, in addition to
supporting quality research presentations. Approximately 24 successful student
applicants, from institutions (excluding Harvard), will be funded for travel and
accommodation, with an expected average award of 500 USD per
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to encourage and incentivize a
new generation of researchers to attend the conference. The travel awards will
help to foster the development of the next generation of molecular programmers,
by encouraging students to attend, present their work, and interact with other
important players in the field. Students who attend the conference will get
exposure to early versions of work that are expected to be published in top
venues and, furthermore, they will have the opportunity to interact with, and
potentially collaborate with, researchers who are producing work of the highest
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of topics includes control of molecular
folding and self-assembly to construct nanostructures; demonstration of
switches, gates, devices, and circuits with biomolecules; molecular motors and
molecular robotics; computational processes in vitro and in vivo; studies of
fault-tolerance and error correction; synthetic biology and in vitro evolution;
software tools for analysis, simulation, and design; as well as a range of
applications in engineering, physics, chemistry, biology, and medicine. The
first day of the conference will be devoted to tutorial sessions including
hands-on experiments, which will help researchers establish a solid basis in new
research domains. The presentation sessions during the conference will be an
excellent stage for discussing new results of highest quality and exchanging new
ideas, which will contribute to advancing knowledge and developing new
technologies.