* 1514926
* EAPSI: Developing Biological Paper-Based Batteries
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Keith Heyde, Heyde                   Keith
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,311.00

Supplying electricity to small-scale microelectronics is a growing issue.
Conventional power sources are both expensive and environmentally toxic.
Additionally, many rely on rare-earth elements, whose future production is
difficult to ensure. This award supports research aimed at developing a fully
sustainable, biological battery. This unit will use living cells to generate
electricity. This project will be conducted under the supervision Professor
Chao-Min Cheng of National Tsing Hua University. These batteries will be
designed to live within a paper-based reactor. Dr. Cheng is a leading expert of
paper-based microtechnology, and the project will leverage his extensive
knowledge in developing small scale paper diagnostic reactors for this battery
project.

Developing a low cost paper-based microfluidic biological battery will
synthesizing work microbiology, microfluidics, materials science, chemistry, and
electronics. First, a paper-based microfluidic channel will be designed that
limits the abnormalities caused by lateral wax diffusion during the
manufacturing process. This requires knowledge of the fluidic design of liquid
max and how it interacts with the mechanical contours of the paper. For this the
project will use microscopy to determine boundary conditions and combine this
insight with first-principal based analytical fluid models. These models will
inform how the wax layers are spread and designed. Second, a paper-based
microfluidic channel that immobilizes bacteria through the use of fluid regimes
abnormalities in the chromatography paper will be modeled, designed and
manufactured. The genetically engineered Geobacter sulfurreducens and Shewanella
oneidensis will be used for their redox capabilities. Employing the above work
with additive manufacturing, paper-based biological batteries capable of
supplying power to low draw microelectronics will be assembled. This final step
will rely on layering our paper-based microfluidic chamber vertically and
connecting the anode and cathode terminals with a small AU filament. This NSF
EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in
collaboration with the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.