* 1514752
* Models for Trait-Mediated Dispersal in Ecology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Robert Cantrell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 507,778.00

The dispersal of organisms strongly influences their interactions with their
environment and with populations of other organisms. The ecological effects of
dispersal in turn influence the fitness of individuals, and hence influence
natural selection, which drives evolution. Thus, the effects of dispersal can
feed back to influence the attributes and behaviors of organisms, including
those that affect dispersal and its consequences. Such attributes and behaviors
are known as traits. They include tendencies to seek resources, avoid predators,
or migrate seasonally, which can be viewed as dispersal strategies, but they
also include the ways that organisms use information about their environment to
decide how to move or how they communicate such information with other members
of their species. This project will use mathematical models to gain insight into
the connections between the structure and variability of the environment and the
dispersal traits that can be expected to evolve and persist. Mathematical models
are necessary to gain such insight because the effects of dispersal and the
feedbacks involved in its evolution are too subtle and complex to capture with
verbal descriptions. In past research, the investigators have gained a good
understanding of which fixed dispersal traits are most favorable in the context
of a single population in an environment that varies in space but not in time.
One aspect of this project is to address similar issues in the context of
environments that are also changing in time. Another is to study more deeply how
dispersal influences species interactions, especially when it interacts with
variations in timing of life history events. Both of those research directions
are motivated in part by ecological problems related to global change. Other
aspects of the project focus on understanding behavioral traits related to
dispersal; some of those may be relevant to conservation/restoration efforts and
to understanding the movement of disease vectors. Some parts of the project will
be conducted in collaboration with postdoctoral fellows and thus should
contribute to enhancing the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
dispersal of organisms affects their fitness by determining their spatial
distribution and interactions with other populations, which then creates
selective pressure on traits related to dispersal. This leads to complex
feedbacks between the effects and evolution of dispersal traits that can only be
understood by using mathematical or computational models. Traditional models of
dispersal typically assume it is a fixed behavior, independent of environmental
conditions, such as simple diffusion. However, organisms seek resources, avoid
enemies, and engage in behaviors such as migration that require the use and
transmission of information. These conditional dispersal behaviors are traits,
which can be shaped by evolution and can be viewed as strategies from the
viewpoint of adaptive dynamics. In previous work, the investigators used
pairwise invasibility analysis of various models, including reaction-advection-
diffusion equations, discrete diffusion systems, and their nonlocal integro-
differential analogues, to show that for a single unstructured population in a
spatially varying but temporally constant environment the evolutionarily stable
strategies are those that produce an ideal free distribution. The research team
will use similar methods to gain understanding of the evolution of dispersal
traits in the more realistic contexts of populations in environments that vary
in both space and time, populations that are structured by stage or internal
state, and systems of interacting populations. To do that, the investigators
will use additional types of models including integro-difference models as well
as those used before. It is expected that the detailed conclusions in those
cases will often be different from those for an unstructured population in a
temporally constant environment. Some numerical experiments may be needed to
suggest what the conclusions should be. Hybrid models that include both
dispersal and phenology will also be studied, as well as models for organisms
with multiple dispersal modes. The first of those is relevant to understanding
how phenology shifts caused by global change could interact with spatial
effects. For example, how are the effects of isolation in time similar to those
of isolation in space, and how do they differ? The second is relevant to
understanding the movement patterns of various organisms, including female
mosquitoes that switch between seeking blood meals and seeking oviposition
sites. More broadly, understanding dispersal traits is relevant to conservation
and pest management and to predicting the effects of global change on natural
and agricultural ecosystems.