* 1514830
* EAPSI: Elucidating the Role of Ionic Aggregate Structure on Polymer Dynamics for Charge Transport Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Luri Middleton, Middleton               Luri           R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Global and US energy consumption increases every year and consequently
substantial research efforts have been devoted to improving next-generation
energy solutions to keep up with demand and improve efficiency. Currently, there
is intense interest in acid-containing and ion-containing polymers as this class
of polymers could enable the next generation of batteries, thin film capacitors,
and proton exchange membranes in fuel cells. The goal of this project is to gain
fundamental understanding of the coupling between ion motion and polymer
dynamics in a model ion-containing polymer system. To optimize the ion transport
kinetics, a performance bottleneck in these critically important to
applications, one must understand the nature of this coupling. The specific
expertise in the physics of complex liquids and instrumental capabilities of Dr.
Ryusuke Nozaki?s lab at Hokkaido University in Japan will be essential to
investigate dynamics in this class of polymers.

Interest in ionomers and other polymers with acid, ionic and polar groups is
fueled by these polymers? ability to selectively transport charged species.
Dielectric relaxation spectroscopy (DRS) will be used to investigate the various
relaxations in a series of homologous acid copolymers neutralized with metal
salts such as lithium. DRS will measure relaxations on the timescales of ion
conduction and polymer motion. This technique will be combined with a recently
synthesized category of acid copolymers with high levels of molecular control
during synthesis to probe the coupling of motion between polymer and ion. These
precise copolymers and ionomers provide unprecedented molecular control that
produces well-defined morphologies and thereby facilitate the improved
understanding of structure-property relationships. Specifically, the differences
between discrete and percolated ionic aggregate morphologies will be
investigated with the goal of accelerating ion motion relative to polymer
dynamics. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.