* 1514923
* EAPSI:Investigating Roles of Putative Phosphonatases from the Extreme Bacterium Synechococcus
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Benjamin Minkoff, Minkoff                 Benjamin       B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Phosphorus is the eleventh most abundant element on the planet, and essential to
life. Phosphate esters, compounds that contain a C-O-P bond, make up the
backbones of DNA and RNA and are also a component of the molecular energy
molecule ATP. Thus, phosphate esters have been well studied for many decades.
Less thoroughly examined are organophosphanates, compounds which contain a C-P
bond. Organophosphonates are thought to have predominated on primitive Earth,
when oxygen concentration was likely lower than today. More recently,
organophosphonates have been noted for their importance as commercial products,
from antibiotics to fungicides, and in providing nutrients for organisms living
in extreme environments. Additionally, organophosphonates have recently been
recognized as an important component of the marine phosphorus cycle, accounting
for up to 25% of oceanic dissolved organic phosphate. Understanding
organophosphonate breakdown and utilization is thus important for understanding
environmental phosphorus cycling. Work will be conducted with Professor Taichi
Takasuka, at Hokkaido University, to make and test the function of enzymes
proposed to be able to break down these compounds. It is possible that they have
the ability to break down organophosphonates in a way that has never been
reported before. The most well known microbial pathway for organophosphonate
catabolism is that of C-P lyase, a multi-subunit enzyme complex that, in all
bacteria studied, is under control of a single, phosphate-activated promoter.
C-P lyase?s mechanism has recently been proposed, along with mechanisms for
alternative organophosphonate catabolism. Of these alternative pathways, most
have been at least partially characterized. However, three recent publications
present evidence for as-yet-uncharacterized catabolic pathways of phosphonate
degradation in Campylobacter spp., Heliobacter spp., and Synechococcus spp.
Specifically, in Synechoccus spp. isolated from Yellowstone National Park, gene
products have been implicated in organophosphonate catabolism, but neither
verified nor characterized. These putative phosphonatases will be expressed
using a wheat germ embryo-based cell-free protein production system, and
biochemically characterized, using quantitative mass spectrometry (MS). The
putative phosphonatases (phnases) implicated in phosphonate catabolism by this
study and their metabolic products may reveal novel mechanisms of breakdown of
this important subset of phosphate containing compounds. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.