* 1514246
* Changes-of mind in target selection for action
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Jerome Sanes, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 234,000.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship supports a rising scientist in the interdisciplinary
area overlapping behavioral science, computational modeling and functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), focusing on the process of decision making.
Decision-making is a pervasive part of everyday life: in some cases, decisions
are irreversible and in others an initial choice can be altered by a change of
mind. For instance, when fetching a book off the shelf, one may initially reach
toward the wrong title and later adjust the course of their reach in favor of
the desired option. Such decisions require precise coordination between several
brain systems to allocate attention, select a course of action, and execute hand
and eye movements. Importantly, recent research demonstrates that cognition is
tightly integrated with perception and action. Specifically, motor areas
supporting the execution of eye and hand movements are also critically involved
in decision-making; however, while the neural networks of decision-making are
relatively well characterized, little is known about how the brain supports
online changes to behavior after a decision to act has been executed. This
proposal aims to investigate the brain systems supporting the ability to
continuously modify decisions during target selection and determine how
competition for attentional resources impacts this process. The results of this
project will advance our understanding of the brain structures and neural
information flow underlying rapid, flexible decision-making during action
execution. This has important implications for informing impairments caused by
disorders such as traumatic brain injury, stroke, and optic ataxia and the
design of more advanced neural prosthetics to better serve amputees in dynamic,
real-life settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to provide
a more comprehensive understanding of human decision-making by examining how
multiple brain systems interact to support changes of mind during target
selection. Using a multi-faceted approach including behavioral,
electroencephalography (EEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and
advanced computational modeling techniques, this proposal will investigate the
neural substrates that support rapid decision adjustments when executing
actions. Specifically, how does the allocation of spatial attention during
target selection impact change of mind? Moreover, what is the nature of
information flow between higher-order cortical regions and eye- and hand-related
motor areas during changes of mind during target selection? These results will
represent an important step toward a more complete understanding of the brain
mechanisms involved in complex human decision-making in naturalistic settings.
This proposal is also supported by the NSF EPSCoR.