* 1514233
* Antecedents and Consequences of Cross-Race Friendships in Early and Middle Childhood
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Amber Williams, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 201,965.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship (under the "Broadening Participation" track of the SBE
postdoctoral fellowships program) trains a young scientist exploring the effects
of cross-race friendships in early and middle childhood. Despite its history of
civil right progress, the U.S. continues to be plagued by racial inequalities,
racial discrimination, and racial tensions. Finding solutions to these problems
is critical to the country's social and economic wellbeing and will require
cross-race cooperation based on trust, respect, and goodwill. Fostering cross-
race friendships among youth is likely to facilitate cooperative work toward
racial equality and justice. Past research has shown that cross-race friendships
reduce negative racial attitudes. More positive racial attitudes and interracial
interactions may, in turn, reduce the future prevalence of discrimination, which
is linked to negative physical and mental health outcomes. Studying ways to
encourage the frequency and quality of cross-race friendships in childhood may
provide educators, parents, and policy-makers with effective methods of
encouraging positive racial attitudes and openness to cross-race friendships at
a point in development during which such attitudes are flexible. Given that the
prevalence of cross-race friendships decreases across childhood (Aboud,
Mendelson, &amp; Purdy, 2003), the proposed work aims to understand the
formation and function of cross-race friendships in early and middle childhood
among youth from diverse racial backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims of the two proposed studies are to: (1) understand the ways in which
parents' and children's attitudes and behaviors predict children's willingness
to initiate cross-race interaction and the nature of such interactions, (2)
identify qualities of cross-race interactions that promote cross-race
friendships, and (3) explore whether cross-race friendships uniquely and
causally predict improvement in racial attitudes over and above other types of
cross-race contact. The first study explores whether children's endorsement of
racial stereotypes and their beliefs regarding whether individuals of different
racial groups are different in underlying structural and fundamental ways (i.e.,
racial essentialism) relate to their willingness to adopt, and their treatment
of, cross-race versus same-race pen pals. This study also examines whether
parental characteristics, including their valuing of diversity, the messages
that they send their children about race, and the racial diversity of their
neighborhoods and social networks predict children's pen pal selection and
behavior. The second study extends the first by using an experimental
methodology to examine the causal effects of children?s cross-race interactions
and friendships on their racial attitudes (i.e., stereotypes and essentialist
views). Same and cross-race dyads are brought into a lab setting and randomly
assigned to interact under conditions of: (1) mere contact, (2) academic
cooperation, and (3) friendship induction. This study examines whether these
contextual manipulations lead to friendship formation, and in turn, a reduction
in racial stereotyping and racially essentialist attitudes. These studies extend
the current understanding of the nature and benefits of cross-race friendships
in childhood in three ways. First, study 1 examines the antecedents of
children's willingness to befriend and behave positively toward cross-race
individuals rather than focusing on how cross-race friendships predict
attitudes, as has been the focus of much previous work. Second, instead of
relying solely on correlational associations, study 2 explores the causal links
between cross-race friendships and racial attitudes. Finally, both studies
extend previous work by exploring the formation and benefits of cross-race
friendships among a diverse population, including African American, Latino, and
White children.