* 1514641
* EAPSI: Fluid Flow-Assisted Assembly of Solar Cell Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Lawrence Valverde, Valverde                Lawrence
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) hold great promise as a solar energy conversion
technology which can be easily mass produced and is cheap enough to offer
electricity at a price comparable to power generated from traditional coal-fired
power plants. Furthermore, the potential for use with flexible substrates opens
new opportunities for integration of solar cells with architecture and urban
infrastructure. While the advantages of OPVs are attractive, the technology is
just emerging from its infancy and has yet to reach power conversion
efficiencies exceeding 10%. Most of the critical physics intrinsic to achieving
the necessary efficiencies occur in the active layer of a device which is
composed of organic polymer semiconductors. This project aims to improve device
efficiency by investigating the benefits of controlling the assembly and
organization of the active layer at the molecular scale. The research will be
conducted under the mentorship of Professor Chih-I Wu at National Taiwan
University who has extensive experience with OPVs and similar semiconductor
technology and is ideally suited to host this research.

Critical processes in the OPV active layer include charge-carrier generation
through light absorption and charge-carrier collection due to exciton diffusion,
dissociation, and transport to opposite contacts. Excitons?excited, yet still
bound pairs of positive and negative charge carriers?in organic materials have
relatively low diffusion lengths and mobilities compared to charge transport in
typical solid-state photovoltaic semiconductors. As such, the strategy of
increasing active layer thickness in order to increase photon interaction with
the material leads to lost efficiency due to carrier recombination, often
negating the strategy?s intentions. One such solution is to increase effective
optical thickness while retaining minimal physical thickness by integration of
metallic nanoparticles into the polymer matrix. Solutions such as this, however,
are still often deposited by spin-coating, which provides excellent control of
active layer thickness, but little control with regard to mesoscale
architecture. Recent work at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign has
demonstrated enhancement of optoelectronic properties in organic semiconducting
polymers due to molecular alignment via microfluidics. This research aims to
achieve unprecedented efficiencies through the synthesis of metallic
nanoparticle doping with microfluidic directed assembly. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.