* 1514659
* EAPSI:Assessing Seed Dispersal Limitation as a Cause of Abrupt Treelines in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jeremy Johnson, Johnson                 Jeremy         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This research will identify if seed dispersal at New Zealand alpine treelines is
limited and a cause of their abrupt and striking form. The abrupt alpine
treeline in New Zealand is a system that has experienced warming over the last
50 years without a corresponding change in alpine treeline position. In a
closely linked vegetation-climate system, we would expect that the treeline
should track climate relatively closely over periods as short as a decade.
Unlike animals that can respond quickly to changing environmental conditions,
plants are fixed in space and must respond inter-generationally through seed
dispersal. This research will address the issue by 1) characterizing gene flow
at mountain beech treelines and 2) assessing the degree to which the treeline is
dispersal limited resulting in their abrupt form. The research will analyze
genomic data allowing the researchers to dissect genetic similarity between
treeline forming individuals and forest individuals below, teasing apart the
ecological factors influencing dispersal and the potential for treelines to
track future climate variation. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with New Zealand researchers Dr. Brad Case at Lincoln University and Dr. Ellen
Cieraad at Landcare Research, both experts on New Zealand treeline dynamics.

Specifically, a genotyping by sequencing approach, double digest restriction
site associated DNA discovery, will be used to simultaneously sequence and
identify highly informative molecular markers, single nucleotide polymorphisms,
across the mountain beech (Nothofagus solandri var. cliffortioides (Hook.f.)
Poole.) genome. Genome wide datasets are rare in forest species but next
generation sequencing is allowing large genomic regions to be analyzed
efficiently. The genomic variation will be assessed along three elevational
transects to identify if seed dispersal limitation is a cause of abrupt alpine
treelines. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Royal
Society of New Zealand.