* 1514515
* I-Corps l:  Leveraging Maker Pathways Research Projects to Scale Steam + Making Outreach Programs
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Shawn Jordan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Making is fast growing topic area to get students and K-12 teachers engaged in
STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math), particularly
engineering. In this team's research in the Maker Community, the team has
witnessed many examples of Adult and Young Makers being entrepreneurial with
what they have built. Educators, parents, and makerspaces are all interested in
how to train young people for a technologically complex future. Parents often
send their children to summer camps or encourage them to participate in after
school activities which can provide technical skills. Makerspaces provide a
community and tools to their members. This I-Corps team believes that bridging
the gap will provide value to the end-users, customers, and market. A broad
range of educators could benefit from curricula, projects, support, marketing,
and funding materials for running their Making education goals. This includes
K-12 teachers, homeschooling families, science centers, makerspaces, and
university educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team aims to leverage
its understanding of adult and young Maker educational pathways to build chain-
reaction STEAM Machines(TM) and Making+Tinkering engineering outreach short-
courses for STEAM outreach with middle school and high school students. The team
intends to facilitate a broad adaptation of STEAM education principles through
hands on project-based learning and provide professional development for
teachers and science centers. The team imagines a holistic solution that
includes curricula, projects, support, marketing and funding solutions, and
optional products such as materials and on-site consulting. The team's interest
is in being a catalyst for Making becoming an experience by which students are
exposed to invention, innovation and entrepreneurship mindsets. This is an
opportunity to grow a future workforce who invents, builds and markets
innovative and useful solutions.