* 1514486
* Fish as a delicacy and a staple: Social status and the daily meal at the 14th to 16th century town of Songo Mnara, Tanzania
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Jeffrey Fleisher, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2017
* USD 192,662.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship supports Dr. Erendira Quintana Morales, under the
mentorship of Dr. Jeffrey Fleisher (Rice University), to investigate how daily
meals serve to express and negotiate social status by comparing food remains
associated with households of varying social status in the 14th-16th century
town of Songo Mnara, Tanzania. The results of this archaeological study have
implications for our understanding of past social diversity and inequality and
the role of everyday practices, such as daily meals, as strategies for social
mobility. An innovative and significant contribution of this project is
demonstrating the role of fish as both a delicacy and a staple of the daily
meal, providing evidence of cases where eating fish exerts both dividing and
unifying power in a society where fish are ubiquitous but often understudied.
This project provides valuable opportunities to transfer research skills to
undergraduate students through training and experience analyzing and recording
ceramic and zooarchaeological data, from which they can develop independent
research projects. Students also have the opportunity to develop leadership and
communications skills by participating in a community outreach program developed
out of the fellow?s research. This archaeology module is designed in partnership
with a local low-income school to increase the participation of underrepresented
minorities in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines fish
bone and ceramic fragments from a selection of households representing diverse
levels of social standing to explore how variation in food consumption practices
is indicative of social status. Specific measures in the analysis of fish
remains, such as size, taxonomic diversity, and element distribution, are
compared across the samples to reveal statistically significant patterns in fish
distribution. Standard methods of ceramic analysis for the Swahili region are
used to determine how vessel form, size, origin, and decoration vary across
households associated with different social status. The identification of lipid
traces on ceramic fragments serves to reconstruct what food was cooked in
specific vessels, which is a pioneering application of this method in the study
of fish consumption and in this region. Together, these three research
components -- fish remains analysis, ceramic analysis, and lipid analysis --
indicate how different modes of eating and cooking were combined with different
foods on a daily basis. A unique, town-level perspective emerges from the
spatial patterning of daily consumption practices during the short occupation at
Songo Mnara. This research highlights how a detailed investigation of regularly
consumed food, such as fish in coastal communities, reveals the social
interactions and constructions of meaning associated with past daily practices
that form the fabric of a society. The project has significant international
collaboration, therefore it is jointly funded by the NSF Office of International
Science and Engineering, and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences.