* 1514882
* INSPIRE: Legged Locomotion for Desert Research
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Daniel Koditschek, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE project is supported by the Directorate of Computer and Information
Science and Engineering, the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems,
the Directorate of Geosciences, Division of Earth Sciences, and the Office of
International and Integrative Activities. Sand and dust storms menace the world.
They impact large human populations on nearly every continent, damage
habitation, disrupt transportation, threaten agriculture, biodiversity, human
health and life, and degrade the environment (desertification). A team of
scientists and engineers is developing an autonomous legged robot research
assistant, designed to operate within harsh desert environments for purposes of
gathering heretofore unavailable measurements of wind and sand movement under
conditions far too uncomfortable and dangerous for human presence. These data
may offer new insights into dust production and its global effects that could
significantly impact predictions of environmental degradation by climate change
in drylands. At the same time, meeting the formidable mobility and perceptual
capabilities arising from scientists' requirements will advance the foundations
and practice of robotics. Ultimately, advances in control of dust emissions from
soils made possible by this novel collaboration could prolong the sustainability
of the agroecosystem and result in improved air quality of downwind population
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dust emission has traditionally been assumed to
release sediment previously deposited in soil, but there is growing evidence
that sand abrasion may actually produce significant quantities of new dust.
Establishing sand seas as dust factories, rather than simply dust reservoirs
represents a qualitatively new result that would cascade through aeolian and
climate science. But the severe events of interest are hidden from existing
conventional instruments and they pose presently insurmountable challenges to
flying, wheeled or even tracked vehicles. Aeolian science needs legged machines
to negotiate the steep, shifting slopes, and broken ground under the
environmental conditions of interest. Steady running over simple terrain is a
largely solved problem in robotics, but transitional maneuvers and agile
negotiation of geometrically complex, unstable, fragile terrain characteristic
of desert substrates pose a daunting next challenge for legged locomotion,
requiring new approaches to turning, gait control, and perception.