* 1514192
* SBE: Medium: Collaborative: Understanding and Exploiting Visceral Roots of Privacy and Security Concerns
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Alessandro Acquisti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Huth
* 08/31/2020
* USD 595,197.00

Human beings have evolved to detect and react to threats in their physical
environment, and have developed perceptual systems selected to assess these
physical stimuli for current, material risks. In cyberspace, the same stimuli
are often absent, subdued, or deliberately manipulated by malicious third
parties. Hence, security and privacy concerns that would normally be activated
in the offline world may remain muted, and defense behaviors may be hampered.
While it is not possible to directly test such conjecture, it is possible to
test the impact that "visceral" stimuli in the physical world (that is,
physical, sensorial cues processed non-consciously rather than with conscious
awareness) have on security and privacy behavior in cyberspace. We use a stream
of human subjects experiments to investigate the impact of three sets of stimuli
over security behavior and privacy behavior in cyberspace: 1) sensorial stimuli
(such as auditory, visual, or olfactory cues of the physical proximity of other
human beings); 2) surveillance stimuli (such as cues that one is being
observed); and 3) environmental stimuli (such as inherent characteristics of the
physical environment in which a subject is located). Security behavior is
operationalized in terms of individuals? ability to recognize and react to cyber
attacks. Privacy behavior is operationalized in terms of individuals? propensity
to disclose personal or sensitive information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the experiments are twofold. From a positive perspective, the goal is to
understand whether privacy and security decision making online is made harder by
the absence of sensorial stimuli that humans have evolved to use to detect and
react to threats in the physical world. From a normative perspective, the goal
is to examine whether physical stimuli can be used to ameliorate security and
privacy behavior in cyberspace. For instance: Can stimuli indicating physical
proximity to others trigger changes in security and privacy behavior in
cyberspace? If so, can the same stimuli be leveraged and exploited to design
privacy and security interventions aimed at helping end users? Findings from
this research may inform the work of security and privacy technologists,
providing insights that go beyond the technical security of hardware and
software infrastructure, and that help revisit the strategies and assumptions
underlying those systems. Finally, by exposing conditions under which technology
alone may not guarantee cybersecurity, this research can actively inform the
work of policy makers.