* 1514695
* Research Topics in Theoretical Nuclear and Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Akif Baha Balantekin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project will use theoretical methods to explore some of the fundamental
questions at the interface of nuclear science with astrophysics and high-energy
physics. These questions include where and how elements from deuterium to
uranium are made in the Universe and the effect of the elementary particles
called neutrinos on the production of elements and the origin of the asymmetry
in the cosmic abundance of matter over antimatter in the observed Universe. This
project will also examine nuclear reaction mechanisms at very low energies. This
research contributes to the support of national scientific priorities in Nuclear
Science, in particular to the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams under construction
at the Michigan State University campus, a world-leading laboratory for the
study of nuclear structure, reactions and astrophysics. The research efforts to
be carried out here will also contribute to the training of next generation of
scientists, enabling them to take part in a competitive workforce capable of
performing in diverse settings.

The sheer number of neutrinos emitted from a cooling proto-neutron star
following the collapse of a supernova core necessitates inclusion of neutrino-
neutrino interactions in the description of the neutrino transport in
supernovae. Symmetries of the collective modes of this many-neutrino system and
their impact on the rapid neutron capture nucleosynthesis in supernovae will be
investigated. An unidentified emission line was recently seen in the X-ray
spectrum of galaxy clusters that could be interpreted as a signal emerging from
a decaying seven keV sterile neutrino, which mixes with the active ones. The
investigator and his students will explore the effects of such states in reactor
experiments and assess the likelihood of existence of such a state. They will
explore also effects of neutrino magnetic interactions on Big Bang
Nucleosynthesis, together with various ways to exploit symmetries in
understanding double beta decay nuclear matrix elements. Finally, the PI will
re-examine the interaction potential between two nuclei in the light of the
recent experience with the effective field theory, hitherto applied only to the
nucleon-nucleon interactions.