* 1514253
* RI: Medium: Sentential Decision Diagrams
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Adnan Darwiche, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 06/30/2019
* USD 705,865.00

Logical and probabilistic reasoning are now routinely used in various fields of
computer science and engineering, including artificial intelligence in
particular. These modes of reasoning currently underlie systems that perform
automated diagnosis, planning, software and hardware verification, web
information extraction, bioinformatics, vision and robotics. This project aims
at advancing the state of the art in logical and probabilistic reasoning, to
allow scientists and engineers to learn and reason with much larger models than
is currently possible. The project is based on a particular computational
paradigm, known as knowledge compilation, which transforms knowledge into forms
that facilitate their efficient processing by reasoning and learning algorithms.
The results expected from this project will provide domain-independent, highly
scalable, tools and techniques for addressing computational problems that arise
in healthcare, industrial automation, and information management. The project
will also provide a context for training graduate students in the computational
paradigm of knowledge compilation, and will target the integration of this
paradigm into computer science curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the project aims to develop a new framework for knowledge
compilation based on the recently discovered Sentential Decision Diagram (SDD).
The SDD is a target compilation language, which generalizes the Ordered Binary
Decision Diagram (OBDD) that has been quite influential in many areas of
computer science and engineering. This project has two parts. The first part is
concerned with developing the SDD compilation language further, both
theoretically and practically. On the theoretical side, there is a number of
pending of questions relating to lower and upper bounds on SDDs, in addition to
questions that must be answered to fully understand their relation to OBDDs. On
the practical side, the SDD package needs to be extended to enhance its
scalability and to provide new functionality that is needed for fully exploiting
SDDs in a wider spectrum of applications. The second part of the project is
concerned with a more recent discovery: The probabilistic SDD (PSDD). This
compilation language aims at inducing probability distributions over
propositional theories, in a very principled and efficient manner. Our objective
here is to develop PSDDs into a mature tool, with a corresponding public
package, for learning tractable probabilistic models under massive logical
constraints, and for compiling probabilistic graphical models into PSDDs for the
purpose of more scalable probabilistic reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;