* 1514808
* EDT: Team Training Mathematical Scientists Through Industrial Collaborations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Susan Minkoff, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2019
* USD 598,805.00

The goal of this project is to transform doctoral training in the mathematical
sciences to include activities that provide students with marketable skills and
experiences. Prior to the start of formal thesis research, students will develop
mathematical and statistical approaches to tackle problems arising in other
areas of science and engineering. The 16 doctoral students supported by the
project will spend two semesters of their second year working on an
interdisciplinary research problem posed by an external partner from industry, a
government lab, or a research institution. Students will work in teams
consisting of 2-3 students, one mathematics and one statistics faculty mentor,
and one of our external partners. These research projects will replace the
students' normal teaching assistant duties in their second year and will provide
exposure to the entire research process, from starting with an open-ended
problem description to obtaining final results. In the summer after this year-
long research experience, the students will be well positioned to continue work
at the external partners' organizations as interns, thereby gaining experience
that could ultimately lead to employment opportunities after graduation.
Specific objectives include: (1) Broadening opportunities for students to pursue
the solution of real-world application problems through connections with
industrial and interdisciplinary researchers; (2) Increasing students'
confidence to tackle applied problems with which they are not familiar; (3)
Increasing students' ability to communicate within research teams and to wider
audiences; (4) Broadening the range of career paths for mathematical sciences
Ph.D. graduates, and increasing the number and proportion of students who do
internships, take industrial research positions, or take postdoctoral positions
at national labs. The teams will be chosen to include some students whose
dissertation topics may not involve strong modeling or computational components.
We will use the EDT project as a recruiting tool to increase the number of
qualified U.S. students who apply to the Ph.D. program, especially women and
under-represented minorities. The web site for the project is
www.utdallas.edu/EDT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six external partners have agreed to
collaborate on this project. In consultation with the external partners, we have
developed broad research problems that complement the strengths of the faculty
mentors at UTD. Proposed projects include (1) uncertainty quantification for
microseismic source estimation in unconventional oil and gas recovery; (2)
infectious disease forecasting; (3) cone beam computerized tomography to acquire
patient anatomy data for cancer radiotherapy treatments; (4) multisensor
tracking of multiple moving targets for defense applications; and (5) modeling
of plasma processing systems for advanced manufacturing. Following an annual
kick-off event, we will hold an in-depth workshop in which students and faculty
will learn fundamental theory, examples, and computational skills of direct
relevance for the chosen projects that year. The remainder of the year is broken
into one- to four-month time periods during which the research goals will be
defined, the problem prototyped and solved, and the results disseminated to the
external partner and others outside the project.