* 1514538
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: On-demand Physical Layer Cooperation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Ayfer Ozgur, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2019
* USD 333,000.00

Wireless access is fast becoming the primary portal to the Internet, causing an
exponentially rising demand for wireless data. This has pushed current wireless
systems to their limits, despite significant investment in infrastructure to
meet the ever-growing demands. Physical layer cooperation can enable near-
optimal usage of the available wireless bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal fundamentally rethinks physical-layer cooperation by introducing an on-
demand approach to wireless cooperation. It can be argued that the success of
the (wired) Internet was made possible by its on-demand operation, using
adaptation, local knowledge, feedback and a best-effort service model. Notably,
the success of many peer-to-peer network protocols is closely tied to on-demand
information propagation and adaptation of the network. The broad goal of this
proposal is to bring this philosophy to wireless networks, enabling near-optimal
usage of the wireless network bandwidth within the complexity constraints of
implementable systems. This project aims to complement the theoretical work with
proof-of-concept deployments on software radio testbeds, and also engage
industry partners to impact next-generation wireless network designs. The
project also promotes training of research engineers, through a plan to
establish a unique inter-university education and research program, which will
include joint and collaborative student advising and curricular development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying assumption of most network information
theory works is that one can build architectures which tightly coordinate the
estimation and sharing of information about the wireless channels, the user
requirements and the network topology, at a very fast time-scale, without
impacting the performance (rates, error). That is, the cost of learning the very
dynamic network state is not accounted for. Another implicit assumption is
complete network usage, that all available relays in a wireless network are
used, with no adaptation to user demand. This can be very wasteful in many
situations, and again, the cost of unnecessarily using relays is not accounted
for. The many breakthrough ideas based on these assumptions have advanced a
collective understanding, but bringing physical layer cooperation techniques
closer to practical networks requires additional steps to move beyond these
assumptions. This project puts together a program that develops the theoretical
foundations and practice of an on-demand network operation, that dispenses with
these assumptions. This entails operating specific subsets of the network relays
(sub-networks) that fulfill target rates, as opposed to using all network relays
to achieve the best possible performance. This project constructs a theoretical
understanding of how to select, adapt and operate these sub-networks on demand,
by using accountable partial network knowledge and using feedback mechanisms to
enhance signal adaptation to the unknown. The theoretical formulations are
tightly coupled to implementable protocols that will be validated in test beds.