* 1514381
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Secure and Usable Indoor Navigation for Individuals with Visual Impairment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Terri Hedgpeth, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 550,000.00

Despite significant effort on novel wireless and mobile applications for sighted
people, novel wireless and mobile applications to improve the wellbeing of
visually impaired individuals remain largely underexplored. The biggest everyday
challenge for visually impaired individuals is safe and quick navigation to
reach a desired destination in unfamiliar outdoor/indoor environments. Outdoor
navigation for unsighted people can be greatly facilitated by GPS-based aids
which unfortunately do not work in indoor environments lack of GPS signals. This
proposal outlines a challenging research plan on developing, prototyping, and
evaluating a secure and usable indoor navigation system for the visually
impaired. The scientific promise of the proposed research will expand the
fundamental understandings about indoor navigation for the visually impaired
with the potential to open a new research direction. Successful development and
implementations of the proposed techniques will have profound impact on allowing
visually impaired individuals to have indoor navigation and wayfinding as
sighted people, thus significantly improving the mobility and wellbeing of
millions of visually impaired users in the US and around the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research consists of six main research
thrusts. The first thrust is to investigate novel crowdsourcing-based techniques
to construct accurate indoor floor plans for arbitrary indoor venues with or
without large open spaces. The second thrust is to develop secure cooperative
techniques to detect and minimize the impact of fake mobility traces submitted
by dishonest crowdsourcing workers. The third thrust is to investigate
crowdsourcing-based construction of an indoor image database that can well
characterize and visualize an indoor venue. The fourth thrust is to develop
crowdsourcing-based techniques to enable accurate point-to-point indoor
navigation for the visually impaired. The fifth thrust is to investigate novel
techniques that can provide visually impaired individuals enhanced indoor
navigation experience similar to what sighted persons can get. The last thrust
is to implement the proposed indoor navigation system and thoroughly evaluate
its efficacy, efficiency, and usability.