* 1514893
* RAPID: A rare opportunity to examine overcompensation resulting from intensive harvest of an introduced predator
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Edwin Grosholz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2016
* USD 199,187.00

The usual expectation is that when populations of plants and animals experience
repeated losses to predators or human harvest, they would decline over time. If
instead these populations rebound to numbers exceeding their initial levels,
this would seem counter-intuitive or even paradoxical. However, for several
decades mathematical models of population processes have shown that this
unexpected response, formally known as overcompensation, is not only possible,
but even expected under some circumstances. In what may be the first example of
overcompensation in a marine system, a dramatic increase in a population of the
non-native European green crab was recently observed following an intensive
removal program. This RAPID project will use field surveys and laboratory
experiments to verify that this population explosion results from
overcompensation. Data will be fed into population models to understand to what
degree populations processes such as cannibalism by adult crabs on juvenile
crabs and changes in maturity rate of reproductive females are contributing to
or modifying overcompensation. The work will provide important insights into the
fundamental population dynamics that can produce overcompensation in both
natural and managed populations. Broader Impacts include mentoring graduate
trainees and undergraduate interns in the design and execution of field
experiments as well as in laboratory culture and feeding experiments. The
project will also involve a network of citizen scientists who are involved with
restoration activities in this region and results will be posted on the European
Green Crab Project website.

This project aims to establish the first example of overcompensation in marine
systems. Overcompensation refers to the paradoxical process where reduction of a
population due to natural or human causes results in a greater equilibrium
population than before the reduction. A population explosion of green crabs has
been recently documented in a coastal lagoon and there are strong indications
that this may be the result of overcompensation. Accelerated maturation of
females, which can accompany and modify the expression of overcompensation has
been observed. This RAPID project will collect field data from this unusual
recruitment class and conduct targeted mesocosm experiments. These will include
population surveys and mark-recapture studies to measure demographic rates
across study sites. Laboratory mesocosm studies using this recruitment class
will determine size specific mortality. Outcomes will be used in population
dynamics models to determine to what degree overcompensation has created this
dramatic population increase. The project will seek answers to the following
questions: 1) what are the rates of cannibalism by adult green crabs and large
juveniles on different sizes of juvenile green crabs, 2) what are the
consequences of smaller size at first reproduction for population dynamics and
for overcompensation and 3) how quickly will the green crab population return to
the levels observed prior to the eradication program five years earlier?