* 1514737
* Understanding Interacting Binary Stars Identified in Astronomical Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Paula Szkody, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2021
* USD 221,591.00

This project is aimed at understanding how stars that are formed in binary pairs
are distributed throughout our galaxy and how they evolve in time by interacting
with each other. The team members will use telescope time available through
their university to accomplish follow-up observations of variable objects that
are identified in several current ongoing sky surveys. The results will reveal
the number and nature of these systems that can be compared to theoretical
evolution models to understand their evolution. This study also serves as
preparation for the future Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (the NSF funded
astronomy project recommended by the United States' 2010 Decadal Survey), by
revealing the types of variables that will be found. The intellectual merit of
the results include new understanding of how mass transfer between stars affects
their evolution, how common these stars are at various locations in the galaxy,
how magnetic fields enter into the evolution, and how variable the objects are
at different evolution stages. The project has broad impact through building up
and working with an international community of scientists that will know how to
maximize results from the future Synoptic Telescope, including undergraduate
students in STEM fields as well as graduate and postdoctoral students in
astronomy.

The investigators will use Apache Point Observatory to obtain spectra, radial
velocities, and high time-resolution light curves of cataclysmic variables from
ongoing sky surveys (Sloan, Catalina, Kepler, and Palomar) in order to further
the understanding of the evolution of interacting close binary stars. The
results will determine the galactic distribution, test population models, and
the purity of the instability strip for accreting white dwarfs, parameterize the
population containing magnetic white dwarfs, as well as reveal the number and
nature of variables that will be present in the future Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope (LSST). The new results include number densities out of the galactic
plane, physical parameters of the variables at the shortest orbital periods,
angular momentum losses, heating and cooling resulting from accretion changes,
as well as the numbers containing magnetic white dwarfs. A broader impact of
these results is the buildup of an international community of astronomers,
including undergraduate STEM students, graduate students and postdocs that will
be able to exploit the LSST by identifying and following up close binaries of
interest.