* 1514814
* Collaborative Research: The Response of Continental Hydrothermal Systems to Tectonic, Magmatic, and Climatic Forcing
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Sherilyn Fritz, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2022
* USD 159,415.00

Continental hydrothermal systems have immense scientific and practical
significance and are critically important to the Earth?s thermal budget and
geochemical cycles. Continental hydrothermal systems are a primary source of
economically important metal deposits, provide geothermal resources, support
exotic ecosystems that are just beginning to be explored, and in some settings
pose a significant geologic hazard via hydrothermal explosions. The subsurface
conditions and processes that control these systems are poorly understood
because they entail the flow of multi-phase and multi-component fluids through
rocks with heterogeneous permeability fields that are perturbed by a multitude
of geological and environmental processes. Carefully designed multidisciplinary
field experiments and modeling efforts are &lt;br/&gt;required to understand the
coupled processes that drive these dynamic systems and control their response to
geological and environmental forcing. This project is focused on quantifying the
response of continental hydrothermal systems to tectonic, magmatic, and climatic
processes operating on time-scales from seconds to thousands of years. The PIs
address important and timely scientific questions, such as: How do multi-phase
fluids and dissolved constituents flux through hydrothermal systems? How do
these systems redistribute elements to produce mineral deposits and microbial
habitats? How do earthquakes and magmatic activity perturb hydrothermal systems?
What triggers hydrothermal explosions? How do environmental processes and
climate affect continental hydrothermal systems? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will involve a combination of fieldwork, data analysis, and modeling. The field
program uses a combination of innovative instrument networks and sediment coring
activities that will be integrated through modeling activities to study the
response of the Yellowstone Lake hydrothermal system to tectonic, magmatic, and
climatic forcing. Yellowstone Lake is an ideal site for this research because it
hosts an active hydrothermal system located in a region with high levels of
tectonic and magmatic activity that has been influenced by a broad range of
climate conditions in postglacial times. Research activities will include
components of geochemistry, seismology, geology, geodesy, heat flow,
micropaleontology, limnology, paleoclimatology, statistics, analytical modeling,
and numerical modeling, all of which are essential for unraveling the coupled
processes that drive system behavior. Working on a lake-floor system provides an
exceptional opportunity to study forcing-response relationships on an expanded
range of time-scales spanning more than 11 orders of magnitude.