* 1514276
* Neurocognition of speech comprehension in social context: speaker identity and listener experience
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Janet van Hell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 10/31/2016
* USD 199,988.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising scholar at the intersection of
Linguistics and Neuroscience. Worldwide, there are more multilingual than
monolingual speakers and, by extension, more accented than non-accented speakers
of English and many other world languages (e.g., Spanish, Mandarin, Arabic).
Social psychology and sociolinguistic research suggests that foreign accent
often leads to stigmatization and negative social biases. The majority of the
world's speakers probably experience some type of stigmatization or stereotyping
based on their non-standard accent. To improve intercultural interactions and
global communication, better insights into how foreign accent affects
comprehension, decision-making, and evaluation are needed. This research project
addresses an important yet under-studied area of research in the neurocognition
of language: the effects of speaker identity as a pragmatic social cue that
influences language comprehension, and the impact of listener experience and
attitudes on comprehension. Specifically, the project tests how foreign-accented
speech impacts spoken language comprehension in four groups of listeners who
differ in their prior experience with foreign-accented speakers: monolingual
adult listeners, monolingual child listeners, and two groups of bilingual
listeners (bilinguals with the same or a different foreign accent as the
speaker). The interdisciplinary research project adds insight into the factors
that underlie relationship-building among speakers and listeners from different
language backgrounds, which is particularly important given that listeners tend
to use language attitudes and cues, such as accent, to stereotype speakers'
attributes and make decisions about them. This project informs cross-cultural
communication, especially for education, business, law, judicial sectors, and
health and welfare sectors, where professionals and clientele frequently
interact with people from different language backgrounds who speak with non-
standard accents. Ultimately, the outcomes of the research will contribute to
decreasing the potentiation of social disparity and reducing the entrenchment of
negative social biases. Because the project takes a socio-contextual approach in
the brain-based study of language, it also contributes to bridging neuroscience
research with applied fields, including education.

This research project is the first neurocognitive study on how foreign-accented
speech impacts language comprehension in four groups of listeners who differ in
their experience with foreign-accented speakers. The multi-disciplinary approach
combines insights and methods from cognitive neuroscience, sociolinguistics, and
developmental psychology to investigate the interplay of language attitudes,
accented speech comprehension, and neural signatures of language processing. The
research design uses Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) and analyses of neural
oscillations to study the neural correlates of how listeners' experience with
foreign-accented speech and language attitudes affect language comprehension.
The project tests both child and adult listeners and yields important insights
into the development of neuropragmatic sensitivity in language comprehension and
introduces linguistic pragmatics into neuroscience research. Additionally,
including two groups of bilingual listeners identifies neuropragmatic effects on
spoken language comprehension in non-native listeners. This is crucial
considering that the majority of the world's speakers are bi- or multilingual,
making non-native listening a global social norm. Due to its interdisciplinary
motivation and design, the project establishes the groundwork for future
research on interactions among social, individual, and neurobiological factors
in language and communication.