* 1514603
* I-Corps:  CyberExercises, Instructional Modules Development for Exercise-based Teaching of CyberSecurity Concepts
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Akbar Siami Namin, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

At the present time there is a lack or absence of comprehensive offering of
online/offline cybersecurity related exercise-based training and a certification
program. Offering such a curriculum can have a broad impact on promoting cyber
security education and practices across various organizations. This learning
technology can have a significant impact on elevating the quality and the
quantity of cyber security courses offered by two and four-year colleges and
thus fosters an exponential increase in the number of nationally demanded cyber
security professionals. This I-Corps team intends to enhance the curriculum in
cyber-security pedagogies and raise the knowledge dissemination prowess of the
national and international community in academia. The proposed project
introduces online/offline training instructional modules to train individuals
interested in learning various aspects of cyber-security through specialization
tracks along with a leveling certification program carefully crafted to address
the needs of students of two and four-year college students. The project also
offers scientifically developed course materials for instructors with the aim of
facilitating teaching. The primary target audiences in this project are
community college, upper division and four year collegiate faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This online/offline learning development project is
codenamed, "CyberExercises" and has several features that rectify the previously
mentioned issues and consequently, provides a relatively unique position in the
market to commercialize our certification program. The first and leading
competitive advantage with this project is the development of cyber-security
simulations, exercises, and attack use cases designed to replicate real world
problems. This allows hands-on expertise in areas specifically relevant to the
participant and raises the ability of these individuals to negate the malicious
effects caused from them. A second relevant competitive advantage is the
creation of specific tracks customized to each individual. Several cyber-
security certification programs exist, but the competition usually has a generic
program that lead individuals to focus on irrelevant material, in fields
unrelated to their own, and often results in ineffectual information retention.