* 1514956
* EAPSI:Characterization of a Plant Cell-Produced Drug for the Treatment of Nerve Agent Exposure
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jasmine Corbin, Corbin                  Jasmine        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Plant cell suspension cultures are being investigated as a safe, cost-efficient,
and scalable platform for the production of human therapeutic proteins. However,
a major barrier for commercialization of this technology is the difference in
the N©\glycosylation of proteins produced by humans and plants: the presence of
plant-specific glycan structures can reduce the drug¡¯s efficacy and potentially
cause an unwanted immune response. Thus, the goal of this work is to
characterize the glycan profile of a protein therapeutic produced in a
transgenic rice cell culture. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Kazuhito Fujiyama of Osaka University, an expert in analysis and
modification of plant-made glycoproteins, and will enable use of his research
group¡¯s highly specialized protocols, equipment, and expertise.

The glycan profile will be determined for rice cell culture-produced
butyrylcholinesterase, a native human enzyme used for the treatment of exposure
to organophosphorus nerve agents such as sarin. The protein will be analyzed
using liquid chromatography¨Cmass spectrometry, and the resulting data will be
processed using bioinformatics software and databases of known plant-specific
glycan structure. The glycans will be first cleaved from the protein and
analyzed independently to determine glycan structure. Next, glycopeptide
fragments will be generated and analyzed to provide information about site-
specific glycosylation patterns. Knowledge of the glycan structures and site
occupancy will later be used to further understanding of plant glycosylation
patterns and to enable in vitro glycan humanization of the plant-made BuChE.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.