* 1514600
* RUI: Analysis of Chromatin-level Mechanisms Regulating Genomic Imprinting in Mouse
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Tamara Davis, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2019
* USD 319,516.00

Most genes in mammals are expressed from copies inherited from both the mother
and the father, but a small number of genes are only expressed from one of these
two copies; these are called imprinted genes. This project aims to investigate
the mechanisms that ultimately allow one copy of these imprinted genes to be
expressed while the other copy remains silent, or non-functional. Understanding
the regulation of these genes is important because normal patterns of mammalian
growth and development are perturbed if the expression of imprinted genes is
dysregulated, as when both or neither copy is expressed. These studies will be
conducted at Bryn Mawr College, a women's undergraduate institution, and will
provide a diverse cohort of undergraduate students with an enhanced educational
environment by affording them the opportunity to use current methodologies to
advance scientific exploration, ultimately preparing these undergraduate women
to be the next generation of research scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imprinted
genes are only expressed from one of the two parentally inherited alleles.
Monoallelic expression of imprinted genes is associated with differential DNA
methylation on the maternal and paternal alleles that are passed to offspring at
fertilization. What remains unknown is how further refinement of chromatin
structure is achieved during post-fertilization development in order to maintain
imprinted expression and establish tissue-specific imprinting. Post-
fertilization acquisition of DNA methylation at additional sites within
imprinted loci has been proposed to serve this purpose, but DNA methylation at
such secondary differentially methylated regions is highly variable. This
research will test the hypotheses that the observed variability is due to
increased levels of hemi-methylation and/or increased levels of
5-hydroxymethylcytosine. In addition, this work will identify cis-regulatory
elements responsible for tissue-specific imprinting using chromosome
conformation capture to understand how these elements work in concert with
epigenetic factors to achieve monoallelic vs. biallelic expression. Overall,
this research will lend insight into the mechanisms governing the establishment
and maintenance of chromatin structure critical for imprinted gene expression.