* 1514838
* Field Binary OB Stars:  Multifaceted Diagnostics of Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Sally Oey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 02/28/2021
* USD 409,922.00

The most massive stars are of vital interest to understanding how stars are
formed, and how they affect their host galaxy throughout their life, especially
in their inevitable explosive end. We normally expect high-mass stars to form in
clusters with lower-mass stars. However, about 25% of high-mass stars are found
not in clusters but in apparent isolation (known as "field" stars). This project
will quantify the properties of massive field stars and determine the relative
contributions to the field of stars that were ejected from clusters vs those
formed in isolation. These findings will set critical observational constraints
on theories of star formation, which are broadly relevant to understanding our
environment within our host galaxy, including planet formation. The project will
exploit new instrumentation on the 6.5-m Magellan telescope. The project will
involve both undergraduate and graduate students. They will incorporate their
data sets into simple activities that can be utilized in undergraduate
introductory astronomy courses. The PI is involved in several curricular
innovation and outreach activities, including partnerships with the UM Special
Collections Library, the historic UM Detroit Observatory, and UM Museum of
Natural History. These promote broader science education among undergraduates
and the public, and build synergistic ties on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will carry out a spectroscopic monitoring survey of the field OB star
population in the Small Magellanic Cloud using the Michigan/Magellan Fiber
System (M2FS), a multi-object, echelle spectrometer. Their goals are to (1)
Identify field star binaries and obtain the distributions of orbital parameters,
including period, mass ratio, and eccentricity. 2) Accurately determine the
radial velocity distribution and constrain models of runaway ejection
mechanisms. Constrain the relative contribution to the field of runaways vs
stars that formed in situ. (3) Determine whether field stars that formed in situ
are indeed slow rotators. (4) Identify any trends in Oe/Be star properties with
binarity and v sin i while also providing high-quality monitoring of the Balmer
emission.