* 1514427
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Understanding Online Creative Collaboration over Multidimensional Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Noshir Contractor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2019
* USD 387,419.00

This is a study of the structure and dynamics of Internet-based collaboration.
The project seeks groundbreaking insights into how multidimensional network
configurations shape the success of value-creation processes within
crowdsourcing systems and online communities. The research also offers new
computational social science approaches to theorizing and researching the roles
of social structure and influence within technology-mediated communication and
cooperation processes. The findings will inform decisions of leaders interested
in optimizing all forms of collaboration in fields such as open-source software
development, academic projects, and business. System designers will be able to
identify interpersonal dynamics and develop new features for opinion aggregation
and effective collaboration. In addition, the research will inform managers on
how best to use crowdsourcing solutions to support innovation and marketing
strategies including peer-to-peer marketing to translate activity within online
communities into sales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will analyze digital
trace data that enable studies of population-level human interaction on an
unprecedented scale. Understanding such interaction is crucial for anticipating
impacts in our social, economic, and political lives as well as for system
design. One site of such interaction is crowdsourcing systems - socio-technical
systems through which online communities comprised of diverse and distributed
individuals dynamically coordinate work and relationships. Many crowdsourcing
systems not only generate creative content but also contain a rich community of
collaboration and evaluation in which creators and adopters of creative content
interact among themselves and with artifacts through overlapping relationships
such as affiliation, communication, affinity, and purchasing. These
relationships constitute multidimensional networks and create structures at
multiple levels. Empirical studies have yet to examine how multidimensional
networks in crowdsourcing enable effective large-scale collaboration. The data
derive from two distinctly different sources, thus providing opportunities for
comparison across a range of online creation-oriented communities. One is a
crowdsourcing platform and ecommerce website for creative garment design, and
the other is a platform for participants to create innovative designs based on
scrap materials. This project will analyze both online community activity and
offline purchasing behavior. The data provide a unique opportunity to understand
overlapping structures of social interaction driving peer influence and opinion
formation as well as the offline economic consequences of this online activity.
This study contributes to the literature by (1) analyzing multidimensional
network structures of interpersonal and socio-technical interactions within
these socio-technical systems, (2) modeling how success feeds back into value-
creation processes and facilitates learning, and (3) developing methods to
predict the economic success of creative products generated in these contexts.
The application and integration of various computational and statistical
approaches will provide significant dividends to the broader scientific research
community by contributing to the development of technical resources that can be
extended to other forms of data-intensive inquiry. This includes documentation
about best practices for integrating methods for classification and prediction;
courses to train students to perform large-scale data analysis; and developing
new theoretical approaches for understanding the multidimensional foundations of
cyber-human systems.