* 1514780
* EAGER: Data-Mining Driven Power-Efficient Intelligent Memory Storage for Mobile Video Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Wei Jin, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 215,576.00

Mobile devices such as smart-phones and tablets have become the most important
medium for delivering Internet traffic, especially multimedia content, to end
users. One of the most popular multimedia applications is video streaming.
During this process, video decoding has become the dominant energy-intensive
application used in mobile devices. In particular, the major signal processing
units in video decoders, such as motion estimation and compensation, forward and
inverse discrete cosine transform, require a significant amount of calculations
and frequent embedded memory accesses. It is understood that embedded SRAM
consumes a large amount of power and limits battery life, and this situation is
only expected to grow with the emerging popularity of high quality mobile video
applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to address this
problem by incorporating advanced data mining techniques particularly suited to
mobile video data applications into the hardware design process to yield an
intelligent memory having high power efficiency. The PIs will explore and
characterize the behaviors of video data and provide a better-informed low power
hardware design. The goal is to create new power efficient mobile video memory
designs that utilize the identified characteristics extracted by suitable data-
mining techniques tailored to video data, which will serve as a core foundation
to bring about drastic improvements in energy efficiency. The exploration of
these intelligent low power techniques through the interaction of both hardware
and software viewpoints will enable a new dimension for power savings. The
success of this project will have a huge impact on the mobile computing
community, architecture community, and everyday life. This project will also
serve as an excellent educational platform to improve the understanding of green
computing amongst future computer scientists and computer engineers. The PIs
will jointly develop course modules focusing on software/hardware co-design for
mobile devices, which can be integrated into a variety of different courses. The
PIs will also continue to recruit underrepresented students, such as females and
minorities, to participate in this project.