* 1514285
* NeTS: Medium: Scaling WLAN Throughput and Range with Wide Aperture and 100x Spectrum Diversity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Edward Knightly, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 800,000.00

The driving vision of this project is to develop the foundations to scale line-
of-sight (LOS) Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) to Terabit/second (Tbps)
throughput and to exploit Tbps LOS interconnections to form distributed arrays
in lower frequency bands. Namely, this project first targets to scale
millimeter-wave networks with wide aperture LOS spatial multiplexing, thereby
overcoming a fundamental limit of the lack of rich multi-path channels at high
frequency. The second target is to overcome the inability of high frequencies to
penetrate objects and the inability of lower frequency devices to have large
arrays on a single client due to physical device constraints. Surmounting these
obstacles enables formation of all-wireless distributed arrays with
unprecedented properties. The proposed research agenda will enable new
dimensions for scaling WLAN throughput and range.This project targets to impact
spectrum policy via demonstration of novel usage cases of emerging and diverse
spectral bands. This project will show how a design based on wide aperture
enables high frequency bands to scale to achieve previously impossible capacity
gains. This project will impact standards bodies as it will show how
enhancements to existing standards and fusion of diverse bands can yield vast
performance gains. This project will impact industry through demonstration of
results coupled with the investigators' extensive collaborative industry
network. Finally, the project includes an inter-disciplinary education plan and
the team includes multiple Ph.D. students from under-represented groups. This
project will provide two integrated fundamental advances towards realizing a
vision of scaling WLAN throughput and range. The first project thrust is
development and fabrication of a wide aperture millimeter wave interconnect with
pico-second scale synchronization. The key technique is combining widely-spaced
radiating elements into a synchronized and coherent line-of-sight spatially
multiplexed transmission. Second, the project exploits the diverse properties of
spectrum spanning two orders of magnitude (100 times or 100x). By coupling the
aforementioned millimeter wave interconnect (operating at 30 GHz to 300 GHz)
with legacy bands (500 MHz to 5 GHz), the 100x architecture will enable long-
range spatially multiplexed object-penetrating links. The design will enable a
device with a single legacy-band antenna to spoof legacy-band MIMO
infrastructure into performing full-rank transmission and reception. A key
project outcome will be experimental proof-of-concept demonstrations of all
scaling principles and the first experimental realization of distributed legacy-
band spatial multiplexing for single legacy-band antenna devices, a mode enabled
by tightly synchronized distributed antennas with 100x spectrum diversity.

Gigabit-per-second scale wireless transmission is now feasible: Driven by the
wide spectrum availability at 60 GHz, multi-Gb/sec systems are already
standardized in protocols such as IEEE 802.11ad and wireless HDMI and are
available in commercial products and chipsets, including tri-band chips that
support 60 GHz as well as legacy bands at 2.4 and 5 GHz. Moreover, the broad
range of millimeter wave spectrum (30 GHz to 300 GHz) is considered a leading
candidate by industry, regulators and the research community for the next
generation of wireless systems. The project's objective is to realize the next
order of magnitude in rate, directionality, and range, targeting both direct
line-of-sight (LOS) paths and non-line-of-sight (NLOS) paths that must penetrate
objects. The project's goal is to both explore the underlying foundations and to
design and implement proof-of-concept systems to (i) realize a WLAN architecture
that scales to Tbps via networked mm-wave antennas that form a large effective
aperture and (ii) fuse diverse spectral bands spanning two orders of magnitude
in order to scale client array size, and subsequently capacity, beyond the
physical constraints of the device.