* 1514967
* RAPID: In vitro and in vivo evaluation of CANDO predictions for Ebola virus therapeutics
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Michael G. Katze, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2016
* USD 199,999.00

There are no small molecules known to target specifically the components of
Ebola virion, and therefore no effective small-molecule therapeutics approved to
treat Ebola virus disease (EVD) in human patients. Even if safe drug candidates
were available, there are formidable engineering and social challenges in
manufacturing sufficient doses in time to make an immediate epidemiological
impact. A critical advance would be to identify an already-approved and
manufactured compound that could be repurposed to treat EVD. This project, if
successful, will serve as a proof of concept for using powerful high-performance
computing and in vivo validation for swift identification and testing of
compounds that are already approved and available for human use. The PI recently
developed a mouse model of Ebola virus disease using the Collaborative Cross
mouse resource, which is genetically diverse yet tractable, and was shown to
reproduce the range of disease outcomes observed in human EVD patients. This
model will be utilized to evaluate small molecules, which have been already
identified computationally by the Computational Analysis of Novel Drug
Opportunities (CANDO) platform. CANDO is a novel high-performance computing
approach, which docks in a massively parallel fashion all the approved drugs
onto the known three-dimensional structures of target Ebola virus proteins and
identifies those molecules that are most likely to bind tightly and specifically
to virus proteins. Far from being limited to the pharmaceutical development
field, this approach will have general applicability for rapid prediction and
validation of molecular probes specific to any macromolecule with the known
spatial structure. Identifying drugs that are already FDA-approved for the
treatment of other conditions, but which also have activity against Ebola virus,
will significantly augment efforts to control Ebola outbreaks, as this will
allow us to rapidly deploy effective treatments. This will eliminate the need
for costly, slow trials and reduce the risk of such drugs producing unwanted
toxicity, since they have already undergone extensive testing for safety and
pharmacologic characterization. This drug-repurposing approach can be applied to
swiftly counter other emerging viruses for which there are no vaccines or
effective treatments. The same methods, furthermore, can be directly applied to
develop chemical probes that can target any large molecule with a known
structure.