* 1514493
* An interdisciplinary examination of speech processing in typical, deaf, and hard-of-hearing children
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Roberta Golinkoff, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 184,065.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship supports a rising scientist in the interdisciplinary
area of psycholinguistics, speech processing and developmental science. Hearing
loss is one of the most common birth defects in the United States affecting
approximately 3 in 1,000 newborns. Depending on the degree of hearing loss,
children receive different forms of intervention (e.g., hearing aids (HA) or
cochlear implants (CI)). Nevertheless, there is a huge amount of variability in
these children?s linguistic and academic outcomes. While some children who
receive CIs develop normally, half of the children who are implanted will have
language delays. Hearing screening procedures in clinics do not typically
include precise speech perception measures; thus, recommendations for treatment
are made without knowing whether children can interpret speech input. This makes
it difficult to effectively determine which children require CIs. When children
do not receive the appropriate intervention early enough, they are being
deprived of vital input during an extremely critical period for neural
development. Lack of exposure to sound and speech during the first few months of
life is detrimental for development of the brain?s auditory processing areas.
The current research combines clinical practices with research approaches to
examine the development of speech processing abilities in typical, deaf, and
hard-of-hearing infants. This work provides valuable information regarding how
children with various degrees of hearing loss process speech. The project has
the potential to substantially improve language outcomes in deaf or hard-of-
hearing (DHH) children, by providing a set of measures that will help determine
CI candidacy sooner. Findings will not only enhance scientific understanding of
DHH children's language development, but also provide important benefits to
society. Special education for children with hearing loss who fail to receive
appropriate early intervention costs the public additional thousands of dollars
per year, and keeps these children from fulfilling their potential. Furthermore,
the inclusion of typical-hearing children informs the wider field of infant
speech perception, affording insight into the trajectories that characterize
development. Discoveries and extensions from this project are relevant for
clinicians, parents, educators, policy makers, researchers and most importantly,
to the children whose lives are potentially affected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project evaluates the feasibility of a hybrid approach that takes techniques and
concepts from the field of psycholinguistics to examine how the degree of
hearing loss relates to the development of speech processing skills and later
vocabulary outcomes in DHH children. By incorporating parental reports and
behavioral measures used by developmental researchers (e.g., eye-gaze/looking
patterns), as well as audiometric measures (e.g., Otoacoustic Emissions,
auditory brain responses), the project translates the fruits of developmental
science for use with a clinical group while at the same time providing valuable
information about typical development. The research administers these various
tasks to the same DHH and typical children at 3 time points in the first year of
life to gauge their speech-processing ability. The ultimate goal of this work is
to more accurately and efficiently assess whether individual children can
flourish linguistically with a HA or will require a CI. Findings will help
prevent delays in language and speech acquisition, and lags in later academic
achievement. This proposal is also supported by the NSF EPSCoR.