* 1514437
* TWC: TTP Option: Medium: Scalable Web Transparency: New Scientific Building Blocks, Tools, and Measurements to Tame the Data-Driven Web
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Roxana Geambasu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,588,998.00

With the advent of "big data," the Web has become a highly potent and opaque
place which, left unchecked, can breed data misuse and unfair practices toward
individuals. Today's Web services accumulate staggering amounts of personal
data, such as emails, searches, and activity logs. They are mined for business
value, retained for extended periods of time, and at times shared with third
parties -- all without individuals' knowledge or explicit consent. Are these
uses good or bad for individuals? Do they match a service's privacy policy? How
long is data used after deletion? Who shares data with whom? Presently, there is
little insight into these questions. This project creates a set of building
blocks to track different types of individual data (e.g., keywords used in
searches, previous sites visited) and measure multiple types of use (e.g.,
targeted advertising). These are used to develop robust and scalable tools for
tracking data to uncover misuse.

Our project seeks to increase the data-driven Web's transparency by developing
both the tools and the scientific foundations for tracking the data's journey on
the web. We make contributions on three fronts. First, we design a set of
building blocks, highly reusable and scalable components that facilitate the
building of a new generation of auditing tools to lift the curtain on how
personal data is being used. Second, we build a set of robust and scalable
transparency tools that instantiate those building blocks and enable users,
journalists, and investigators to obtain visibility into Web services' data
uses. We are actively seeking out deployments through collaborations with
journalists and investigators. Third, we leverage these tools to run extensive
measurement studies of various data-driven platforms, such as targeted
advertising ecosystems, data brokers, and online price discrimination. These
studies increase awareness, and help uncover examples of data mistreatment,
which we hope will provide the grounds for an informed societal argument on the
need for increased voluntary transparency on the Web.