* 1514647
* I-Corps:  Sustainabilty of Peer-Led Learning Programs Through a Commercialization Model
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2015
* Geoffrey Saupe, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Universities have funding mechanisms to pay administrators, staff, faculty
members and graduate students. However, funding mechanisms to pay undergraduates
for student-assisted learning are largely absent, and under budget constraints
new funding is very difficult to obtain. A strategy other than continuing to
repeat the grant proposal cycle is needed, in order to avoid gaps in funding
and, therefore, gaps in the program's continuation. The goal of this I-CORPS L
project is to develop a viable non-profit business strategy that can be
implemented by educational institutions for the purpose of creating self-
sustaining effective learning programs in STEM education.

The proposed product is a system for funding and promoting learning excellence
in the realm of peer-assisted learning programs. The system produces and sells
customized books and other learning materials. The innovation and intellectual
property (IP) contained in the materials is donated to non-profit organizations,
where they are optimized for distribution to customers. Donors of the IP include
a variety of individuals interested in supporting quality education. Lead for
America Corporation (LFAC), has demonstrated proof of principle for the model
proposed in this I-CORPS L proposal submission, producing and publishing
customized workbooks for sale in university bookstores. The sale of these
learning materials generates funds, which are used to support the learning
programs and enhance STEM education on the campuses and classrooms where they
are used. Campuses which adopt this strategy have considerable control over the
customization of their materials as well as control over the input of the
intellectual property that is used. By this innovation, funding issues that
often impede the adoption of effective learning strategies can be resolved.
Self-generated support through this proposed system offers long-term stability
to peer-led and peer-assisted effective teaching and learning strategies.