* 1514709
* Ends of Einstein Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Hans-Joachim Hein, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2017
* USD 116,395.00

An Einstein manifold is a Riemannian manifold of constant Ricci curvature. This
means that we have a space permeated by a physical field governed by a certain
system of nonlinear partial differential equations, closely related to but
subtly different from how the gravitational field in Einstein's theory of
General Relativity permeates spacetime. Independent of their origin in physics,
Einstein manifolds are beautiful mathematical objects in their own right whose
study links together many disparate areas of mathematics. The space underlying
an Einstein manifold usually has dimension 4 or higher, which makes it difficult
to visualize such structures. However, Einstein manifolds in dimension 4 share
many basic features with minimal surfaces in dimension 2, which have been a
staple of mathematical research and popularization for
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is a key feature of nonlinear partial
differential equations that solutions may form singularities and break down at
points of infinite physical field strength. An "end" of an Einstein manifold is
a neighborhood of such a singularity in space. The aim of this project is to
advance our understanding of these ends in two complementary ways: by
constructing new examples with unexpected properties, and by proving
classification theorems to narrow down the range of possible phenomena. On the
examples side, this will include the construction of Einstein metrics with
isolated singularities not homeomorphic to their tangent cones, Einstein metrics
with complex hyperbolic cusp ends, Einstein metrics interpolating between
different Ricci-flat cones, and Einstein manifolds of unbounded topology. On the
classification side, the main goal is to resolve open questions in the theory of
gravitational instantons (complete hyper-Kahler manifolds of real dimension 4),
by further developing a compactification technique recently introduced by the PI
and his coauthors.