* 1514801
* EAPSI:Resolving sources of volcanic and hydrothermal gases from the North Island of New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Brian House, House                   Brian          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

While volatile elements like carbon are returned to the deep Earth at convergent
tectonic margins like the Hikurangi Margin off the coast of New Zealand?s North
Island, some carbon in marine sediments is released through volcanic and
hydrothermal activity. Geologic cycling of carbon ? both at settings like the
Hikurangi Margin and globally ? is poorly understood and must be clarified to
evaluate anthropogenic effects on the carbon budget. This award supports the
first concerted volatile sampling and analysis campaign aimed at elucidating
where, relative to the Hikurangi Trench, slab-derived C is first detected in
geothermal systems and how the extent of C release changes with distance from
the trench. Field sampling and analysis will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. Bruce Christenson of GNS Science, New Zealand.

In addition to the overall carbon cycling budget, the sampling that will be
conducted in the fore-arc, volcanic center (the Taupo Volcanic Zone), and back-
arc regions of the North Island will be used to constrain cycling and
devolatilization potential of various carbon, nitrogen, and helium reservoirs at
different depths along the subducting slab. Fore- and back-arc devolatilization
processes are poorly understood, as are the particular geochemical reactions
responsible for volatile release and the potential for carbonate in altered
oceanic crust to contribute to carbon fluxes. New volcanic, hydrothermal, and
rock samples will enable more complete thermodynamic modeling of subduction
zones, with local as well as global implications. Comprehensive sampling and
analysis will also permit refinement of standard models used to distinguish
sources of volatiles released at subduction zones. This award is funded in
collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.