* 1514705
* EAPSI: The Estimation of a Power Grid Resiliency Metric Using Wide Area Measurements
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Andreas Schmitt, Schmitt                 Andreas        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The number of renewable energy sources continues to grow as demand for
electricity increases. While using more renewable energy has many benefits,
there are issues that need to be addressed before large amounts of power can
come from renewables. Specifically, the addition of renewables to the power grid
decreases the consistency and stability of the system. One metric which allows
for the assessment of power grid stability is grid inertia . Inertia provides
information on how much system conditions will change after an event such as a
large power loss. This is also known as the resiliency of the system. The
project will estimate the value of inertia in the grid with the use of wide area
measurements from locations throughout the grid. The research will be done in
collaboration with Dr. Byongjun Lee at Korea University, whose research deals
with system stability using wide area measurements.

The widespread implementation of phasor measurement units (PMU) to the grid
provides grid-wide system data . These wide area measurements allow for analysis
that was not previously possible. One area that has benefitted from the addition
of PMUs is stability analysis. As more renewables are added to the system, these
stability analyses will become increasingly important. While traditional sources
use large machines to generate power which increases the inertia, renewables do
not contribute significantly to the system inertia. When larger percentages of
the power generated are from renewable sources, the overall system inertia will
decrease which means the power grid will be less resilient. The aim of this
project is to use the data from PMUs to estimate the inertia value in the grid
such that additional stability analyses can be done in the future to ensure that
the grid can use renewables effectively. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.