* 1514910
* Existence, Stability, and Qualitative Theory of Traveling Water Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Samuel Walsh, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 12/31/2018
* USD 137,357.00

Water waves are a fundamental subject of study in atmosphere and ocean science.
They have been investigated for hundreds of years, yet many of their most basic
features remain poorly understood mathematically. For instance, only very
recently has significant progress been achieved in developing a rigorous
existence theory for steady rotational water waves, that is, waves with
vorticity in the bulk of the fluid. These types of waves are ubiquitous in
nature: vorticity is generated by incoming currents, the wind blowing over the
ocean, or the density stratification due to salinity. A deeper understanding of
the mathematics underlying these phenomena would have many scientific and
practical applications. For example, traveling waves in density-stratified water
(internal waves) are a generic feature of coastal flows in the ocean; they are
known to play a major role in driving the circulation of ocean. Vorticity in air
is likewise strongly connected to the process of wind generation of water waves,
a topic of great importance to ocean and climate modeling as well as ocean
engineering. The investigator studies traveling waves in density-stratified
water, traveling waves with localized vorticity, and the stability of several
important classes of steady waves. He also studies the question of whether
stratified waves depend continuously on their density distribution. This
question has serious practical implications for how well layered-fluid models
can reliably represent flows in the ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The specific
goals of this project are to (i) expand the existence theory for steady
stratified waves and rotational traveling waves; (ii) develop new tools for
studying the qualitative properties of internal waves; and (iii) ascertain the
stability/instability of several important classes of steady waves. The
investigators and colleagues improve on the current existence theory for large-
amplitude internal waves by allowing for a general velocity profile in the far
field. Concurrently, they study the question of whether stratified waves depend
continuously on their density distribution. Confirmation or denial of this fact
has serious practical implications: if it is not true, then there is an
unbridgeable gap between continuously stratified fluids and the layered-fluid
systems that are commonly used to model them. Conversely, if the dependence is
smooth, then the modulus of continuity gives bounds on the error arising from
the layered approximation. The investigator studies traveling waves with
localized vorticity. In earlier work, he and collaborators proved the existence
of classes of traveling wave with compactly supported vorticity (including point
vortices and vortex patches), but completely unexplored is the intermediate
regime where the vorticity is localized but not compact. This important regime
is attacked using techniques from bifurcation theory and semi-linear elliptic
theory on unbounded domains. Using newly developed tools for determining
stability/instability of bound states for non-canonical Hamiltonian systems,
they also study the orbital stability of traveling waves with point vortices.
Lastly, the problem of wind generation of water waves is considered. This
entails studying the stability of small-amplitude steady waves in a two-fluid
Euler system, which sheds light on the role of the air-sea interface in the
transfer of energy from wind to water.