* 1514978
* EAPSI:Examining the Connectivity of Fish Populations Between Mesophotic and Shallower Reefs of Southern Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Garrett Johnson, Johnson                 Garrett        B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

While coral reefs worldwide are threatened by climate change, overfishing, and
pollution, an enormous and unexplored coral reef zone may provide a refuge from
many of these threats. Most coral ecosystem research has focused on shallow
reefs less than 30m depth, though photosynthetic corals extend to 165m in many
areas. This disparity is due to the physiological limitations of conventional
scuba that confines researchers to the shallows. This study will utilize new
technology in subsea instrument recovery, closed circuit rebreathers and
standard diver-based transects to provide the first comprehensive analysis of
MCEs of Japan. Research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. James
Reimer, a noted expert on genetics at the MISE Lab of the University of the
Ryukyus in Okinawa, Japan. Results will yield empirical data to assess the level
of connectivity of fish and invertebrate populations between MCEs and shallower
reefs by genetic analysis. and will provide valuable insight into MCE habitat
composition that will prove beneficial to marine resource managers.

Mesophotic Coral Ecosystems (MCEs) are tropical light-dependent reef communities
that extend from 30m to the bottom of the photic zone (165m). Remarkably MCEs
account for two-thirds of zooxanthellate coral habitat, yet remain almost
entirely unexplored. In particular the relationships between shallow and deep
communities are unknown; MCE fish populations may overlap with those of
shallower reefs, as suggested by the Deep Reef Refugia Hypothesis (DRRH), making
MCEs a potential refuge from environmental stress. The objectives of this study
are two-fold. First, the diversity of benthic covers of MCEs will be assessed at
four sites. Second, the DRRH will be examined to assess the role of MCEs in
providing larval fish and invertebrate recruits to shallow and deep reefs and to
determine the overall extent of vertical gene flow. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.