* 1514971
* EAPSI:Pesticide & Breeding Failure: Investigating the Link Using a Poorly Studied Australian Seabird
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Morgan Gilmour, Gilmour                 Morgan         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

Contaminants such as pesticides are ubiquitous in today's world. Though they are
a useful agricultural tool, pesticides can also cause unknown harm to the
surrounding environment and wildlife. In collaboration with Dr. Jennifer Lavers
at the University of Tasmania, this project will investigate: 1) the exposure of
an Australian seabird, the Great-winged Petrel (Pterodroma macroptera), to
contaminants through its diet of fish and squid in Western Australia; and 2) the
relationship between contaminants and Petrel breeding hormones. The researchers
hypothesize that contaminants cause a decrease in breeding hormones, which could
negatively affect the birds' breeding behaviors, possibly causing egg
abandonment and nest failure. This collaboration provides a unique opportunity
to: 1) research how contaminants affect seabirds in an area heavily-used for
both agriculture and fisheries; and 2) provide data on a little-studied species.
Petrels eat the same types of fish and squid that humans eat, so the results of
this project will inform issues affecting human health.

Contaminants such as organochlorines are ubiquitous in coastal areas, but
transport to more oceanic habitats and thus, organisms, remains little-studied.
The effect of organochlorines on wildlife vary among species, and although many
studies report contaminant loads, there are few data on what specifically drives
changes in behavior and physiology. This project will address this gap by
evaluating organochlorine pesticides and concurrent concentrations of a breeding
hormone (prolactin) in Great-winged Petrels (Pterodroma macroptera) in relation
to their diet and foraging habitat characteristics. This project will collect
blood samples from Petrels at breeding colonies in Western Australia; deploy GPS
tracking tags on Petrels to study foraging ecology; and conduct lab analyses at
RMIT University in Melbourne. This project?s results will provide information
about organochlorines in fish and piscivorous birds in King George Sound, a
highly productive area for fisheries that is adjacent to a large agricultural
delta, and thereby provide information for human health.

This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of
Science.