* 1514592
* Workshop: 2015 NSF Proposal Writing Workshop; Charlotte, North Carolina; June 8, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Tony Schmitz, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2015
* USD 12,799.00

This award supports an NSF proposal writing workshop aiming to aid future NSF
proposal submitters in communicating clear research objectives and improving
proposal quality. Participants will learn guidelines for writing a quality NSF
proposal with an emphasis on the research objective. Interactions during the
workshop will help build meaningful collaborations. This will positively affect
the attendees' academic career and, subsequently, will help develop the nation's
human resources. Additionally, when proposals are well written, the reviews tend
to be more consistent and NSF panel meetings are more efficient.

This NSF proposal writing workshop will be held on June 8, 2015, at the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte. It will be collocated with the 43rd
SME (Society of Manufacturing Engineers) North American Manufacturing Research
Conference (NAMRC) and the ASME (American Society of Mechanical Engineers)
Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC 2015). Major activities
of the workshop include: presentations by NSF program directors, breakout
sessions to discuss example research objectives, a group question/answer period,
and a conclusions session. Professors and graduate students from across the US
will be invited to attend the workshop.