* 1514945
* EAPSI: Understanding How Increasing Urbanization Affects Cultural and Biological Knowledge Preservation in Sichuan Province, China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Barnabas Seyler, Seyler                  Barnabas
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

China?s vast orchid diversity, particularly Southwest China?s Sichuan Province,
is well documented. Many species are used in traditional Chinese medicine, with
a long history of cultivation and cultural appreciation. Pressures resulting
from their pharmaceutical potential, rarity, and beauty, and from habitat loss,
risk extinction of many species. Due to the link between biodiversity and
cultural diversity, documenting traditional orchid knowledge is necessary to
conserve the orchid culture and diversity. Rapid urbanization and the acute
economic pressures for rural communities to develop have increased endangerment
of Southwest China?s biological and cultural diversity. In collaboration with
Dr. Ya Tang, an accomplished environmental scientist and botanist at Sichuan
University, this project will test the effect of urbanization on three types of
orchid knowledge in Sichuan Province. The unique cultural and biological
diversity of the province position this study to yield valuable insights for
conservation efforts.

Though the orchid flora of Sichuan Province is the third most diverse in
Mainland China, a disproÂ¬portionately small amount of research studies have
focused there. Rapidly declining orchid populations are widely recognized, but
little attention has been paid to formally documenting this phenomenon or
investigating the impact of their loss. Urbanization and economic development
pressures compound the endangerment of Sichuan?s biocultural diversity. This
study asks what role urbanization has on the preservation/dissemination of
orchid cultural knowledge in Sichuan, hypothesizing that the effect depends on
the type of knowledge considered. To test this, an interdisciplinary knowledge
survey, employing semi-structured interviews, will be conducted to assess
impacts of urbanization on three types of orchid knowledge in Sichuan.
Stakeholders in orchid biocultural diversity conservation such as government
agencies, botanical gardens, and universities will benefit from the greater
insight this project will provide for their initiatives. This NSF EAPSI award
supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration
with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.