* 1514932
* EAPSI:Characterizing Cultural Differences in Responses to Personal Insults
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jessica LeClair, LeClair                 Jessica        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

EAPSI: Characterizing cultural differences in responses to personal insults With
rapid globalization, more people face challenges of working and communicating
across cultures. In such interactions, misunderstandings may lead to unintended
insults. Understanding how people might respond when insulted is important,
especially as responses may vary across cultures (Leung & Cohen, 2001).
Aggressive responses may be acceptable in some cultures, while seen as
inappropriate in others. This project will examine cultural differences in how
people respond to insults and consider how being focused on avoiding negative
outcomes versus gaining positive outcomes alters behavioral responses to
insults. This research aims to contribute to developing culturally sensitive
ways of communicating and behaving. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Yukiko Uchida, an expert in cross-cultural understanding
at the Kokoro Research Center of Kyoto University, Japan.

Existing work on cultural differences in insult responses has largely focused on
regional variation, especially within the United States, and has used extreme
insult situations, including swearing and name-calling (e.g., Cohen et al.,
1996). The present study seeks to examine cultural differences in insult
responses by using a minor everyday-type of insult. Further, the research will
investigate the effect of manipulating approach-avoidance motivation on insult
responses. An approach motivation orients towards opportunities for gain, while
an avoidance motivation orients towards preventing loses. Based on previous
findings, suggesting that avoidance orientation may be more consistent with
responses in face cultures (e.g., East Asia) while approach orientation may be
more consistent with honor-type responses, we will examine how manipulating
approach-avoidance may impact responses to insults across cultures. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science.