* 1514655
* EAPSI: Productivity and Exits from Farming
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Austin Ramsey, Ramsey                  Austin         F
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The farm sector in Japan is subject to significant economic distortions. These
distortions, consequences of legislative activity in the 1950?s and 1960?s, have
resulted in a flagging agricultural economy. Total agricultural output has
declined significantly over the past three decades and the amount of farmland
being abandoned is at record levels. Japan?s Prime Minister, Shinzo Abe, has
targeted the agricultural sector for structural reform as part of a plan for
overall economic growth. The success of reform efforts will ultimately depend on
the state of productivity in Japanese agriculture and the factors causing
farmers to exit farming. Internal restructuring is critical to intrasectoral
growth, but the dynamics of these processes are not well understood. As a
general study of industry dynamics, this project will provide empirical results
pertinent to agricultural and industrial economies beyond Japan. The research is
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Tadashi Sonoda of Nagoya University who is
an expert on Japanese farm households.

Standard economic models based on the behavior of farm households will motivate
the use of reduced form statistical modeling. A Bayesian hierarchical model will
be specified to determine linkages between net farm exits over a period of time
and relevant economic and demographic variables. Hierarchical models make it
possible to utilize data at both the prefecture and town levels. Because several
measures of productivity and market distortion are only available at the
prefecture level, this modeling flexibility is especially important. Production
frontiers estimated from aggregate data will allow inference of the relationship
between productivity and farm exit through the use of secondary equations. The
results of this approach will make it possible to assess the factors influencing
aggregate entry and exit from the farm sector. Additionally, this study will
demonstrate the importance of productivity dynamics in understanding the
changing compositions of agricultural economies. This NSF EAPSI award supports
the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.