* 1514406
* CSR:Medium:Collaborative Research: SparseKaffe: high-performance, auto-tuned, energy-aware algorithms for sparse direct methods on modern heterogeneous architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Timothy Davis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The use of sparse direct methods in computational science is ubiquitous. Direct
methods can be used to find solutions to many numerical algebra applications,
including sparse linear systems, sparse linear least squares, and eigenvalue
problems; consequently they form the backbone of a broad spectrum of large scale
applications. In the widely used and actively growing University of Florida
Sparse Matrix Collection, there are problems from structural engineering,
computational fluid dynamics (CFD), computer graphics/vision,
robotics/kinematics, theoretical and quantum chemistry, power networks, social
networks, document networks, among others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The SparseKaffe
project team will develop algorithms and software for high-performance parallel
sparse direct methods with irregular and hierarchical structure that can exploit
clusters of Hybrid Multicore Processors to achieve orders of magnitude gains in
computational performance, while also paying careful attention to the energy
requirements. This requires the development of novel and innovative algorithms
for scheduling, energy minimization, and memory management; development of novel
user-guided autotuning algorithms that exploit different hardware
characteristics; and designing a common infrastructure for creating auto-tuned
software.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The use of sparse direct methods is extensive,
with many of the relevant science and engineering application areas being pushed
to run at ever higher scales. The team expects SparseKaffe solvers to be able
deliver not only high performance to the applications that use them, but also
the energy efficiency that they will increasingly demand. The team will also
create a course, and a corresponding set of course modules, to teach students
how to develop algorithms and software that deliver orders of magnitude gains in
performance on clusters of hybrid multicore processors.