* 1515557
* EAPSI: Investigating the Stability of Particles in Topological Phases of Matter
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Matthew Cha, Cha                     Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

A fundamental challenge in science is to characterize states of matter. A phase
of matter is a family of states of matter which have very uniform physical
properties. Common phases include liquid, gas and solid, which are distinguished
by varying temperature. In the 1980?s, scientist discovered new phases of matter
in two dimensional electron gas structures, namely fractional quantum hall
states. These states possessed particles with interesting statistical behavior,
called anyons. In particular, an exchange of two anyons resulted in a
multiplication of the state by a complex phase. These new states of matter
belong to topologically ordered phases. This project investigates the conjecture
that the structure of anyons is stable within a topological phase. This research
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Yasuyuki Kawahigashi, professor in
the Department of Mathematical Science at the University of Tokyo. Dr.
Kawahigashi is an expert in the theory of operator algebras and their
applications to mathematical physics. The collaboration allows us to further
explore the operator algebraic perspective of topological phases and pursue
rigorous results in the subject. This research will advance efforts to realize
universal quantum computing.

We begin by studying exactly solvable Hamiltonian lattice models, in the
thermodynamic limit, for which the anyon structure is completely known. These
models include Kitaev?s surface codes and Levin and Wen?s string-net models.
Each anyon is related to a superselection sector of the algebra of observables.
Analysis of the superselection sectors allows one to recover the complete anyon
structure, including particle fusion and braiding. Under physically allowable
perturbations, we will study the stability of the superselection sectors and
particle fusion and braiding. The stability of anyons is the premise of a major
program in fault-tolerant quantum computation, namely topological quantum
computation. The results of this project form the basis for the continued search
for a universal quantum computer through topologically ordered states. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science.