* 1515257
* EAPSI: Reconstructing 3D models from 2D images
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Audrey Cheong, Cheong                  Audrey         L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

This award supports research aimed at simplifying the process of obtaining
3-dimensional models through enhanced software and algorithm development,
enabling 3D model creation on everyday hardware such as a basic camera phone or
digital camera. This will allow small projects to perform 3D quantitative
studies without having to locate or invest in a 3D scanner. This project will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Shang-Hong Lai of National Tsing-Hua
University in Taiwan. Dr. Lai, an expert in the field of computer vision, has
created 3D face models from a single face image. Similar principles can be
applied to reconstruct 3D torso models to enhance breast cancer research.
Performing surface analysis on the 3D models will facilitate the quantitative
analysis of the breast morphology, help improve plastic surgery techniques to
adjust shape and volume, and provide 3D visualization of possible surgical
outcomes to patients during their pre-surgical consultation. In the broader
scheme, a cell phone app could potentially create a 3D model from captured
photos on the scene, which will lead to a greater accessibility to 3D data.

An algorithm on reconstructing 3D models from multi-view images will be
developed for rendering different objects, which will allow for 3D shape
analysis. The objectives are to calibrate the images to determine camera
positions, construct a coarse depth map of the target object, and modify the
parameters of the modeling algorithm to achieve photo-consistency. Multiple
photographs of a small toy object will be taken from various positions and these
positions will be recorded for reference. Some challenges are differentiating
shadow boundaries from structural edges and determining the directions of the
light sources. The graph cut method will give the general outline of the 3D
model based on the silhouettes from the images. Other methods utilizing
illumination and shading will be used to further refine the 3D model. This NSF
EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in
collaboration with the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.