* 1515288
* EAPSI: The Anatomy and Evolutionary Relationships of Klamelisaurus Gobiensis and Other Sauropod Dinosaurs of the Middle and Late Jurassic of China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Andrew Moore, Moore                   Andrew         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1.00

Sauropod dinosaurs are the largest terrestrial animals ever to have lived. The
sauropod body plan--characterized by elongated necks, massive bodies, and air-
filled bones--emerged in the Middle and Late Jurassic, some evolving neck
lengths exceeding nine meters. It is not known how and why body forms evolve. So
far, no fewer than twenty sauropods from the Middle and Late Jurassic of China
were found. Yet most remain to be studied. Through collaboration with Dr. Xu
Xing of the Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, an
international authority on dinosaur evolution, this project will exhaustively
document the anatomy of Klamelisaurus gobiensis, an understudied sauropod from
the Middle-Late Jurassic of China. New anatomical data from Klamelisaurus and
other Chinese sauropods will be used to produce a revised hypothesis of sauropod
evolutionary relationships and illuminate the mechanisms by which long necks
evolved.

The holotype of Klamelisaurus gobiensis preserves a largely complete postcranial
skeleton. The researcher will spend a significant portion of the EAPSI program
producing a monographic anatomical description of Klamelisaurus. In addition,
the researcher will reassess sauropod evolutionary relationships with a large
morphological character matrix that includes numerous Chinese sauropods that
have never been included in such an analysis, specifically addressing the
hypothesis that Klamelisaurus is an early member of the exceptionally long-
necked Omeisauridae. Phylogenetic analyses will be performed under both maximum
parsimony and Bayesian posterior probability optimality criteria in the programs
TNT and BEAST. The resulting evolutionary trees will be used to statistically
test the likelihood of different evolutionary hypotheses regarding neck
elongation, e.g., air space increases in anterior cervical vertebrae prior to
the cervicalization of dorsal vertebrae. This NSF EAPSI award supports the
research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.