* 1515635
* EAPSI: Hydrology of a Seasonally Creeping Fault in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Noah Randolph-Flagg, Randolph-Flagg          Noah           G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

This award supports research that will use water samples, creep meter data, and
computer models to understand the hydrology of the Longitudinal Valley Fault in
eastern Taiwan. Faults can exhibit two behaviors--stick-slip behavior,
characterized by earthquakes, and aseismic slip, known as creep. The
Longitudinal Valley Fault exhibits both behaviors with a magnitude 6.5
earthquake in 2003 and yearly creep occurring almost exclusively during the
rainy season. This seasonal motion is extremely unusual and, unlike most
unpredictable faults, provides information about the processes occurring within
faults. Dr. Jian-Cheng Lee, who maintains the Longitudinal Valley Fault
observatory, has used the seasonal motion on the fault to make testable
predictions about the depth, source, pressure, and pattern of water circulating
within the fault. In collaboration with Dr. Lee, this study will sample the
water chemistry and temperature of springs along the fault to more directly
measure the processes inferred from fault motions.

This study will involve sampling hot springs, which are directly measuring the
conditions within the fault. These new observations will be integrated with
creep and well log data to create a 3D hydrologic model for fault movement.
Tritium (3H) concentrations measure if water postdates subaerial nuclear tests
and the amount of mixing with deeper fluids. Deuterium and oxygen isotope ratios
can be used to trace the source elevation of groundwater due to the systematic
changes in the isotopic composition of rain. Thermobarometers use the
temperature dependence of chemical reactions with bedrock to record the
pressures and temperatures experienced by groundwater. These measurements
constrain the depth and speed of groundwater circulation near the fault as well
as source of this groundwater. This study will then use the open-source United
States Geological Survey program HYDROTHERM to model 2-phase advection of heat,
pressure, and water through a fault zone. This NSF EAPSI award support the
research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.