* 1515174
* EAPSI: Variable Energy Positron Beam for Positronium Diffraction
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Randall Gladen, Gladen                  Randall        W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports participation of a U.S. graduate student in a cutting edge
experiment using the new positronium beam developed by Professor Yasuyuki
Nagashima of Tokyo University of Science (TUS). The Nagashima beam consists of
positronium particles, which will be diffracted from solid surfaces. In the
experiment, positronium particles will be diffracted from solid surfaces,
providing a unique neutral-particle spectroscopic method with several advantages
over conventional neutral-particle spectroscopy, including particle size and the
reduction in damage of the surface of the sample. This experiment will also
provide the first observation of the diffraction of positronium from solid
surfaces, providing valuable experimental evidence for theoretical quantum
mechanics, as well as experimental results that will aid in the development of
other spectroscopic methods. Future experiments may include the study of porous
and catalytic materials for the development of fuel cells and the production of
hydrogen from water using solar energy. This work will also contribute to the
collaboration between the Nagashima laboratory at TUS and the Positron Surface
Laboratory group at the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA).

Professor Yasuyuki Nagashima and his research group, in collaboration with the
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), successfully constructed an
earlier positronium beam using the photo-detachment of electrons from negative
positronium ions, with a new positronium beam currently under construction.
Using this unique method, this energy-tunable beam surpassed the previous beam
energy limit of 400 eV, with measured minimum and maximum energies of 300 eV and
1.9 keV, respectively, and higher energies possible. The new beam?s properties
of high flux, better collimation, and lower energy spread will enable the
observation of multiple diffraction beams and the measurement of the energy
dependence of the diffraction. Using this new positronium beam, which is
expected to be completed by spring 2015, experiments consisting of the
observation of high-energy positronium diffraction from solid surfaces, namely
Si and LiF, will be performed. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.