* 1515849
* Dynamics of Dispersive PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* David Ambrose, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 269,987.00

This project studies dispersive partial differential equations, which are
equations describing wave-like behavior in physical systems. As such, dispersive
partial differential equations can describe phenomena in optics, fluids, or
plasmas, to name just a few areas of application. To determine the validity of a
particular equation as a model for a given phenomenon, it can be helpful to
determine whether the equation has a solution, and if it does, how this solution
depends upon the physical parameters. For certain nonlinear Schrodinger
equations, and for certain equations which can be used as models for waves in
water, the principal investigator will study when these equations either lack
solutions, or have solutions which depend discontinuously upon the data. This
will indicate that these particular models have only limited validity for
applications. As another part of the project, for some other families of
dispersive partial differential equations, the principal investigator will
determine when the equations either do or do not possess solutions with certain
special forms. Understanding such solutions, such as waves of permanent form or
time-periodic waves, can lead to a deeper understanding of the behavior of the
corresponding physical phenomena over long intervals of time.

The principal investigator will study well-posedness and ill-posedness for
quasilinear Schrodinger equations and for truncated series water wave models.
For quasilinear Schrodinger equations, well-posedness theorems have been proved
under certain non-degeneracy hypotheses; in this work, ill-posedness will be
studied when the non-degeneracy condition is violated. For truncated series
models of water waves, the relationship between well-posedness/ill-posedness and
the strength of dispersion will be investigated using complex variable methods
and tools from paradifferential calculus. For nonlinear Schrodinger equations
and for general families of nonlinear dispersive equations, the principal
investigator will use small divisor estimates, normal forms, and dispersive
smoothing estimates to demonstrate the non-existence of small-amplitude
spatially periodic, time-periodic waves in certain parameter regimes. Also,
existence of time-periodic, spatially-periodic waves for dispersive equations
with high-derivative nonlinearities (especially for systems related to capillary
waves in fluids) will be studied, using small divisor methods and techniques of
Fourier analysis.