* 1515129
* EAPSI: Genomic Insights to Diversification and Speciation Using Hybrid Zones of Widespread Australian Geckos (Heteronotia Binoei)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* James Titus-Mcquillan, Titus-McQuillan         James          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Hybrid zones are areas where the distribution of two distinct species overlap,
allowing the species to exchange genes in the area of contact. The width of
hybrid zones can provide important insights into the process of speciation, and
in particular how species remain distinct in the face of ongoing gene flow. The
work will leverage the power of next-generation sequencing to quantify gene flow
and the permeability of thousands of genes across three hybrid zones between
divergent lineages in the widespread Bynoe?s gecko (Heteronotia binoei). This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Craig Moritz, a world
renowned expert in the field of evolutionary biology, at Australia National
University in Canberra, Australia. The biogeographic history of Australia plays
an important role in understanding the mechanisms of biotic diversification in
arid regions, and this project will contribute insights into how lineages
diverge during the dynamic climatic environments of the Pliocene and
Pleistocene.

Speciation is a fundamental process in biology and understanding the mechanisms
that promote and/or limit biotic diversification has been a core theme in
evolutionary science. Hybrid zones are regions where two closely-related species
exchange genetic material and thus demonstrate that while reproductive isolation
is not necessary for speciation, important biotic and abiotic variables prevent
the complete merging of the divergent lineages. This project leverages the power
of next-generation sequencing, an emerging model system of diversification in
Australia (Heteronotia), and a strong international alliance to impart insights
into speciation processes, a primary goal in evolutionary biology. Those loci
with steep clines and smaller widths may represent genes important to
adaptation. By incorporating exome data using next-generation sequencing, this
project includes a genome-wide functional perspective on understanding the
dynamics of speciation, highlighting the exceptional value that genomics has on
understanding natural history.

This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is
funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.