* 1515604
* EAPSI:Interactive Behavior of Methane-Consuming Microbes in Marine Sediments and their Resilience to Increased Methane Levels
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Scott Klasek, Klasek                  Scott          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The potent greenhouse gas methane is responsible for about 20% of anthropogenic
warming. (Tens of) megatons of methane are produced annually in marine
sediments, but microbes in the sediments consume most of this methane before it
is released into the ocean or atmosphere. These microbes consist of clusters of
bacteria and archaea coexisting in layers of sediment where methane mixes with
sulfate. Several studies have focused on characterizing the metabolism of this
microbial partnership and measuring methane consumption rates, but the
mechanisms by which the cells find each other, disperse, and respond to
environmental changes, such as increases in methane released from subseafloor
reserves, have not been characterized. Quantifying the relationships between
methane concentration, cell activity, and cell density will improve carbon
cycling models, allow a more accurate prediction of methane release into the
ocean, and advance the understanding of a major process in the global carbon
cycle. Also, identifying cellular pathways and components involved in the
interactions between the two cell types will offer fundamental insight into a
model archaeal-bacterial symbiosis. This research will be conducted with Drs.
Fengping Wang and Ying He at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China. Dr. Wang
has enriched these cells using similar techniques and obtained their genomes to
predict their nutrient cycling processes, and Dr. He?s bioinformatics expertise
will help uncover new cell-cell interactions.

The anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) by methanotrophic archaea of the ANME
clades and sulfate-reducing bacteria consumes 60-90% of the methane produced in
the marine subsurface, making it a crucial biogeochemical process. Long-term,
high-pressure incubations of marine sediment samples in static bioreactors have
been used to generate biomass and study cell growth. Incubations under different
methane concentrations combined with fluorescence microscopy and comparative
metagenomics and metatranscriptomics will be used to assess shifts in the
composition, activity, and behavior of these microbial communities. A draft
genome of an anaerobic methanotroph (ANME-2) will also be examined for
chemotaxis and cell-cell signaling pathways. This NSF EAPSI research fellowship
supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration
with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.