* 1515417
* EAPSI: Investigating the Performance of Data Dissemination Protocols in Urban Outdoor Wireless Sensor Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kwame-Lante Wright, Wright                  Kwame-Lante
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research to study the performance of wireless sensor network
data dissemination protocols in an urban outdoor environment. Wireless sensor
networks (WSNs) provide the ability to gather an unprecedented amount of
information about our environment. They have been employed for a variety of
applications including structural health and habitat monitoring. There is
growing interest in utilizing wireless sensor networks in the study of urban
sustainability, as a means to measure air quality and its effects on people and
the environment. However, the rich streams of data required by this application
area place a high demand on the underlying network protocols; protocols that
were designed specifically for use in an indoor environment. The wireless
channel characteristics of an indoor environment can differ significantly from
an outdoor one, and hence motivates this study. Experiments will be conducted in
Clementi, Singapore on an urban outdoor testbed built and maintained by Dr. Mun
Choon Chan and the Communication and Internet Research Lab at the National
University of Singapore (NUS). The results of this study will be used to propose
and develop enhancements to improve the performance of existing protocols
outdoors.

The focus of this study will be on WSNs utilizing 2.4 GHz radios based on the
IEEE 802.15.4 standard, which are the most common for this type of network.
There are a variety of published protocols that have been designed for WSNs,
including Glossy and Splash. Such protocols have been developed and analyzed
indoors, since indoor testbeds, such as Motelab and Indriya, are more common.
However, the performance of these protocols has not been assessed in an urban
outdoor environment. There are two techniques utilized by these dissemination
protocols that will be focus of this study, namely channel hopping, a technique
designed to exploit the lack of correlation between different channels in a
wireless network, and transmitter density diversity, a technique where the
potential for constructive interference between devices is exploited to improve
the reliability of a communication link. This study will assess the suitability
of these two techniques for an urban outdoor environment. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation in Singapore.