* 1515576
* EAPSI: Evolutionary Origins of Complexity in a Bioluminescent Crustacean
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Emily Ellis, Ellis                   Emily          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

A long-standing question in evolutionary biology is why there are so many
species. One possibility is that certain traits ¬including courtship displays
¬contribute to a faster rate of new species formation (speciation). Although
studied for decades, there are still only a few well-documented examples of
traits that led to faster speciation, and even fewer that implicate sexual
traits as a driver of speciation. Without well-documented examples, it is
impossible to distinguish between different explanatory models that link
particular traits to rapid speciation. A novel, but tractable, study system to
investigate the link between sexual selection and speciation is ostracod
crustacean bioluminescence. Many of these animals use bioluminescence in a
courtship display, not unlike fireflies. This award supports collection and
genetic and behavioral analysis of a diverse range of bioluminescent ostracod
crustaceans to determine whether female preference for light pre-dates the
evolution of male light signals. The answer to this question has direct
implications for models of how mating signals evolved. The research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Yoshihiro Ohmiya, a noted expert on
invertebrate bioluminescence, at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology in Tsukuba, Japan.

This project bridges the gap between molecular phylogenetics and behavioral
evolution. The proposed research offers a novel approach to studying female
preference in a phylogenetic context, as well as functional tests to discover
previously undocumented conspecific bioluminescent signals. The award supports
collection of eleven Japanese bioluminescent ostracod crustaceans and their
close relatives (none of which use bioluminescence for mating). The collection
will enable genetic, species-level data for a novel phylogeny to test various
sexual selection hypotheses. This will be augmented by behavioral studies that
quantify female response to simulated bioluminescence. These results will be
synthesized to time the origins of the male signaling trait and the evolution of
female preference. The researcher will test the Sensory Exploitation Hypothesis,
which posits that traits involved in mating exploit the receiver?s innate
senses. After these experiments, the ostracods will be preserved for further
genomic study. Genomic material will be sequenced to create a phylogenetic tree
of relationships for the group and test whether the evolution of bioluminescent
courtship displays has increased diversity in the group. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.