* 1515024
* Theoretic Studies in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics and Climate Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Shouhong Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2018
* USD 309,249.00

The principal investigator develops and studies mathematical models of
geophysical processes important for weather and climate. A major aim is to
better understand sources of climate variability and the extent of their
influences. The work involves new mathematical theory and techniques for dynamic
transitions between states of a system described by a set of partial
differential equations, and for memory effects -- differences in any particular
state's features that depend on the chain of states through which the system
arrives at that state. The system may be deterministic or stochastic. The
mathematical issues are motivated by climate problems, and in turn the theory
and the techniques are applied to the understanding of fundamental issues in
climate dynamics and prediction. This project leads to improved predictions and
new insights into weather, climate, and environmental phenomena of central
importance to our economy. One such phenomenon to be studied in this project is
the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), which is the dominant mode of inter-
annual climate variability, and which has global impacts on temperature,
precipitation, tropical cyclones, human health, and even conflict. The project
involves scientists as well as graduate students from the related scientific
disciplines. Graduate students are included in the work of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The principal investigator and his collaborators work on
dynamic transition theory for both deterministic partial differential equations
and stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs), and on developing theory
and methods to establish effective non-Markovian reduced models for SPDEs. The
goal is to quantify the sensitivity and dynamic transitions associated with
typical sources of climate low frequency variability. Major goals include
quantifying the role played by the memory effects, and identifying the key
nonlinear interactions between low and high modes and the memory effects caused
by noise. A few typical sources of climate variability that will be studied
include ENSO, tropical convections, and the thermohaline circulations. Their
variability, independently and interactively, may play a significant role in
climate changes, past and future. The project involves specific collaborations
with active atmosphere/ocean scientists in different institutions, and graduate
students are included in the project work as well.