* 1515112
* EAPSI: Optimization and Investigation of MRI Contrast Phenomena
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Benjamin Fellows, Fellows                 Benjamin       D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of the most powerful tools available for
biomedical imaging today. This is especially true when paired with contrast
enhancement agents. Although current FDA approved contrast enhancement agents
are sufficient, they are far from optimal. This project will focus on
identifying the key variables contributing to contrast enhancement and
exploiting this information to develop highly efficient, completely optimized
MRI contrast agents. Optimizing such materials will reduce agent dosage and
increase accuracy of MRI scans. This work will be done in collaboration with Dr.
Tim St. Pierre, a leading authority in the field of biomagnetics, at the
University of Western Australia in Perth Australia. Dr. St. Pierre's lab is one
of two places in the world that possess such a diverse set of magnetic
instrumentation, this will allow for the full characterization and investigation
of the contrast enhancement materials in question. Investigations in contrast
enhancement physics will be done using an MRI active nanoparticle complex that
can be accurately varied in size and composition. This investigation will
determine optimal parameters for novel contrast agents effectively lowering dose
and toxicity while increasing contrast. Once ideal parameters are attained, core
shell particles that combine both longitudinal and transverse relaxation agents
(T1 and T2 respectively) will be synthesized in accordance with optimization
data. The dual mode agents will allow for the reduction in noise and
misinterpretation due to artifacts appearing in weighted scans, as well as
reducing the amount of contrast required for a normal procedure. The bimodal
nature of the particles will allow the subtraction of such artifacts seen by a
single weighted scan using the combined contrast to determine artifact
enhancement and eliminate it. The dual contrast complex will also enhance the
understanding of the contrast mechanism, and how changes in local field
influence the relaxation times measured in MRI.

This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of
Science.