* 1515671
* Workshop: "Global Solutions to Regional Problems: Collecting Global Expertise to the Problem of Harmful Algal Blooms" at Bowling Green State University, Ohio on April 13-14, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* George Bullerjahn, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 20,000.00

1515671&lt;br/&gt;Bullerjahn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop: Global
Solutions to Regional Problems: Collecting Global Expertise to the Problem of
Harmful Algal Blooms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the Workshop is to
identify the major knowledge gaps toward understanding bloom formation,
detection and mitigation, along with discussion of case studies that highlight
current bloom remediation efforts. Since bloom events are an increasingly global
phenomena, bringing together cyanobacteria, harmful algal bloom researchers from
China, Europe and Australia will provide a broad perspective on current research
and mitigation strategies employed around the world. The outcome of the Workshop
will be a manuscript submitted to a peer-reviewed journal that summarizes future
research goals and challenges, along with current best practices for CHAB
control. Overall, the Workshop will set priorities for both future research and
implementation of remediation protocols. This project will not fund any
international participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site of the Workshop is
located in the watershed in which a cyanobacteria, harmful algal bloom event
shut down the municipal water supply to 500,000 residents in August 2014. This
phenomenon was widely reported in the popular press, thereby informing the
general public to HAB threats. The Workshop is ideally positioned to educate the
public through news media on the causes, prevention and event response to CHABs
so that residents in affected areas are adequately informed. Published findings
of the Workshop will be broadly disseminated to the scientific community through
the peer-reviewed literature, and drafts of the Workshop manuscript will be made
available to NOAA staff to help inform their strategic actions through the
Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act. Lastly, undergraduate
students at BGSU will participate in a seminar in which Workshop findings drive
the formation of a list of recommendations for regional and national
cyanobacteria, harmful algal bloom control.