* 1515015
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the Trans-Neptunian Solar System with the Dark Energy Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Gerdes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2018
* USD 95,940.00

Despite centuries of scanning the skies, it is only now that humans are able to
begin to really search for and identify many of the most distant objects in our
own Solar System, those that orbit well beyond Neptune. These objects are
becoming accessible through ongoing surveys using telescopes on the Earth that
scan large parts of the sky repeatedly. These surveys allow detection of very
faint objects, as well as their motion and any changes in brightness. The
objects are important to understand because they are the remnants of the early
Solar System and can help us understand how our Solar System formed and evolved
into what we see today. This project will capitalize on an ongoing survey in the
southern hemisphere by developing new data processing tools to carry out an
extensive search for transient and slow-moving objects in the survey images in
order to characterize the most distant visible members of the Solar System.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal team will augment their successful outreach
program to Philadelphia-area middle school teachers and community-based
organizations through their partnership with the Franklin Institute to produce
presentations and middle-school curricular materials on the outer solar system.
A key component of the program will be a contest to suggest names for minor
planets that are discovered in the data used in this project. The PIs will also
mentor two graduate students and undergraduate students working in a large
international team of astronomers and particle physicists from a myriad of
cultural backgrounds through participation in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal that seeks to
expand the use of data being obtained as a part of the Dark Energy Survey (DES)
using the Dark Energy Camera (DECam) on the Cerro-Tololo 4m telescope. In
particular, they will extend the standard DES data processing in order to carry
out an extensive search for transient and slow-moving objects in the DES images
in order to characterize the most distant visible members of the Solar System,
which orbit well beyond Neptune and are relics of major disturbances to the
nascent Solar System. This will enable them to increase by a factor of ~10 the
number of known Inner Oort Cloud bodies and other minor planets with perihelia
beyond about 50 AU, which have dynamical and physical states that are largely
unperturbed by interactions with the (known) planets over the age of the Solar
System.