* 1515058
* EAPSI:Structure and Deformation Rates of the North Canterbury Fold and Thrust Belt, South Island, New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* David Oakley, Oakley                  David          O
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,258.00

The project focuses on active faulting within the North Canterbury region of the
South Island of New Zealand. The project will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. Philip Barnes, a marine geologist at New Zealand?s National Institute of
Water and Atmospheric Research who has done extensive work studying offshore
faults. In addition to expertise, Dr. Barnes will provide access to a large
database of offshore seismic reflection data, which is used to make images of
the subsurface. The project will involve interpretation of this data, which will
complement ongoing work on nearby onshore faults. Interpretation will involve
identifying active faults in the seismic images, modeling the relationship
between faulting at depth and folding of overlying rocks, and estimating rates
of fault slip. Results will be used to identify active faults that may cause
future earthquakes. They will also improve understanding of how folding of
rocks, which commonly occurs in association with faults, can be used to infer
the location of and amount of slip on the faults. Seismic reflection data will
be interpreted to reveal details of fault-related folds and the possible
reactivation of basement normal faults. Fold kinematic models, particularly
trishear, will be tested for their applicability to these structures and used to
produce restored cross-sections. Offshore results will be combined with onshore
cross-sections, based on previous geologic mapping, to produce sections across
the entire fold and thrust belt and to calculate total shortening. Growth strata
will be restored to calculate rates of deformation, including the rates of slip
on active faults, and these will be used along with deformation rates derived
from previously-dated marine terraces along the coast to estimate rates of
shortening across the transects. Finally, shortening and shortening rate
calculations will be compared to the predictions of models for plate-boundary
deformation within the region. This award is funded in collaboration with the
Royal Society of New Zealand.