* 1515264
* EAPSI: Evaluating the Seismic Performance of a New Building 'spine' Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Barbara Simpson, Simpson                 Barbara        G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Many contemporary buildings tend to form a soft story mechanism during an
earthquake. This behavior is characterized by large demands concentrated in a
single story of the building. These demands can ultimately limit the capacity of
the entire system and increase both structural and nonstructural damage, leading
to structural collapse. This award supports research to develop the merits of a
relatively new 'spine' system. The new system utilizes a spine that ties all the
stories in a building together, forcing them to behave as one unit so that
damage is not permitted to concentrate in a single story. If effective, this
system could become essential for suitable structural performance during seismic
events. This project will be conducted at National Taiwan University in Taipei,
Taiwan under the mentorship of Professor K.C. Tsai, a noted expert on innovative
steel building systems.

This study will attempt to quantify the relationship between the use of a spine
and its ability to mitigate a soft story. There has been little research
internationally addressing the specific details of the spine concept and how to
implement a spine into design practice. The purpose of this study would be to
address the following questions about a spine system: (1) What is the effect of
allowing yielding in the mast rather than designing it to be completely elastic?
(2) What is the effect on the system if the inelastic portion outside of the
mast is significantly damaged and exhibits substantial deterioration during a
seismic event? (3) What is the resiliency of the system in terms of the amount
of residual drift associated with a mast system after an event? Special emphasis
will be placed on the first of these questions. This NSF EAPSI award supports
the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.