* 1515159
* EAPSI: Synthesis and Electrical Transport Properties of Chemical Vapor Deposited Two-Dimensional Semiconductor Layers of Tungsten Diselenide
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Michael Fralaide, Fralaide                Michael        O
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Efforts to improve and enhance silicon technology is a present challenge in the
field of nanotechnology and materials science. In that respect, the
investigation of novel materials that can be produced with thickness equal to a
few atomic layers, for example transition metal dichalgoenides, might lead to
breakthrough solutions for several electronic and optoelectronic applications.
The synthesis and electrical transport properties of these advanced
nanomaterials can lead to potential improvements in a wide variety of digital
and analog circuits in electronics, such as broadcast receivers and wireless
communications. In this project, two dimensional atomic layers of tungsten
diselenide (WSe2) will be prepared and characterized structurally and
electrically. This research will be carried out under the mentorship of
Professor Li Song at the National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory at the
University of Science and Technology of China, offering an opportunity to work
with a noted expert in state-of-the-art laboratory facilities such as a
cleanroom for microelectronic device nanofabrication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2D
nanomaterials have become of particular interest given their electronic
properties, surface homogeneity, and their ability to be functionalized and
doped in a variety of different ways. In particular, atomically thin WSe2 is
known to exhibit a relatively high charge carrier mobility and a direct band
gap, unlike graphene?s zero band gap. The chemical vapor deposition method to
synthesize layers of WSe2 can be investigated by fine-tuning the growth
parameters. Using an array of methods, including high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy and Raman spectroscopy, the WSe2 thin films can be
physically and morphologically characterized. Then, various electrical and
optical transport properties, such as the field effect mobility of charge
carriers and photoelectronic properties, of these devices will be investigated.
This project will analyze the exact nature of the relation between layering and
electrical transport properties and enable new insight into the integration of
monolayered WSe2 as metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistors in
electronic nanodevice applications. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research
of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Chinese
Ministry of Science and Technology.