* 1515843
* Microbial Metabolic Cooperation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Robert Gunsalus, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2019
* USD 900,000.00

Syntrophic bacteria are a group of poorly understood microorganisms that play
essential roles in the recycling of all naturally occurring organic materials in
environments without oxygen (anaerobic environments). Syntrophy refers to the
mutually beneficial metabolic interactions of the participating bacteria. These
bacteria work as members of small microbial teams that consume decaying plant
and animal material and convert it back into the starting materials needed for
photosynthesis by plants and algae. The syntrophic bacteria first break down and
recycle small organic molecules such as fats, amino acids and small aromatic
compounds and make acetic acid (vinegar), water and hydrogen gas. These
syntrophic waste products are then used by a second group of microbes called
methanogens to make more water plus carbon dioxide and methane. The latter can
be harvested as a renewable energy source. By cooperating, both types of
microbes are able to obtain energy and grow where neither could alone. This
project will use a combination of molecular and biochemical methods to study the
unique metabolic skills of each microbe and how they cooperate with one another
to optimally recycle waste materials in nature. This knowledge will assist
others to better describe and model the use of carbon on Earth and to predict
how our ever-changing environment affects the maintenance of the Earth's life
forms (the biosphere). This knowledge will also improve our ability to recycle
unwanted waste materials in the environment. The knowledge obtained will be used
develop new web-based and team-based activities that will promote enthusiasm for
microbiology to lower and upper level microbiology undergraduates, including
those from institutions with a large minority
enrollment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Syntrophic metabolism is a microbial
process found in nearly all anaerobic ecosystems yet very little is understood
about the molecular, biochemical, or physiological basis of this essential
ecological process. Understanding how syntrophic consortia composed of distinct
types of bacterial and archaeal species operate at the metabolic and molecular
levels is critical to describe and model global carbon cycling and ecosystem
function. The hypothesis to be tested states that special metabolic and
sensory/regulatory systems are used by syntrophic partners to accomplish their
cooperative existence. The model syntrophic co-culture, Syntrophomonas wolfei
and Methanospirillum hungatei, will be used to unravel the basic principles
governing syntrophic partnership formation and maintenance. A combination of
high-throughput technologies including genome-wide transcript and proteomic
profiling will be used to identify the metabolic and regulatory networks
involved in syntrophic fatty acid catabolism and to delineate other adaptations
that may be required to maintain the syntrophic lifestyle. This will reveal the
pathways operative in electron flow and hydrogen and/formate production from
thermodynamically difficult reactions as well as special biochemical machinery
and regulatory controls needed for syntrophic cooperation. These data will
provide a foundation to predict and explore related processes in other
multispecies microbial communities.