* 1515111
* EAPSI: Understanding the Effects of High Pressure and Heat on an Aluminum Alloy
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Uchechi Okeke, Okeke                   Uchechi
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Aluminum 2139 is a copper-based aluminum (Al) alloy that is used in the
aerospace industry and has an attractive mixture of strength and toughness.
Traditional welding methods cause copper containing Al alloys to crack, which is
unacceptable for structural components. However, this can be circumvented by
melting the joined area of two plates clamped together and using a rotating tool
to stir this softened area until the softened area from both plates have mixed.
This is called friction stir welding. Research conducted at Michigan State
University (MSU) has demonstrated that the welded region is weaker than the
unwelded base metal region. In an effort to improve its performance, the
friction stir welded region will undergo post-weld heat treatment (PWHT). The
unwelded region will undergo high pressure torsion (HPT) to investigate how high
pressure processing affects the performance of this alloy. This work will be
performed in collaboration with Professor Mitsuo Niinomi at the Institute for
Materials Research (IMR) at Tohoku University in Japan. The IMR personnel have
notable expertise in HPT as well as related data characterization and analysis.

The total material strain, the microstructural phases present and their volume
fraction, microstructure and dislocation structures, and hardness of the HPT
treated samples will be characterized in this study using EBSD, x-ray
diffraction, transmission electron microscopy imaging, and Vickers hardness
testing. Mechanical tensile testing will be performed. The PWHT experiments will
be grouped as: solution treatment, solution treated and artificially aged, and
artificially aged. These samples will then be polished and characterized at
Tohoku University using EBSD, x-ray diffraction, and Vickers hardness testing.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.