* 1515458
* US-French Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Spatial and Temporal Aspects of Molecular Signaling in Synaptic Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Edwin (Ted) Abel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 09/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

Noradrenaline is released in many regions of the brain in response to anxiety
and stress. Its action on brain cells in several regions contributes to memory
storage and extinction, and in some circumstances memory of particularly
stressful events creates problems such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
The hippocampus is one of the brain regions receiving noradrenaline and is an
important locus of contextual memory. One mechanism whereby noradrenaline
facilitates memory storage has been characterized, but PTSD treatments aimed at
this mechanism has not been successful. Recently, a non-standard action of
noradrenaline on brain cells was discovered, but the implications for memory
storage have not been characterized. The proposed research will employ live cell
imaging, physiology and computational modeling to investigate this alternative
mechanism whereby noradrenaline modifies memory storage. The results will have
major implications for the development of novel treatments for stress-related
memory disorders, by suggesting novel molecular targets for pharmaceutical
development.

Noradrenergic signaling through &#946; adrenergic receptors (&#946;AR) crucially
contributes to the long term synaptic plasticity (LTP) underlying memory storage
in the hippocampus. Activation of noradrenergic receptors leads to elevations in
the second messenger cAMP and the memory kinase PKA through classical signaling
pathways. Recently a novel signaling pathway activated by &#946;AR, involving
activation of the memory kinase ERK, has been shown to be involved in memory
storage and synaptic plasticity. However, the mechanism employed in the
hippocampus is not completely understood, which hinders development of novel
treatments for stress-related memory disorders. Thus, the goal of this project
is to delineate the role of &#946;AR signaling in the LTP underlying hippocampal
memory storage. This research will define the role of ERK recruitment by
&#946;2ARs in LTP, and demonstrate how different temporal patterns of
stimulation use distinct signaling pathways downstream of &#946;2AR activation.
The research uses computational spatial modeling of signaling pathways, live
cell imaging in brain slice, electrophysiology, biochemistry, and molecular
biology to demonstrate how different temporal stimulation patterns activate
distinct signaling pathways downstream of &#946;2AR signaling. A back and forth
interaction between live cell imaging of kinase activity and model development
will produce an experimentally constrained and validated signaling pathway
model. Then, simulation experiments will be used to design stimulation protocols
that will be tested with electrophysiological and biochemical experiments. The
research includes development of software tools (https://github.com/neurord/) to
facilitate creation of models that help to interpret live cell imaging results.

A companion project is being funded by the French National Research Agency
(ANR).