* 1515311
* EAPSI: Influence of Human-Associated Microbes on Protected Marine Species
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jimiane Ashe, Ashe                    Jimiane        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

In an era of global climate change and habitat alteration, it is important to
study the direct impact humans have on natural populations of plants and
animals. Specifically what impact do microbes from human wastewater have on
threatened marine species? Activities from this project will provide an
opportunity to explicitly link functionally important immune gene diversity of
marine fish to human-influenced microbial variation in their local environments.
Genetic and environmental samples will be collected from urban and rural coastal
environments throughout New Zealand to assess population level genetic diversity
of the pot-belly seahorse (Hippocampus abdominalis), microbial composition and
human environmental impacts. Because this type of research is new and may have
larger implications for how human wastewater is treated, a new experimental
methodology must be developed. The pot-belly seahorse has an adaptive immune
system perfectly suited for developing this study, and their native environment
of rural and urban New Zealand coastlines are isolated from any other source of
marine pollution making this EAPSI opportunity unique and invaluable to complete
the proposed research. Collaboration with Professor Sharyn Goldstien from the
University of Canterbury and specialists from the National Institute of Water
and Atmospheric Research will solidify a professional network of researchers and
scientific studies interested in marine genetics, nearshore protected species
conservation and adaptive immunity between the United States and New Zealand.

Immune gene diversity within marine populations has the potential to yield
profound insights relative to microbe-mediated differentiation and evolution in
nearshore communities affected by human activity especially when compared to
neutral genomic diversity. Protected syngnathid species like seahorses are ideal
subjects to test for genetic population differences between urban and non-urban
coastal environments due to their extensive nearshore habitats, variable
tolerance to environmental and anthropogenic influence and mechanisms of
adaptive immunity. Obtaining genetic material from model seahorse species
Hippocampus abdominalis from urban and non-urban New Zealand sites will allow
the opportunity to compare neutral and non-neutral immune genetic variation as
well as microbial communities between coastal ecosystems exposed to differing
levels of human wastewater. H. abdominalis populations will exhibit limited
genetic differentiation at neutral nuclear loci throughout their New Zealand
range, while functionally important immune loci will show pronounced spatial
structure especially between urban sites experiencing high inputs of wastewater
and rural sites with low anthropogenic inputs. Environmental samples collected
at urban sites are expected to show evidence of anthropogenic activity. This
award is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.