* 1515303
* EAPSI: Understanding the Development of Sustainable Information Infrastructures for Digital Preservation to Support Marginalized Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Rebecca Frank, Frank                   Rebecca        D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The long-term preservation of digital information requires sustainable
infrastructure. Social and technical elements, including people, organizations,
hardware, software, and communication technologies, combine to form
infrastructures that support preservation and access to digital information such
as research data and personal records. This research seeks to understand the
lifecycles and outcomes of digital preservation projects, focusing on projects
whose goals included supporting communities experiencing identity, memory, and
accountability crises such as children in care. In order to inform future
infrastructure development, the goals of this study are to identify those
factors that contribute to successful sustainable infrastructure development, to
understand the types of challenges that arise in the development process and how
those challenges are overcome. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Joanne Evans at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia. Australia
has a strong public records infrastructure, making this site an ideal location
for this project. Findings from this research could inform the development and
study of recordkeeping infrastructures in the United States.

This research employs a mixed methods approach, pairing a large-scale survey
with in-depth semi-structured interviews and observations. Using a theoretical
framework based on theories of infrastructure development this study seeks to
understand the outcomes of digital information and research data management
projects funded by the Australian National Data Service (ANDS). This study of
ANDS-funded projects will be one of the first to look at an entire ecosystem of
federally-funded projects, generating baseline data that will provide insight
into what factors contribute to successful digital preservation infrastructure
development.

This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of
Sciences.