* 1515034
* EAPSI:Developing a Coral-Based Climate Reconstruction to Better Understand Tropical Pacific Hydroclimate
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Alex Lopatka, Lopatka                 Alex
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

The El Niño-Southern Oscillation, which originates in the tropical Pacific, can
cause significant changes in climate and weather patterns across the globe, such
as droughts and floods. How the El Niño-Southern Oscillation will respond to
anthropogenic climate change remains unanswered in the scientific literature.
Through a collaboration with Dr. Andrew Lorrey of the National Institute of
Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) in New Zealand, this research will improve
the scientific understanding of El Niño and La Nina events by collecting
chemical measurements from coral reef samples to reconstruct changes in climate
over intervals of the last millennium. Dr. Lorrey is an expert climatologist and
curator of a south Pacific coral archive. This study will extend climate
observations over a longer period of time allowing scientists to put current
climate change into a longer paleoclimate context.

In the southwestern tropical Pacific, the dominant climate feature is a band of
low-level moisture, known as the South Pacific Convergence Zone. During an El
Niño event, this zone shifts towards the equator, resulting in unusually dry
conditions in the south Pacific and unusually wet conditions in the central
equatorial Pacific. Over 100 coral samples have been collected from the southern
Cook Islands and will be used to reconstruct hydrological changes associated
with movements of the South Pacific Convergence Zone and the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation. Well preserved coral samples will be radiometrically-dated and age-
modeled using x-ray computed tomography techniques. Stable isotopes in the coral
skeleton vary with temperature and hydrological changes. Therefore, corals can
be used to model changes in climate. To reconstruct climate over the past
millennium, I will sample pristine, well-dated coral samples with Dr. Andrew
Lorrey and use instrumentation at NIWA in Auckland, New Zealand to prepare the
coral samples for future isotopic analyses at the Paleoclimate Co-Laboratory at
the University of Maryland. This award is funded in collaboration with the Royal
Society of New Zealand.