* 1515554
* EAPSI: Implementation of Ultra-Fast Control to Advance Benchtop Nonlinear Imaging Systems for Clinical Imaging Viability
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kirby Campbell, Campbell                Kirby          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Second harmonic generation (SHG) imaging, a nonlinear optical process in which
photons effectively "combine", is a powerful diagnostic tool for visualizing and
quantifying differences in collagen architecture in a wide range of diseases
including cancer, fibrosis, connective tissue disorders and cardiovascular
disease. Currently, all the imaging hardware and polarization devices of our
imaging system are synchronized in an extremely inefficient way. This project
takes advantage of profound expertise of field-programmable gate array (FPGA)
programming in Professor Shean-Jen Chen?s laboratory at National Cheng Kung
University in Tainan, Taiwan. Using FPGA programming, this projects aims for
improving the speed and efficiency of the benchtop imaging platform for
potential clinical use.

The versatility of SHG imaging is such that it can be coupled with polarization
techniques for detecting various collagen isoform distribution indicative of
early disease onset. Our current imaging setup operates with the Olympus
Fluoview 300 laser-scanning system mounted on an Olympus BX61 upright microscope
coupled with various polarization optical components. The system offers precise,
motion-free control of excitation polarization using a liquid crystal modulator
(LCM) in the infinity space and emission polarization gating using a rotatable
Glan-laser polarizer (GLP) on a motorized mount before the photomultiplier tube
(PMT) detector. Currently, all of these polarization devices are synchronized
using custom LabVIEW programs connected through a National Instruments BNC-2110
connector block that is inefficient and slow. To overcome these issues and
progress our system to be more viable for potential endoscopic use, we wish to
implement a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) using logic blocks to
interconnect our DAQ boards and hardware with much more speed and efficiency.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.