* 1515594
* EAPSI: Quantum Techniques for the Efficient Modeling of Random Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Blake Pollard, Pollard                 Blake          S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Randomness plays an essential role in nature and in life. In some cases, the
presence of noise or randomness simply adds small deviations to otherwise
deterministic behavior. In other situations, randomness can drive a system to
new places, much as mutation and gene drift drive evolution. Stochastic
processes provide a framework for modeling such probabilistic systems.
Classically, simulating a given stochastic process requires a minimum amount of
memory or information storage. Professor Vlatko Vedral, and his collaborators at
the Centre for Quantum Technologies (CQT) at the National University of
Singapore (NUS) have shown how to use quantum mechanics to systematically
construct models of stochastic processes which utilize less information than the
optimal classical models. The amount of information required to accurately
simulate a process can be taken as a measure of its complexity; thus stochastic
processes appear simpler when viewed through the lens of quantum models. Working
with Prof. Vedral and his group at the CQT, the project will analyze the
complexity of classical and quantum models for certain 'memoryless' stochastic
processes called Markov processes.

A system consists of several interacting parts, possibly interacting with their
environment. Using ideas from category theory, the PI has developed a
compositional framework for building up complicated Markov processes from
smaller interacting pieces called ?open Markov processes.' In this framework one
can analyze the complexity of a composite system in relation to the complexity
of its parts. This project will determine how this relationship changes when
quantum models are utilized. Open Markov processes allow one to naturally
incorporate interactions between a system and its environment. For many systems,
especially in biology, feedback between a system and its environment plays an
important role in determining the behavior of a system. This research will
analyze the possible advantages of using quantum models to simulate stochastic
processes corresponding to simple biochemical networks coupled to a stochastic
environment. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Singapore.