* 1515340
* EAPSI:EAPSI: Investigation of the Wrinkling and Buckling Behavior of Layered Soft Materials with Applications in the Developing Brain
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Maria Holland, Holland                 Maria
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

During the third trimester of gestation, the human brain evolves from having a
mostly smooth surface to the characteristic 'wrinkled' appearance of the adult
brain. How does this happen, and why does it sometimes go wrong? The mechanics
community has been interested in these questions for decades, attempting to
model the brain as a thin, stiff, growing layer (gray matter) attached to a
thicker, softer layer (white matter). Recent mechanical tests, however, have
revealed that gray matter is actually slightly less stiff than the underlying
white matter, challenging many prior models and assumptions. Through
collaboration with Dr. Feng Xi-Qiao of Tsinghua University in Beijing, China, an
expert in the wrinkling and buckling of soft films, this project will explore
the behavior of thin growing layers on substrates of a similar stiffness. This
research will lead to a greater understanding of brain development in light of
these recent findings.

For a stiff growing layer on a soft substrate, the formation of sinusoidal waves
is expected, while the growth of a soft layer on a stiffer substrate will lead
to creases with pinched valleys. The transition between waves and creases
happens gradually in the region of interest for brain tissue. Using both
analytical and numerical approaches, this research will explore the behavior of
soft layered materials with stiffness ratios close to unity. Numerical
simulations will be performed in the finite element software Abaqus, using the
built-in linear perturbation analysis as well as user-defined material models
that simulate volumetric growth. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.