* 1515597
* EAPSI:Electron transfer characteristics of thermophilic electrode-respiring bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Adan Medina, Medina                  Adan
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

Biofilm-forming electrogenic bacteria are so called due to their ability to
interact with solid electrodes. These electrochemically active biofilms (EABs)
are intriguing to the scientific community due to their utility in wastewater
treatment, electrosynthesis of biocommodities, and powering battery-less remote
sensors. A model EAB, the electrode-respiring bacteria Geobacter sulfurreducens
is able to directly transfer electrons to electrodes, resulting in high electron
transfer efficiencies. The PI has experience in electrochemical techniques that
can quantify the electron transfer efficiency in EABs and compare them to the
model Geobacter sulfurreducens. This project, under the mentorship of Dr. Inseop
Chang of the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST) in South Korea,
will quantify the electron transfer efficiency of thermophilic EABs that have
been isolated by the host laboratory from distillery wastewater treatment
microbial fuel cells. This collaboration will provide access to thermophiles
that have only been observed by the host researcher?s
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many studies on EABs focus on the current
density that was achieved in a controlled experiment, often treating the
electron transfer process as a black box. This study will use the
electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance employed in a bioelectrochemical
system to evaluate the new strains performance as an electrochemically active
biofilm, and compare it to model EABs at elevated temperatures. The working
hypothesis is that thermophilic electrode-respiring bacteria isolated from
distillery waste water microbial fuel cells will retain their current production
capacities in monoculture and this can be quantified through the use of an
electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance platform currently being developed
at Washington State University. NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the National Research Foundation of Korea.