* 1515444
* EAPSI: Identifying Dominant Atmospheric Circulation Patterns Leading to Extreme Precipitation in Mid-Latitudes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* David Farnham, Farnham                 David          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research to investigate the statistical predictability of
extreme precipitation in mid-latitude locations. Atmospheric circulations that
enhance the chance of extreme precipitation in mid-latitude locations (e.g.
regions of the United States of America) will be statistically summarized and
used to advance flood prediction techniques. The work has the potential to
improve the accuracy of flood risk assessments and projections, as well as the
ability of modelers to forecast mid-latitude extreme precipitation events up to
a week in advance. Such improvements could allow for improved decision-making in
infrastructure planning and early warning systems in flood prone areas. The
project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Hyun-Han Kwon at the Risk
Prevention Center and the Department of Civil Engineering at Chonbuk National
University in South Korea. Dr. Kwon is an expert in hydrological modeling at
large spatial scales.

The work will apply nonlinear dimensional reduction techniques to characterize
and classify spatio-temporal structures of the underlying atmospheric variables
(e.g. pressure, temperature, and humidity) leading to mid-latitude extreme
precipitation. This work aims to provide a benchmark for studies of extreme
rainfall mechanisms that can benefit both statistical and dynamical modeling
initiatives that seek to 1) forecast extreme precipitation on the daily to
weekly timescales, and 2) assess the underlying risk of flooding in a specific
region. This project will focus on tropical moisture transports to specific mid-
latitude locations (the Northeast US and central Korea), while also pursuing a
generalizable product for linking statistical models to atmospheric
circulations. Moreover, establishing the conditional dependence of extreme
precipitation on atmospheric conditions will allow for more meaningful
extrapolation of future risks in a changing climate.

This research is funded jointly by NSF and the National Research Foundation of
Korea.