* 1515709
* Collaborative Research: Integrative Investigation of the Evolution and Biomechanics of Mandibular Form in Hominids
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,02/28/2021
* Carol Ward, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2021
* USD 52,676.00

Among the fundamental questions about human origins is how our hominin ancestors
lived. This study uses a multidisciplinary approach (paleontology, paleoecology,
comparative anatomy, experimental biology) to ask questions about how extinct
populations of hominins behaved on their natural landscapes. Specifically, the
investigators will analyze lower jaws (mandibles), among the most commonly
represented parts of the skeleton in the early human fossil record, of modern
great apes and two early species of extinct hominins (Autralopithecus), to
understand how the structure of the mandible is related to changes in feeding
behavior and diet. The research will provide new data about how changes in diet
and feeding behavior transformed our anatomy across time, permitting more robust
explanations of the processes by which we became human. Broader impacts will
include undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral training in the latest
analytical techniques for fossil analyses; outreach to primary and secondary
school science teachers and students using hands-on experiences and web-based
content designed to enhance teaching and learning about human origins; and the
production of a unique collection 3D data for modern apes and rare fossil
specimens that will be available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mandibles are the most common element in the
hominin fossil record after teeth; they are used to diagnose species, test
phylogenetic hypotheses, and infer feeding behavior and diet. However, extensive
theoretical and experimental work on extant primates has not clarified which
aspects of variation in mandibular form are related to variation in the
positions of the tooth row, jaw muscles and jaw joint, which are related to the
mandible's resistance to internal forces, and how these relate to feeding
behavior and diet. Furthermore, the classical consensus on the relationship
between dentognathic morphology and diet in Plio-Pleistocene hominins -
adaptation to processing mechanically resistant foods - has been challenged by
recent inferences from dietary isotopes, occlusal microwear, and finite element
modeling, which do not converge on a shared view of early hominin diets and
feeding behavior. This lack of consensus is especially glaring in light of the
rich fossil record of mandibles for the Australopithecus anamensis-A. afarensis
lineage (4.2-3.0 Ma), which documents clear changes in dentognathic morphology
and carbon-isotope signatures over time. The primary focus of the proposed
research is an integrative investigation of how spatial and mechanical
determinants of mandibular form track change in diet and feeding behavior in
extant hominids (great apes and humans) and early Australopithecus. The research
is organized under three specific aims: 1. Quantifying and comparing the
location, magnitude and nature of external and internal morphological variation
in mandibles of extant (Homo, Pongo, Pan, and Gorilla) and fossil (A. anamensis,
A. afarensis) hominids via computed tomography and geometric morphometrics; 2.
Testing specific hypotheses about the biomechanical significance of variation in
hominid mandibular morphology via finite-element models; and 3. Evaluating the
extent to which spatial positioning of masticatory system components (tooth row,
jaw joint, and muscle attachment points) explain variation in mandibular
morphology across extant hominids and early Australopithecus. The project will
provide new data on the structural and functional determinants of early hominin
mandibular morphology, to help identify the factors that drove these
morphological changes and allow tests of adaptive hypotheses about the early
evolution of the genus.