* 1515875
* Persistence and Spreading Speeds in Multi-Species Models with A Shifting Habitat Edge
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Bingtuan Li, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

Whether or not a species can persist and spread in an environment is a
fundamental and long-standing question in ecology. Recently, this question has
been brought to the forefront by climate change and landscape conversion. Due to
the processes of climate change, habitat regions suitable for population growth
of many species have been shifting geographically. Climatically induced shifts
may interface with population demographic processes in complex ways, setting the
stage for impacts on species population growth and spread, long-term dynamics
and interactions between species. This project aims to produce new frameworks
for the analysis of persistence and spreading speeds of species in a shifting
habitat. It addresses the question of how ecosystems are being affected by
climate change and how ecosystems might respond in the future. It contributes to
the growing body of information identifying species at a high risk for
extinction and predicting the spread of invasive species under ongoing climate
change. The outcomes of the project help improve strategies for coping with
challenges of natural resource management. This project further stimulates
interdisciplinary collaboration between mathematicians and biologists to address
issues beyond the reach of single disciplines. In addition, it contributes to
human resources development, focusing on training and skill development of
graduate students, and providing them with experience in interdisciplinary
interaction and exploration. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigator formulates and analyzes spatial population models that describe
species growth, interactions, and dispersal in shifting habitats. The goal is to
understand and accurately describe how climate change affects biological
invasion processes. Multi-species reaction-diffusion competition models and
predator-prey models, as well as semi-discrete stage-structured spatial models
with a shifting habitat edge, are studied to emphasize the role of changing
habitat suitability in persistence and spread of an invasive species interacting
with an existing species. In these models, shifts in habitat ranges are
incorporated in species growth functions that propagate as traveling waves.
Species spatial dynamics are investigated for the following cases: (i) one
species spreads into a shifting habitat preoccupied by a resident species; and
(ii) two species consecutively invade an open shifting habitat and the earlier
species is still in the process of expanding its spatial range. New techniques
are developed to determine the behaviors of solutions of the models on
appropriate bounded and unbounded spatial intervals that expand and shift in
time. Methods from differential equations, integral equations, and dynamical
systems are employed to detect conditions under which species go extinct and to
determine spreading speeds of persisting species in space. The results of this
research also have impacts in other disciplines where wave propagation is
studied.