* 1515307
* EAGER: Rung-Reduced Density Functionals for Cost-Capped Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Samuel Trickey, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 160,844.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

The project involves the development of new exchange correlation potentials that
are computationally cheap and would enable ab initio molecular dynamics on
larger systems. This unconventional, promising, but risky approach to developing
these correlation potentials qualifies the project for EAGER. Context is the
growing importance of ab initio molecular dynamics simulations for predictive
simulation of novel material properties. This gives detailed insight into
atomic-scale processes that affect bulk properties, even for experimentally
inaccessible conditions. The PI's constraint-based (not fitted to data bases)
functionals reduce molecular binding energy errors by a factor of two compared
to the most popular methods with vibration frequencies, ionization potentials,
etc. An enticing and highly unusual route to be explored in this proposal is
provided by a recent major advance based on the first fully non-empirical
orbital-free kinetic energy functional at the GGA rung.

There are four areas of broader impact. Success will transform ab initio
molecular dynamics simulations of complicated, challenging materials,
particularly on department and group-level machines by keeping standard Kohn-
Sham cost-scaling as low as possible. Certain fundamental aspects of pure
Density Functional Theory itself (beyond simulations) will be substantially
clarified, including spacing of the Jacobs' ladder rungs. International science
will be enhanced by involvement with collaborators and their student in Mexico.
The postdoctoral scholar will benefit from a high-level academic apprenticeship.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The project involves the development of new exchange correlation potentials that
are computationally cheap and would enable ab initio MD on larger systems. The
proposed solution is to approximate exchange-correlation density functionals
dependent only on the electron number density and its spatial derivatives, and
not explicitly on the Kohn-Sham orbitals. This unconventional, promising, but
risky approach qualifies the project for EAGER. Context is the growing
importance of ab initio molecular dynamics simulations for predictive simulation
of novel material properties. This gives detailed insight into atomic-scale
processes that affect bulk properties, even for experimentally inaccessible
conditions. The PI's constraint-based (not fitted to data bases) functionals
reduce molecular binding energy errors by a factor of two compared to the most
popular methods with vibration frequencies, ionization potentials, etc. This
"rung reduction" strategy will remove the orbitals from meta-generalized
gradient approximation (meta-GGA) functionals to get highly refined GGA
functionals. An enticing and highly unusual route to be explored in this
proposal is provided by a recent major advance based on the first fully non-
empirical orbital-free kinetic energy functional at the GGA rung. There are four
areas of broader impact. Success will transform ab initio molecular dynamics
simulations of complicated, challenging materials, particularly on department
and group-level machines by keeping standard Kohn-Sham cost-scaling as low as
possible. Certain fundamental aspects of pure DFT itself (beyond simulations)
will be substantially clarified, including spacing of the Jacobs' ladder rungs.
International science will be enhanced by involvement with collaborators and
their student in Mexico. The postdoctoral scholar will benefit from a high-level
academic apprenticeship.