* 1515457
* EAPSI: Determining the relative location of malicious nodes within Vehicle-to-Vehicle wireless networks for driver safety
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Billy Kihei, Kihei                   Billy
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

In the United States, 33,000 people are killed annually due to automotive
accidents. Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) wireless communication is a technology that
allows cars to avoid accidents through the exchange of safety messages
containing Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates and land speed
information in real-time. However, existing V2V wireless systems do not account
for information from hacked/malicious systems, which force a car to communicate
wrong GPS coordinates or land speed information. This project will investigate
new physical layer techniques to allow cars to determine other cars? relative
location to a receiver by listening to the way the safety message is received
instead of the message?s contents. These findings could be used to help drivers
avoid accidents in the event that other vehicles are hacked. This research will
be conducted under the guidance of Dr. Wan Choi, an established expert in V2V
physical layer wireless communication, at the Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology in Daejeon, South Korea.

The project aims to develop new algorithms to determine a transmitter?s relative
azimuth and elevation. The algorithms developed will advance the field of radio
localization by designing algorithms specifically for the newly deployed V2V
communication signal which uses the IEEE 802.11p physical layer standard. The
project will include two phases: Phase I involves the development of algorithms
through mathematics and signal processing theory; Phase II entails the
implementation of the algorithms in software and hardware using software defined
radios. The findings generated from the project will allow future vehicle
networking researchers to develop new advanced collision avoidance systems and
techniques for detecting hacked vehicles, ultimately improving driver safety and
reducing fatalities due to auto accidents. This award is funded in collaboration
with the National Research Foundation of Korea.