* 1515590
* The 23rd International Conference on Supersymmetry and Unification of Fundamental Interactions (SUSY 2015)
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* John Gunion, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 01/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

SUSY 2015 (The 23rd International Conference on Supersymmetry and Unification of
Fundamental Interactions) is the primary yearly conference for the presentation
of ideas regarding new physics beyond the Standard Model (not just
supersymmetry) and experimental results relevant thereto. It covers not only
high energy physics but also related areas of cosmology and the early universe.
It attracts 300-400 top researchers (both theorists and experimentalists,
students through senior faculty) in all new physics areas. The conference lasts
for 6 days and includes both plenary talks (about 25 thirty-minute talks) and
seven daily parallel sessions (in combination containing of order 150 talks,
each being of order fifteen minutes). The parallel sessions are designed to
allow students and early career physicists to bring their ideas and results to
the attention of the full community. The conference is essential for all
researchers in the various fields to remain fully up-to-date with respect to the
progress made by and ideas being developed by other researchers in the many sub-
fields of relevance. It is the critical venue for dissemination of recent and
planned research. By bringing the full spectrum of researchers together, the
generation of new ideas is greatly enhanced and sped up. Often, new critical
mass collaborations are formed among theorists and new ideas for the analysis of
existing data and forthcoming data are generated. New approaches to
experimentally confirming or eliminating/constraining theoretical models often
emerge.

Society benefits in many direct and indirect ways from support of theoretical
and experimental physics in the areas on which the conference focuses. The
conference re-inforces and motivates the newest generations of physicists
pursuing research careers in this and related very highly sophisticated fields.
It is focused on ideas that potentially explain the most elementary particles
and most basic forces of nature. Such understanding has often yielded
substantial benefits to society. The developments in experimental techniques,
detectors and accelerators necessary for probing the particles and forces, have
frequently led to very substantial spinoffs. Many medical advances have resulted
from the very sophisticated detector and accelerator developments needed for the
field to progress.