* 1515399
* EAPSI:Towards Combining Magnetic Switching with Conductivity in Molecular Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jeremy Hrudka, Hrudka                  Jeremy         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This EAPSI project aims to synthesize novel, dual-purpose molecular materials by
combining molecules of different functionalities in the same structure.
Specifically, certain iron complexes which exhibit magnetic switching upon
changes in temperature, pressure, or light irradiation will be chemically linked
to molecular fragments known to conduct electricity. The structure-property
relationship will be investigated by crystal structure analysis and magnetic
measurements to reveal factors that affect the behavior of such bi-functional
materials. Insights from this study will lead to a greater understanding of
molecular materials that may be used in such modern technologies as high-density
data storage, optical switches, and molecular sensors. The project will be
carried out in collaboration with Dr. Sally Brooker and her colleagues at the
University of Otago in Dunedin, New Zealand. The host lab?s expertise in this
niche field will result in a productive and informative international
collaboration that will benefit both New Zealand and US research groups.

Spin crossover (SCO) in transition metal compounds is one of the most
fascinating phenomena of magnetic bistability in molecules. While the most
popular SCO complexes are those of the FeII ion in an environment of six
nitrogen atoms, the present project will explore the SCO in an unusual N4S2
coordination environment. Coordination of a common redox-active organic
molecule, tetrathiafulvalene (TTF), to the FeII ion through a N2S2 coordinating
pocket will allow for combining SCO and conductivity in the same material. The
eventual goal of such material design is to attain synergy between the spin-
state switching at the FeII center and the conductivity of the organic
substructure provided by the TTF units. Thorough characterization of the
synthesized materials will be completed on-site using a combination of
instrumental methods to investigate magnetic, structural, electrochemical,
spectroscopic, and thermodynamic properties of the materials obtained. This
award is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.