* 1515115
* A Complete Census of the Quasar Population in the Large Survey Era
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Xiaohui Fan, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2018
* USD 265,166.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. One important aspect of understanding galaxy formation and evolution
is to study supermassive black holes (BHs) at the centers of massive galaxies.
These BHs light up as quasars during the relatively brief phases when the BHs
accumulate most of their mass through accretion. Over the past half-century,
considerable effort has been devoted to capturing these accretion spurts through
surveys at optical wavelengths. In general, these surveys have been limited to
the most luminous sources, or small numbers within deep fields; however, quasar
observations are undergoing an exponential leap in depth and breadth enabled by
new and upcoming surveys. The Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey of the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey III (SDSS-III/BOSS) final data release will include
about 160,000 quasars at redshifts around 2--3, and its successor, the SDSS-
IV/eBOSS, will obtain spectra of over 600,000 quasars at redshifts around 1--2.
The investigators will complement the quasar samples from these cosmology
surveys with their own high redshift programs to form a complete picture of the
evolution of faint quasars from optical surveys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will integrate the science program into a tiered outreach program
at Pima Community College, a Hispanic-Serving Institution located in Tucson. The
outreach program includes (1) public lectures at the East Campus, a region not
reached by The University of Arizona programs, (2) lectures to Astronomy 101
students at Pima integrating an overview of Active Galactic Nuclei into the
regular curriculum, and (3) engagement of a small number of Pima students in the
research program itself by teaching the basics of quasar spectroscopy and
including the students in the eBOSS program to visually inspect quasar
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, exploring this method in the
regime of sparse data (an important precursor for LSST), the team will utilize
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) reductions of SDSS imaging data to
identify about 400 quasars at redshifts around z = 4 through variability
selection. Finally, the team will use deep CFHT imaging to reach faint quasars
(i_AB = 24) at redshift around z = 5. Together, these data will probe several
magnitudes below the break luminosity over a wide redshift range and will reach
nearly all objects classifiable as quasars over 5 Gyr of cosmic evolution,
including the crucial epoch when both star formation and quasar activity
peak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging massive spectroscopic surveys as well as
separate observations with large telescopes, the team will complete the census
of the faint end of the quasar luminosity function to redshift around z = 5 and
obtain new measurements of high-z clustering, thereby providing strong
constraints for models of quasar lifetimes and feedback physics. These
measurements will also provide strong constraints on the quasar ionizing
background during the epoch of He II reionization. Finally, a key aspect of the
project is to develop tools needed for an era when quasar surveys will be
dominated by systematics rather than by statistics. The team will accomplish
this by building models for quasar properties constrained by existing
observations but which provide useful projections for future surveys. These
models will be used to guide target selection for spectroscopic efforts,
identify quasars from photometric data, and train photometric redshift
estimation; furthermore, they will provide insight into intrinsic quasar
properties, such as continuum and dust extinction.