* 1515379
* EAPSI:Depth Limitations of Biofilm Extraction From Groundwater Wells Using Sonication
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kimberly Huynh, Huynh                   Kimberly       T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Groundwater microbial communities are traditionally analyzed through extracting
water samples from monitoring wells. It is well known that most of the microbial
biomass in groundwater exists as surface-attached organisms (biofilm); however,
this fraction is often underrepresented in groundwater analysis. Biofilm
assessment can be improved through creating conditions to physically detach
microorganisms from sediment surface. Sonication with low-frequency acoustic
waves, for example, creates a pressure change in the sediment that loosens and
detaches the biofilm. The efficacy of this treatment decreases with increased
distance from the sonicator. Currently, pre-treatment efficacy at depths greater
than 1 m below the water table is unknown. Through collaboration with Murray
Close of the Institute of Environmental Science and Research (ESR), this
research will examine the extraction quality of in-situ sonication at varying
depths. This may shed light on the limits of in-situ sonication and improve
microbial assessment in groundwater. Accurate assessment is important because
microorganisms play key roles in nutrient cycles and contaminant degradation.

Using established sites in Canterbury, New Zealand, groundwater samples will be
retrieved from two monitoring wells before and after application of a low
frequency sonicator. The sonicator will be used at increasing depths (e.g. 1 m,
4 m, and 7 m) below the water table for each trial and three sonication pulses
at 1.6 kW at 50 minute intervals will be induced each time. The biomass of
aquifer microorganisms will be determined for each sample using assays available
at ESR. Biofilm extraction quality will be assessed by comparing this biomass
against (1) the microbial biomass collected from established sediment cores in
the wells (biofilm) and (2) the microbial biomass collected from the well before
sonication (suspended microorganisms). This research is funded in collaboration
with the Royal Society of New Zealand.