* 1515414
* EAPSI:The Effects of Restricting and Extending Sleep on Adolescent Cognitive Function
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kelly Bennion, Bennion                 Kelly          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Although it has long been known that sleep is critical for healthy functioning,
chronic sleep restriction (as defined by less than 7 hours of nightly sleep) is
a worldwide public health concern. This is particularly important for
adolescents, who experience increased daytime sleepiness in response to puberty
and a phase delay in circadian rhythms. The proposed study involves a two-week
protocol investigating the effects of sleep restriction (5 hours) and sleep
extension (9 hours) on sleepiness levels, mood, vigilance, executive function,
immediate and long-term memory, and false memory, in 15-19 year-old females at
the Nanyang Girls Boarding School in Singapore. Understanding how sleep
restriction affects memory performance and cognitive function is important for
students and educators everywhere, and is especially critical in Singapore,
where chronic short sleep among adolescents is especially prevalent. As such,
this project will be conducted under the mentorship of Dr. Michael Chee, an
expert in the cognitive neuroscience of sleep, at the Duke-National University
of Singapore Graduate Medical School.

During the first three nights, participants will have a 9-hour baseline sleep
opportunity. During the following seven nights, participants will be randomized
into a sleep restriction (5 hours) or sleep extension (9 hours) condition,
during which their nocturnal sleep will be monitored by polysomnography on three
nights. Relative to baseline performance, sleep restriction is expected to
result in greater self-reported sleepiness, poorer cognitive and scholastic
performance, negative mood, and an increased tendency toward risky behavior.
Regarding memory in particular, it is hypothesized that participants in the
sleep restriction group relative to the sleep extension group will show deficits
in long-term memory and an increase in susceptibility to false memory. This
project will not only elucidate the effects of sleep on adolescents? cognitive
function, but also raise awareness of sleep restriction as a global public
health concern. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.