* 1515229
* RUI: Effect of Substrate Polyubiquitination on Proteasomal Unfolding Ability
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Daniel Kraut, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2020
* USD 411,380.00

Effect of Substrate Polyubiquitination on Proteasomal Unfolding Ability

The proteasome is a molecular machine inside cells that removes unwanted or
unneeded proteins by unfolding them, feeding them into a central chamber, and
then chopping them up into small pieces that can be recycled. Proteins destined
for destruction are tagged with a chain composed of multiple copies of a small
protein called ubiquitin. In this research project, the investigator will
examine the relationship between how ubiquitin chains are connected and the
ability of the proteasome to unfold the ubiquitin-modified protein targeted for
degradation. The work will lead to a better understanding of why some proteins
are degraded and others are spared, and have broad impact on the understanding
of cellular processes. Many undergraduate and masters students will work on this
project and thereby enhance their critical thinking and scientific inquiry
skills, which will serve them well as they go on to careers in medicine,
industry, academia or other fields. The investigator will work with Villanova's
Center for Multicultural Affairs to increase the involvement of students from
underrepresented groups in both this and other research experiences. He will
also work to develop an inquiry-based lab class for students, which will help to
expose students who do not do independent research to a research-type setting.

The 26S proteasome is responsible for the bulk of intracellular protein
degradation in eukaryotes. While most substrates are degraded into small
peptides, some "slippery" substrates are only partially degraded, with the
released fragments taking on new cellular functions. The overall goal of
research in the Kraut lab is to better understand the molecular basis of
proteasomal processivity and its regulated failure, and to examine the
relationship between the specific residues of ubiquitin attachment, unfolding
ability and protein degradation. The hypothesis underlying this project is that
polyubiquitin chains increase the unfolding ability of the proteasome, even
after the chains have been removed from the substrate. Preliminary evidence
suggests that chains linked through K48 of ubiquitin lead to more processive
degradation with less release of partially degraded fragments than K63-linked
chains, indicating that polyubiquitination does affect unfolding ability, and
helping to explain why K63-linked chains normally don't lead to degradation in
the cell. The project will focus on determining how ubiquitin chains communicate
with the motor proteins that grip the substrate during unfolding and degradation
by determining which components of the proteasome are required for enhanced
processivity and how different types of ubiquitin chains affect the speed with
which the proteasome unfolds and degrades its substrates or instead releases
them. The investigator has established a processivity assay that measures the
ability of the proteasome to unfold protein domains well after degradation is
initiated, and enables analysis of the underlying kinetics of unfolding and
degradation versus release. This assay, using multiple substrates and proteasome
mutants, will be used to probe the mechanism by which K48-linked chains activate
unfolding after a substrate is already undergoing the degradation process.