* 1515445
* EAPSI:Post-Earthquake Resilience Assessment of Civil Infrastructure Utilizing Satellite Imagery
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Mark Furtado, Furtado                 Mark           N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Modern society depends heavily on the reliability of critical infrastructure
networks. Natural disasters such as earthquakes can cause sudden and widespread
disruptions to these networks at a time when the community needs them most. It
is of paramount importance that these networks be repaired as soon as possible
after an earthquake. However, during the chaos following an earthquake, the time
required to identify earthquake damage on a large scale hinders the repair
process. Satellite and aerial imaging allows for a large-scale visual assessment
that could allow for a quick assessment of damage in a very short time after an
earthquake. This research project will collaborate with Dr. Fumio Yamazaki of
Chiba University in Chiba, Japan. Dr. Yamazaki is a leading researcher in the
use of aerial, satellite and other imaging to assess earthquake damage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disaster resilience has become a hot topic in recent years
and has caught the attention of governments and decision makers on the highest
of levels. A resilient community should be able to absorb the impact of a
disaster and recover in a timely fashion. The researchers involved have
extensively studied the resilience of transportation networks after earthquake
events. This includes creating damage estimation models for simulation
earthquakes, quantifying repair costs and driver delay, determining priority
infrastructure components for repair and utilizing alternative repair techniques
to repair these priority components as quickly as possible. Common in resilience
study however is a lack of understanding of the state of the network immediately
after the event. This means that assumptions are made, such as decision makers
having perfect knowledge of the damage state of the network, which may lead to
an underestimate of the expected cost of an earthquake and overstate the
network?s resilience. Incorporating damage assessment based on the
aforementioned imaging techniques into the post-disaster recovery model serves
to help overcome this problem. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.