* 1515109
* EAPSI:Does Sexual Selection Promote Color Diversification in Southeastern Asian Medakas?
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Lengxob Yong, Yong                    Lengxob
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The Indonesian islands are a remarkable biodiversity hotspot that harbor
abundant and colorful species richness. The diversity is attributed to high
rates of speciation or species formation, where groups of organisms that adapt
to different environments ultimately become unable to interbreed. Yet, the
detailed mechanisms leading to speciation in these species are not completely
known. Here, the researcher will examine one of these mechanisms, specifically
testing whether male elaborate traits in medaka fishes (Oryzias sp.) native to
Indonesia have evolved from differences in female preference. The research will
also test whether female preference for different male color type might serve as
a behavioral isolating mechanism, preventing medaka species from interbreeding
in nature. The project will be conducted at Japan?s National Institute of
Genetics, with Dr. Jun Kitano, a leading scientific expert on fish speciation
who has worked closely with the native fish. Teasing apart the behavioral
components by which new species arise is fundamental to understanding the
beginning stages of how biodiversity is generated.

Demonstrating speciation by sexual selection is still a challenging task in
evolutionary biology. The proposed research will tackle this longstanding issue
by 1) characterizing in details male body color variation within and between
sister-species of medaka species, O. woworae and O. celebensis, using
quantitative colorimetric techniques, and 2) testing for variation in female
preference for male body coloration using mate choice behavioral experiment
conducted under different light environments. The results will offer fundamental
insights on how sexually selected male conspicuous traits and female preference
can diverge and ultimately lead to the evolution of premating isolation between
Indonesian medaka species. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science.