* 1515463
* EAPSI: Exploration of Mobile Smartphone Technology to Measure and Model Air Pollution in Seoul
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Chris Lim, Lim                     Chris          C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Ambient air pollution is a major environmental risk factor responsible for
millions of premature mortality worldwide. Epidemiological studies investigating
the relationship between air pollution and adverse health outcomes often use
government-run, central air monitors to assign exposures to study subjects. This
approach is limited, especially in urban settings, where air pollution levels
can vary substantially between times (e.g. morning rush hour vs. noon) and
between short distances (e.g. near highway vs. nearby park). Small, inexpensive,
and mobile smartphone monitors with location tracking capabilities offer a new
approach to measure air pollution levels and obtain accurate personal level
exposure assessments. In this proposed project, a novel smartphone technology
will be utilized to measure fine particulate matter (PM2.5) concentrations in
Seoul, South Korea. The project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Ho
Kim, an expert in air pollution epidemiology and statistics, at Seoul National
University.

The collected data from this project will additionally be used to create a
prediction model using land use regression methods, where geographic variables
such as highways and parks are used to predict air pollution concentration
levels. The large volume and robustness of smartphone-generated data can improve
the spatiotemporal predictive powers of prediction models by increasing their
spatial resolution and allowing inclusion of time-varying variables. The
constructed model will also be compared to results from New York City, providing
a unique opportunity to evaluate factors commonly or uniquely contributing to
elevated air pollution levels in two major metropolitan cities. In exploring a
brand new, state-of-the-art technology that has not been tested or assessed in
current literature, this project has the potential to greatly impact future
environmental epidemiology study designs and provide a better understanding of
advantages and limitations of smartphone monitors. This award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.