* 1515142
* EAPSI: Understanding How Temperature Affects Liver Function in Plant-Eating Marsupials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Patrice Kurnath, Kurnath                 Patrice
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

At every meal, herbivores deal with toxins produced as a defense by plants. Work
from pharmacology and agriculture suggests this toxicity increases with rising
ambient temperatures. Known as temperature-dependent toxicity (TDT), this
phenomenon is the likely result of decreased liver function by mammals at warmer
temperatures. If TDT is also relevant to mammalian herbivores, then these
mammals could be negatively impacted in a warming environment. To date, TDT has
only been studied in a single natural system with wild, plant-eating rodents.
The current project will expand the investigation of TDT to include a new
species (with interesting comparative properties) that is found only in
Australia. In collaboration with Dr. William Foley at the Australian National
University, an expert in the field of plant-mammal interactions, this project
will test the effect of temperature on liver function in the common brushtail
possum (Trichosurus vulpecula).

Due to global change, increases in ambient temperature are a novel threat for
herbivorous mammals. This project will provide an experimental model to estimate
the ability of common brushtail possums to balance thermoregulation and plant
toxin metabolism with changes in ambient temperature. Whole-organisms assays of
liver function will be conducted in a temperature-controlled, laboratory
setting. Brushtail possums are marsupials that vary greatly in body size and
class of dietary toxins compared to previous TDT work in small rodents. The
interaction between temperature and plant toxins could greatly impact the
feeding strategies and diet selection for free-ranging mammalian herbivores,
which are crucial components of many ecosystems. A more detailed understanding
of TDT will not only advance the field of plant-animal interactions, but will
also enable more accurate predictions of mammalian species? responses to global
change.

This NSF EAPSI award will be funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy
of Science.