* 1515748
* Quantitative Analysis of Transcription Elongation Perturbation Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Amber Mosley, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2018
* USD 660,000.00

The main goal of this project is to identify how cells respond and adapt to
genetic changes that alter the process of RNA synthesis. Using baker's yeast as
the study system, experimental approaches will include state-of-the-art
laboratory technologies and computational methods used to interpret the
resulting quantitative data. As part of the project, a summer internship program
will be established with DePauw University, an undergraduate institution, to
give undergraduate students hands-on research experience at a research-intensive
institution. These experiences will provide early exposure to cutting-edge
research technologies that are broadly applicable in both academia and industry.
The project will also expose students at all levels of training to the
importance of quantitative methods to interrogate
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of the research will be to
understand the consequences on RNA polymerase II-catalyzed RNA synthesis
(transcription) of genetic perturbations that knock out or reduce expression of
non-essential and essential transcription elongation factors. Preliminary data
suggest that such genetic perturbations lead to significant adaptations within
the RNA polymerase II protein-protein interaction network. These adaptations may
include (but are not limited to) disruption of interactions with RNA polymerase
II, compensation leading to novel protein recruitment, and activation of rescue
pathways to dispose of arrested RNA polymerase II. Perturbation-induced changes
will be measured using quantitative mass spectrometry, followed by functional
genomics characterization by chromatin immunoprecipitation and DNA sequencing.
The research will have two major outcomes: development of generalizable,
quantitative approaches for detecting new protein-protein interactions that
mediate cellular responses to genetic perturbations, and identification of novel
functions for proteins that regulate transcriptional elongation by RNA
polymerase II.