* 1515021
* EAPSI: Adapting Japanese silkmoth rearing techniques to answer evolutionary questions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Andrew Mongue, Mongue                  Andrew         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The reproductive biology of butterflies and moths differs from many other
animals for reasons that remain unclear. These insects make vast quantities of
sperm with no DNA which cannot possibly fertilize eggs. Such cells appear to be
a waste of resources, and thus should be removed by natural selection, but they
have not been. This award supports a collaboration with Dr. Hideki Sezutsu of
the National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences in Japan to learn Japanese
silkmoth breeding techniques practiced nowhere else that can address this
mystery. Experiments will be conducted in the Suzetsu lab on silkmoths and
results will be confirmed in the United States with native butterflies and
moths. Insights gained will contribute to an important theoretical discussion in
reproductive biology and may be applied to aid conservation of agriculturally
important pollinators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Japanese researchers have developed
protocols for artificial insemination in silkmoths. This technique will allow
the researcher to vary the amount and kind of sperm female silkmoths receive.
Under the hypothesis that DNA-lacking sperm have a functional role, their
absence in an insemination should negatively impact the fertility of a female?s
eggs. Insight gained from this experiment will be used to more thoroughly test
hypotheses for the function of this novel sperm type in other moths and
butterflies and the researcher will share these techniques with other domestic
insect biologists to advance open new avenues for work in the field of
reproductive biology. This NSF EAPSI award is a fellowship to a U.S. graduate
student and is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science.