* 1515521
* Structural role of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in promoting recombination
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Pui Ho, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2019
* USD 506,694.00

Proposal Title: Structural role of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in promoting
recombination

It is well recognized that the linear arrangement of C, G, A, and T of DNA
defines the genetic code of a cell. We also now recognize that, beyond this
linear sequence, modifications to the DNA bases can also be transferred from the
parent to affect how this code is interpreted in daughter cells; this is the
epigenetic code. Methylation is a well-studied epigenetic marker, but the
oxidation of methyl groups on cytosine, to form hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC)
constitutes a less common, but no less important epigenetic marker. This project
aims to determine how 5hmC affects the three-dimensional structure of DNA at the
atomic level, to affect recombination, The process by which genetic information
is transferred between chromosomes in eukaryotic cells (including human cells),
between a virus and its host, and to repair damaged DNAs. The results from this
project will have significant impact on our understanding of epigenetic markers
and their biological functions. The potential economic impact is that this
understanding will allow the design of new technologies to introduce genes into
biological systems by promoting more efficient mechanisms for recombination. The
project will, in addition, impact the science literacy and the training of high
school students in the STEM areas by bringing hands-on experiences to the
classroom of local high schools and bringing high school students onto the
Colorado State University campus. A diverse cadre of graduate students will also
be trained in a STEM field.

5-Hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) has recently seen renewed interests as the "6th"
base of the genome. The function of 5hmC has generally been recognized as being
an intermediate in the demethylation of 5-methylcytosine; however, recent
mapping of 5hmC occurrence across genomes suggests that the modified base serves
as an epigenetic marker and affects transcription in a tissue dependent manner.
In addition, evidence suggests that 5hmC promotes recombination in vitro and in
vivo, through a pathway dependent on the general nucleotide cutting enzyme
endonuclease G (EndoG). The project will test the hypothesis that 5hmC plays a
structural role by stabilizing a recombination intermediate (the four stranded
DNA Holliday junction), which can provide specificity to EndoG, even though the
enzyme does not appear to discriminate between 5hmC-modified and unmodified
DNAs. The goal of this project is to test a model that 5hmC stabilizes Holliday
junctions in inverted repeat sequences, thereby providing a stable intermediate
for EndoG to bind and cut. The aims to achieve this goal are: Aim 1)
crystallographic and calorimetric studies to determine the effects of 5hmC-
modification on the structure and thermodynamic stability of DNA Holliday
junctions; Aim 2) biochemical studies to determine the structural context and
mechanism by which EndoG recognizes 5hmC-modifications in DNA; and Aim 3)
biochemical studies to determine whether 5hmC-modifications pauses the junction
to allow site specific cutting by EndoG.