* 1515116
* EAPSI: A comparison of lake monitoring and modeling approaches - protecting freshwater resources in Lake Tahoe and Lake Taupo, and globally
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Derek Roberts, Roberts                 Derek          C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This project will compare water quality data and modeling research from Lake
Tahoe (CA/NV, U.S.A.) to research on a New Zealand lake with similar water
quality and which also has a modeling program, Lake Taupo. Dr. David Hamilton at
the University of Waikato in New Zealand has considerable experience at Lake
Taupo and is a leader in combining 3-D models with real-time sensor data. The
PI?s current research focuses on monitoring and modeling water quality in the
near-shore of Lake Tahoe. In collaborating with Dr. Hamilton and his graduate
students, the PI will have access to data and models from Lake Taupo that are
uniquely applicable to the his research on ecologically comparable Lake Tahoe;
the PI will improve his approach to nearshore modeling, will collect reference
data from New Zealand lakes, and will establish research links to eventually
validate his western U.S. model on New Zealand lakes and globally. A robust and
globally transferable nearshore water quality model will serve to better
understand and protect the area of lakes and reservoirs on which human
populations most directly depend.

The margins of lakes are both an important ecological habitat and the primary
recreational and utilitarian usage point for humans. These near-shore areas are
subject to high variability in water quality due to natural and anthropogenic
inputs. Human development and changing climate patterns continue to force
changes to these inputs. Understanding how these variations will affect near-
shore water quality requires an understanding of the spatiotemporal response of
near-shore areas to external loading, meteorology, and the geometric nature of a
lake. The PI?s current research focuses on developing models of this response in
Lake Tahoe. In collaborating with Dr. Hamilton, the PI will gain insight into
generalizing his model for global application; he will learn new modeling
approaches, collect reference data, and establish long-term research links to
continually improve and apply his model to protect global freshwater reserves.
This EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New
Zealand.