* 1515427
* EAPSI:Investigation of Radiation Tolerance of Novel Semiconductor Materials for Space Power
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Zachary Bittner, Bittner                 Zachary        S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Photovoltaics (PV) is an enabling technology for space exploration, and the
lifecycle of the technology employed needs to be well characterized and well
understood before the full system can be designed. A major concern for the
longevity of satellites in Medium Earth orbit (MEO), or orbital radii from 1.8
to 2.5 times the Earth's radius(Re) is the high energy radiation effects from
passing through the Van Allen belts where charge particles are trapped by the
Earth's magnetic field. Since the PV system degrades from exposure to radiation,
the total power consumption of the satellite or vessel is limited by what the PV
system can provide at end-of-life. The underlying goal of this project is to
understand and engineer materials that exhibit better electrical characteristics
under high radiation fluences, a topic of great interest to the space PV
community. This research will be completed at the Semiconductor Analysis &
Radiation Effects group of the Japan Atomic Energy Agency with the assistance of
Dr. Shin-Ichiro Sato, an expert in the field of radiation effects in
semiconductor materials. This facility possesses state-of-the-art solar cell
irradiation and testing facilities, enabling completion of an extensive study in
a relatively short period of time.

For this project, three sets of strain balanced quantum dot/quantum well solar
cells (QDSC/QWSC) and quantum dot/quantum well (QD/QW) test structures will be
grown. The first set will target a strain-neutral condition. The second set will
be designed to have a slightly compressive strain (~1000 parts per million (ppm)
verified via x-ray diffractometry) by thinning the GaP strain compensation
layer. Finally, the third set will have a thicker GaP strain compensation layer,
resulting in a slightly tensile (~1000 ppm) strained QD stack. A change in
required displacement knock-on energy should be measurable via changes in defect
density from DLTS, and if the QD stack is kept thin, relatively minor changes in
residual strain should not have detrimental effects on electrical properties.
Since QD solar cells will also be included, it will be possible to correlate
these changes to changes in electrical properties of devices. This array of
devices makes it possible to deconvolve effects of residual strain from inherent
QD properties in order to enhance understanding of the effects adding
nanostructures has on radiation tolerance of the material. The study will be
repeated with InGaAs/GaAs QWs in order to investigate the impact of 3D quantum
confinement vs 1D quantum confinement on suppressing radiation effects in solar
cells. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.