* 1515460
* EAPSI:Engineering Artificial Cells that Sense a Chemical Target and Migrate in its direction
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Shiva Razavi, Razavi                  Shiva
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

A highly ubiquitous process in biology is cell migration: not only does it
govern many cellular events such as inflammatory response, tissue regeneration,
and wiring of nervous system, it is also central to pathogenesis of diseases
such as cancer, infection, and allergies. Thus, elucidating the mechanism of
cellular movement is key to understanding signaling networks within cells and
devising therapeutics. Many of the studies involving cell migration are
performed in a living cell, a model system that is complex due to the large pool
of molecules it encapsulates. The goal of this project is to study cell
migration in a reduced, minimal system. Akin to the process of assembling radio
parts to understand its functional mechanism, the project aims to reassemble the
molecular players of cell movement in an artificial cell-like structure to
understand how these molecules interact with each other. Dr. Shoji Takeuchi?s
lab at University of Tokyo has the microfabrication expertise that allows for
fast production of cell-like micro compartments using a microfluidics platform.
Thus the biomolecules can be readily packaged and studied in these engineered
cells.

Thus far, the molecular players of motility are identified, however it is not
yet known how these molecules interact with each other and the cell membrane to
orchestrate directed cell migration. To avoid the complexities involved with
studying cell migration in a highly intertwined cellular milieu, this project
aims to engineer an artificial cell that is built one molecule type at a time,
is minimal in the number of components, and can migrate towards a desired
target. This synthetic system is composed of controlled lipid membrane and
protein variables, and thus the long-standing question of cell migration could
be rigorously addressed. The engineered cell also could serve as a biomimetic
device for delivering drugs and biomolecules in a biological environment. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS).