* 1515969
* Collaborative Research: Predicting the Transient Signals from Galactic Centers: Circumbinary Disks and Tidal Disruptions around Black Holes
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Scott Noble, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2019
* USD 12,683.00

With masses millions to billions times that of our Sun, the strong gravitational
influence of supermassive black holes can heat nearby gas so that it outshines
an entire galaxy of stars, and slingshot material outward at relativistic
speeds. They exist at the centers of almost every massive galaxy, and they may
play a significant role in regulating rates of star formation. Our project aims
to produce the most realistic simulations to-date of two of the most dramatic
events they can make: the inspiral and merger of two orbiting supermassive black
holes and the tidal disruption of stars. Both were once thought to be
unobservable, but the advent of very large astronomical surveys sensitive to
transients have led to the discovery of numerous tidal disruptions and promise
the discovery of many mergers. The prospect of extensive observational data make
both very hot topics. The great advantage of this program is the opportunity it
provides to integrate many existing research programs into a larger community of
scientists, students, and the general public. It will foster crossdisciplinary
collaborations among undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and faculty at the Univ. of Tulsa, Johns Hopkins Univ., NASA/GSFC,
and Rochester Institute of Technology. Through such a network, our previous
highly successful outreach programs will be able to reach an even larger and
more diverse audience. For instance, S. Noble (PI) will continue to speak about
hot physics topics with the 100-200 high school students that attend the monthly
"Journal Club" event sponsored by his department, and will work with his
collaborators on building similar activities at their
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this project is to make
specific predictions of electromagnetic signatures of circumbinary accretion and
tidal disruption events that will allow astronomers to identify, based solely on
EM observations, these spectacular events using HST (optical), JWST (IR),
Chandra (X-ray), and ISS-Lobster (X-ray), as well as ground based
instrumentation such as the Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response
System, which is already in operation, or the planned Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope. Such identifications will be a tremendous aid in refining our
estimates of the population of merging supermassive black holes, both for
estimating the numbers of potential gravitational wave targets and for
evaluating the impact of black hole mergers on galaxy evolution. Our simulations
on Blue Waters will employ a number of new computational developments needed to
achieve the most realistic simulations of these systems to date. They include an
adaptive load balancer to evenly distribute runs with nonuniform costs, and a
multi-patch system for evolving the magnetohydrodynamics equations on different
coordinate domains. It is our intent to make the latter tool publicly available
for use in other magnetohydrodynamics codes. Our scientific results will also
have a wide-reaching impact on the astrophysical community, both theoretically
and observationally. We will release detailed spectra and simulation data for
use by observers and future mission development teams. This work comes at a
particularly opportune time, as the fields of time-domain and multi-messenger
astronomy are growing rapidly.