* 1515482
* EAPSI: Ethanol-Induced Toxicity Effects on a Functional Placenta-on-a-Chip
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jeremy Caplin, Caplin                  Jeremy         D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research to apply organ-on-a-chip technology to create a
functioning placenta-on-a-chip to replicate the natural placenta. As a biometric
model capable of transferring nutrients and waste between maternal and fetal
bloodstreams, a placenta-on-a-chip will enable study of the structure and
function of the placenta without the limitations of conventional models. A
particular interest of this research is improved understanding of Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder through testing for ethanol in the fetal bloodstream. Organ-
on-a-chip systems are still a relatively new area of research, but it is
important to expand the horizon with these systems. Being able to provide
reliable in vitro drug testing and analysis targeted towards pregnant patients
is an overwhelmingly important field of study. The research will be conducted
under the mentorship of Professor Noo Li Jeon, a noted expert on microfluidics
and organ-on-a-chip research, at Seoul National University in Korea.

The research involves creating microfluidic channels in PMMA chips, with a
porous polymer membrane between them so that nutrient and waste exchange can
occur. Syncytiotrophoblast cells will be cultivated on the side of the membrane
facing the maternal bloodstream, while vascular endothelial cells will be
cultivated on the side of the membrane facing the fetal bloodstream. Long-term
sustainability tests will be done to verify that the system is stable when fluid
flow is introduced. Additionally, tests will be done using varying levels of
ethanol to test the toxicity reaction of the system. The cells representing the
placental tissue are predicted to decrease in volume density as the
concentration of ethanol increases. The ultimate goal will be a working
placenta-on-a-chip capable of representing in vivo situations involving drug
reactions occurring in the placenta. The chip will not only be a pioneer for
integrating placental functions on a microfluidic chip, but will also prove to
be a sophisticated model capable of producing results in non-ideal situations;
specifically that of ethanol-induced toxicity within the maternal bloodstream.
This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is
funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.