* 1515306
* Large-scale, long-time molecular dynamics simulation of crystal growth: From close-packing to clathrates and quasicrystals
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Sharon Glotzer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2017
* USD 14,803.00

How crystals form from liquids is important in fields ranging from biology,
medicine, and food to the synthesis of materials with desired properties. Yet
little is understood about how crystals form in a way that would allow one to
predictably control and optimize crystal growth to obtain structures with
targeted properties. For example, complex crystals known as clathrates are
important for hydrocarbon extraction and storage, and can cause blockage of oil
and natural gas pipelines. Another complex crystal structure, called a
quasicrystal, is predicted to have unique optical properties important for
telecommunications and novel coatings. This project will use fast computers
based on graphics processors to study how crystals form in clathrates,
quasicrystals, and related crystal structures. Such simulations are challenging
because large system sizes and long time scales must be achieved simultaneously,
and thus very large computing resources such as those offered by Blue Waters are
required. For the first time, the invetigators expect to obtain data on
crystallization that will complement - and surpass - what can be obtained by
experiments, enabling a detailed atomistic view of how crystallization occurs,
and whether the process is different for different types of
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical theories hypothesize that crystals grow
from liquids atom-by-atom, layer-by-layer. How, then, can one explain the
formation of crystals with dozens, hundreds, even thousands of atoms in a unit
cell or aperiodic solids with no unit cell? The investigators will conduct
large-scale, long-run-time molecular dynamics computer simulations of crystal
growth to investigate the relationship between crystal complexity and the growth
mechanism. The planned simulations will neither approach the largest molecular
dynamics simulations nor the longest molecular dynamics simulations, but the
combination of large system size and long run-time (time steps times number of
atoms = 10^16) requires a petascale resource of the leading-edge capability that
Blue Water represents. Preliminary estimates suggest that the project might
achieve or surpass the dynamical range of experimental scattering data for the
first time. The computer simulations will mimic standard experimental crystal
growth protocols (Czochralski and Bridgman-Stockbarger) as closely as possible.
The investigators will employ a computationally inexpensive atomistic model that
they recently developed for the study of icosahedral quasicrystals, clathrates,
and other crystal structures (Nature Materials 14, 109 (2015)). The model is
similar to a united-atom force field model. The project will use HOOMD-Blue for
the entirety of the planned studies, an open source, publicly available code
that the investigators develop for the community, and which has been already
ported to and optimized for Blue Waters. HOOMD-Blue is currently the fastest
available simulation code for carrying out the proposed studies. With the
acquired simulation data the project will investigate the role of unit cell
symmetry on crystal growth and relate the Wulff shape to the space group
symmetry of the dominant clathrate type. Furthermore, the team will conduct a
phason strain analysis of the icosahedral quasicrystal and will compare the
diffraction patterns of the grown crystals with experimental data.