* 1515462
* EAPSI:Neutron Events Study of Kaon Decays for Matter-Antimatter Asymmetry in Our Universe
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Stephanie Su, Su                      Stephanie      Y
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Much physics and astronomy research have been carried out to understand the
early state and the development of the universe. Our current living visible
world is mainly composed of matter rather than antimatter. However, the Big Bang
should have created equal amounts of matter and antimatter. In the elementary
physics study, charge-parity (CP) symmetry violation can explain the matter-
antimatter asymmetry phenomenon. The KOTO experiment studies a rare neutral Kaon
decay, which is a direct CP violating decay. The summer research will focus on
the study neutron events in the experiment, which are major events that
contribute to the background to identify the rare neutral Kaon decay. This
research will be conducted at Osaka University, as well as at Japan Proton
Accelerator Research Complex (J-PARC), in collaboration with Professor Taku
Yamanaka.

The Standard Model provides a clean calculation on the branching ratio of the
rare neutral Kaon decay into a pion and two neutrinos. By measuring the
branching ratio of this decay, we can eliminate many currently established
physics models and perhaps discover new physics. Due to the missing neutrinos
that cannot be detected by the detector, event signals for the rare decay will
appear to have large transverse momentum. However, a neutron event generated
upstream of the detector or inside the calorimeter could possibly appear to be
the same. The research will use the normalization of Kaon decays with final
particles to be three pions, two pions, or two photons to reconstruct the decay
vertex. It will focus on the analysis on cluster information of neutron events
using Monte Carlo simulation, along with known neutron events, to distinguish
them from other events. Once the clustering information for the neutron events
is analyzed, neural network will be trained to identify neutron events. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science.