* 1515064
* EAPSI:Assessing and Quantifying Resilience of Commercial Sectors to Natural Hazards
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Megan Boston, Boston                  Megan
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research to assess and quantify the resilience of commercial
buildings to natural hazards such as earthquakes. Up to this point, most
attempts at understanding community resilience have focused on qualitatively
assessing resilience in a broad over aching manner. While these methods are
valuable they lack the ability to give stakeholders and decision makers specific
information for planning and preparing for a disaster. The 2011 Christchurch
earthquake caused severe damage to the Christchurch Central Business District
(CDB). Studying the impact of the earthquake on the commercial buildings and the
recovery decisions currently being made will be a valuable resource for
understanding the impacts of future earthquakes in the United States. This
project will provide a resilience metric specific for commercial buildings and
the tools required to quantitatively measure resilience over time, providing
predictive tools that can be used to understand vulnerabilities of commercial
buildings, approximate damages and downtimes, and estimate recovery decisions.
This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Ken Elwood, at the
University of Auckland in Auckland, New Zealand.

The impacts of the February 2011 Earthquake in Christchurch, New Zealand, will
serve as a case study to develop tools that can be used to assess
vulnerabilities of commercial buildings and help predict future outcomes to
communities similarly prone to natural hazards. The research will progress in
three phases. The first phase is gathering and combining data previously
collected in New Zealand and collecting additional data needed for the analysis.
During the second phase fault trees and event trees, tools used in risk
analysis, will be created to determine system failures, critical baseline
events, and possible event sequences in the recovery process. Finally, the fault
and event trees will be used to quantify community resilience by determining
functionality over time, feeding into the developed resilience metric(s). The
final product will be fault trees and event trees to be used by decision makers
and engineers to predict potential damages from future earthquakes. This award
is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.