* 1515173
* EAPSI:A Comparative Test of the Spatial Hypothesis for the Mental Representation of Order in Nonhuman Primates
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Rachel Diamond, Diamond                 Rachel
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Humans think about numbers along a mental number line. The spatial
representation of numbers has been linked to improved math abilities. It is
unclear how much these spatial representations are caused by cultural training,
such as learning to read from left to right. Because nonhuman animals have not
learned to read from left to right, they can be used as a good model to
investigate spatial representations in the absence of culture. Number and order
have similar properties, so early nonhuman animal research has focused on order
representations. Chimpanzees at the Primate Research Institute (PRI) of Kyoto
University are some of the first nonhuman primates to have shown similar spatial
representations of order as humans. In collaboration with Dr. Tetsuro Matsuzawa,
the researcher will use touchscreen computers to test how memory for order and
memory for spatial locations interact in the chimpanzees at the PRI. The
researcher will also give similar tasks to rhesus monkeys, to test the extent to
which humans, chimpanzees, and more distant primate relatives similarly think
about number. Because nonhuman primates do not have cultural influences in the
form of reading and math instruction, they are an ideal model in which to test
how culture influences these abilities and their evolutionary history.

At the PRI, chimpanzees will work on touchscreen computers to complete order and
memory tests. Most evidence for a similar spatial representation of order or
number in humans and nonhuman animals is indirect and analogical, and there are
almost no data from animals that is directly comparable to human data. Recent
research suggests that the spatial organization of order occurs in working
memory. If chimpanzees represent order spatially in working memory, then
performing an order task during the delay of a spatial working memory test will
interfere more with performance on the spatial memory task than with performance
on a non-spatial control task. If interference effects are obtained, it will
indicate that chimpanzees represent order spatially and do so using a working
memory mechanism. Comparing performance of nonhuman primates and humans can help
elucidate the underlying mechanism supporting memory for order. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science.