* 1515189
* EAPSI:Investigating the Electronic and Magnetic Properties of Composites with Trapped Electrons
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Chandani Nandadasa, Nandadasa               Chandani       N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

An ionic compound is a chemical compound in which positive and negative ions are
held together by ionic bonds. The positively charged ions are called cations and
the negatively charged ions are called anions. Electride is a unique class of
ionic compound with nonreducible countercations and electrons as anions. These
anionic electrons are neither associated with specific atom or bond nor fully
delocalized, but they are localized within the crystal voids. Since these
electrons are not bound to any ions, electrides have a great potential for cold
emission in a low electric field for high-efficiency light-emitting devices like
cold-cathode fluorescent lamps. Most of these electrides are sensitive to air
and temperature, but recently several new layer structured two-dimensional
electrides have been developed making the practical application of electrides
possible. Two-dimensional electrides also attract scientists because of their
unique electronic properties such as superconductivity and for the potential
application for organic light-emitting diode (OLED) due to their low electron
work function. Theoretical study of electrides is essential for developing new
electrides for selecting candidate compounds with enhanced electronic
properties. This research will be conducted with Dr. Sung Wng Kim, a noted
expert in material science, at Center for Integrated Nanostructure Physics
(CINAP), Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon, Republic of Korea.

Theoretical simulations will use the first-principles calculations based on the
Density Functional Theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio
Simulation Package (VASP). Among layer-structure two-dimensional electrides, two
carbides (Yttrium carbide - Y2C and Dysprosium carbide - Dy2C) and two nitrides
(Strontium nitride - Sr2N and Barium nitride - Ba2N) have been selected for the
proposed project. It is proposed to do theoretical calculations and compare with
the experimental results obtained in the host research advisor's group. The
proposed project will obtain structural, electronic, magnetic and surface
properties of Y2C, Dy2C, Sr2N and Ba2N using first principles calculations to
elucidate the relationship between structure and material properties of
electrides. This award is funded in collaboration with the National Research
Foundation of Korea.