* 1515130
* Mathematical Modeling of the Dynamics of Cellular Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* James Keener, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 215,000.00

The goal of this project is to bring to bear the tools of mathematics to gain an
improved theoretical and quantitative understanding of the fundamental processes
underlying the function of biological organisms. This research will examine the
mechanisms underlying cell behavior including processes such as movement,
direction finding, regulation of protein content, construction of complex
substructures, communication between cells, information processing, and decision
making. The strategy for this investigation is to construct mathematical models
of these processes that are based on the underlying physical and chemical
mechanisms, with the intent of demonstrating and understanding how the
individual components fit and work together to give coordinated, higher level
behavior. A major component of this project is the training of graduate students
to do collaborative, interdisciplinary research and teaching. The combined
effect of these efforts will be to communicate to the broader scientific
community the importance and power of mathematics to understanding biology, to
help build bridges of collaboration between mathematicians and biologists, and
to bring new researchers into the field of mathematical biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this proposal is to use
mathematical methods to study a variety of biological problems broadly
identified as the dynamics of cellular physiological processes. Specific
projects include study of ephaptic coupling of cardiac cells, regulation of the
construction of flagellar rotary motors and control of their rotation direction,
protein trafficking, force generation by depolymerization of microtubules during
cell division, and the beating motion of cilia. While the details of the biology
of each of the projects are quite different, their mathematical descriptions
contain many common features and rely on common principles and transferable
concepts, and it is the commonality of mathematics that unifies this work. In
particular, principles of mathematical modeling, dynamical systems theory,
bifurcation theory, asymptotic analysis, homogenization and multi-scale
analysis, stochastic processes, and numerical simulation will all be used in
this work. Thus, this work brings the tools of modern applied mathematics to
bear on challenging and complex problems of biology while pushing forward the
frontiers of applied mathematics. The combination of diverse biological problems
and sophisticated mathematical tools is expected to result in novel and
unexpected insights into the way cells function.