* 1515326
* EAPSI:Effect of Humic Substances on Ammonium Oxidation Coupled to Iron Reduction in Paddy Soils
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Olivia Healy, Healy                   Olivia
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Humic substances could have a significant impact on iron cycling in paddy soils,
resulting in impacts on nitrogen loss and retention in terrestrial ecosystems.
This project will determine the effect of humic substances on the process of
iron reduction coupled to ammonium oxidation and subsequent nitrogen loss in
paddy soils. The abundance of humic substances in soils indicates the
significant potential impact of humic substances on iron cycling and on nitrogen
loss from paddy soils in China, where one-third of the world?s synthesized
nitrogen fertilizer is produced. To determine the impact of humic substances on
iron and nitrogen cycling in paddy soils, humic substance, iron, and nitrogen
cycling will be stimulated in paddy soils and nitrogen loss will be measured. In
addition, the stimulated microbial community will be analyzed to improve the
understanding of the microorganisms responsible for nitrogen loss and retention
and iron cycling in terrestrial ecosystems. This project will be completed in
collaboration with Dr. Yong-Guan Zhu at the Institute for Urban Environment,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. Dr. Zhu has extensive experience analyzing paddy
soil iron and nitrogen cycling and microbial communities.

The stimulated microbial community will be analyzed by stimulating iron
reduction coupled to ammonium oxidation in paddy soils and employing culture-
independent (sequencing-by-synthesis of 16S rRNA gene sequences) and culture-
dependent (soil enrichment followed by colony isolation) microbial community
analysis of the paddy soils. The proposed research will improve the mechanistic
understanding of terrestrial nitrogen and iron cycling and estimations of global
nitrogen loss. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate
student and is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and
Technology.