* 1515974
* Quantitative Studies of Intrinsically Disordered Protein Structure and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Scott Showalter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2019
* USD 981,911.00

In this research project broad principles wil be developed to describe the
structure of highly flexible proteins, which will provide predictive insight
into their function. The PI's new models connecting molecular structure and
function for highly flexible proteins will lead to the routine quantitative
characterization of these molecular systems. A new experimental methodology will
be implemented for atomic resolution characterization of the structures
possessed by highly flexible proteins and the changes to those structures that
often accompany binding to other macromolecules. As a result, this research and
associated training activities will yield fundamental, molecular level insights
into essential biological processes that will benefit the biotechnology
industry. This program will train junior scientists to seek fundamental insight
into the systems and processes from biochemistry, using the principles and
quantitative laws from the physical sciences. During each year of the project,
the PI will bring middle school students from disadvantaged backgrounds to Penn
State University in order to illustrate for them the opportunities that arise
from higher education in science and engineering fields. Additionally, the PI
has been named a mentor for two Penn State programs that aim to bring under-
represented minority undergraduate students into the research laboratory.
Through these programs, the PI will bring a minimum of one enrolled student per
year of the project into his laboratory. Trainees supported by this project will
continue to provide the daily mentorship of all students engaging in these
outreach programs, with guidance from the PI, who is firmly committed to
expanding opportunities in science for students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
quantitatively describe intrinsically disordered protein (IDP) ensembles and
structure-function relationships on the atomic and molecular scale. The
challenge is to find a model that best describes the conformational features of
highly flexible biomolecules, as this structural description is intimately
connected with cellular function. From a broader point of view, the objective is
to develop new models for protein conformation and dynamics that lead to the
application of structural biological tools to IDPs, which are hypothesized to
possess native structure that is directly responsible for imparting their
specific functions. Defining structure-function relationships for IDPs requires
broadening the traditionally narrow paradigm developed for cooperatively folding
systems. This project continues efforts to develop quantitative and efficient
tools for experimentally constraining IDP structure and site-specific
interactions with other biomolecules through carbon-detected NMR spectroscopy.
Traditionally acquired (i.e., 1H-detected) NMR spectra of IDPs suffer from poor
chemical shift dispersion, rendering them unsuitable to high resolution
applications in most cases. It has been shown that 13C-direct detection
spectroscopy generally produces spectra suitable for quantitative analysis of
IDPs. The development of carbon-detected NMR methods for the study of IDPs will
continue to be developed during the course of this project. Recently a fully
atomistic structural ensemble of the protein FCP1 in its unbound state has been
resolved. This project will expand efforts to include structural
characterization of the complex formed between FCP1 and its folded partner
Rap74, while also defining the conformational ensemble of a segment from the RNA
Polymerase II C-terminal domain, which is the biological target of the FCP1
phosphatase activity. Finally, it is necessary to connect structural findings to
functional outcomes. For the model systems investigated in this project,
biological function can be assayed by defining binding interactions between the
IDPs under study and their cooperatively folded partners. Functional hypothesis
testing will be primarily carried out through quantitative calorimetric binding
studies, establishing the energetic consequences of intrinsic disorder and
defining the driving forces for disordered protein interactions.