* 1515738
* Electromagnetic Properties and Hadronic Parity Violation in Lattice QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Brian Tiburzi, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Quarks are elementary particles that are strongly bound inside protons and
neutrons. The residual strong interactions between protons and neutrons give
rise to all of nuclear physics, from the simplest nuclear reactions responsible
for fusion, to the intricate structure of large unstable nuclei. In essence,
nuclei are to the strong 'chromodynamic' force what molecules are to the
electromagnetic force. Tremendous progress is being made by solving the theory
of strong interactions numerically. Current computing power and algorithms have
put one within reach of realistic computations. Quantitative knowledge of the
strong force will ultimately render nucleons and nuclei into laboratories for
investigating fundamental symmetries and probing the limits of the Standard
Model of particle physics. The comprehensive research program of the PI will
combine advances in theoretical physics and high-performance computing to help
advance our knowledge about nucleons and nuclei to the most advanced level yet.
Moreover, the scope of this program affords both student and post-doctoral
researchers considerable opportunities for training in nuclear and computational
science, two areas in which an advanced technical workforce is much needed.

The scientific goal of this project is to study electromagnetic and parity-
violating properties of strongly bound systems directly from Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). The distribution of charge and magnetism within nucleons
will be explored by calculating their magnetic moments and electromagnetic
polarizabilities using lattice gauge theory. Effort will also be geared toward
studying the electromagnetic structure of light nuclei and hyper-nuclei using
lattice QCD techniques, including the challenge of reducing the quark mass.
Manifestations of the weak interaction at low energies will additionally be
investigated from QCD. The parity-violating component of non-leptonic weak
interactions introduces hadronic parity violation, and probes quark-quark
correlations deep within hadrons. Due to feasibility of lattice QCD computations
in the isotensor channel, lattice renormalization of isotensor parity violation
will be determined and electromagnetic mixing will be addressed for the first
time. Novel methods will be sought for future lattice calculations in the
remaining isospin channels.