* 1515520
* Hacking Your Mind:  The Science of Personal Relevance
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2015,01/31/2021
* David Davis, Oregon Public Broadcasting
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 01/31/2021
* USD 2,792,200.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This media and research project will inform
adult audiences about the discoveries of NSF funded Social, Behavioral, and
Economic (SBE) scientists that are dramatically re-shaping fields as diverse as
economics, marketing, medicine and government. Four primetime PBS specials
hosted by science reporter, Miles O'Brien, will be produced featuring leading
SBE scientists and vetted for inclusion by a panel of expert advisors including
Baruch Fischhoff of Carnegie Mellon and Robert Kurzban of the University of
Pennsylvania. A key innovation in the project is a participatory research
strategy that will enable the public to take part directly in scientific
behavioral research and discover what their participation has revealed about
their own lives. Built around YouTube features, Facebook, and online games it
will build on the public's interest in learning about themselves and others via
social media supported by scientific research. The project collaborators include
the media company, Oregon Public Broadcasting, and researchers at Carnegie
Mellon, University of Pennsylvania, Yale University, and Chapman University.
This project is unique in its strategy for combining broadcast television
programs focusing on Social, Behavioral, and Economics research with a
participatory research component that engages audiences in scientific studies
that are personally relevant. It will fill an important niche in the informal
learning research literature and has the potential to impact media practice that
continues to evolve incorporating new online social media tools.

RMC will conduct formative evaluation to help inform the project deliverables, a
summative evaluation of the project, and an experimental research study in Year
3 of the project. The research study is based on the hypothesis that those
participants assigned to watch the entire television series and engage in all
participatory research activities will experience the greatest gains in STEM
interest and engagement as compared to those who only have limited exposure.
Research participants will be randomly assigned to the control group (no
services) or one of the three treatment conditions: view TV only; engage in
participatory website only; or both. Pre-tests and posttests and statistical
tools will be used to compare changes. Sub-studies will examine dosage levels
and effectiveness in engaging those who have not previously been interested in
STEM.