* 1515187
* Transport of Particles in Heterogeneous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,10/31/2020
* Alexei Novikov, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 10/31/2020
* USD 388,107.00

The objective of this research is to study, from a mathematical perspective,
physical properties of heterogeneous media. Heterogeneous media are ubiquitous.
Some examples are ocean flows, atmospheric turbulence, oil-bearing sands, and
biological tissues. Understanding of properties of such media is relevant to
aspects of virtually every branch of science and engineering (e.g., materials
science, chemical engineering, geophysics, medical imaging, fluid dynamics). One
of the components of this project concerns adaptive optics. Adaptive optics is a
method to improve accuracy of astronomical telescopes, laser communication
systems, and other optical devices. The main source of distortion in these
devices comes from atmospheric turbulence. The aim of this part of the project
is to understand the mechanism of this distortion. Another component of this
research concerns changes in salinity or chlorofluorocarbon on the surface of
the ocean. Oceanic vortices may dramatically change mixing rates of various
chemical compounds. The aim of this element in project is to estimate these
rates in simpler mathematical models to illuminate the mechanisms present in the
full problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical simulation of wave propagation in
heterogeneous media is still beyond reach of modern computers. In practice it
leads to use of various simplified approximations. The derivation and
justification of these approximations is delicate. Many difficulties of such
derivation are already found in a simpler setup of particle propagation in
heterogeneous media. One of the goals of this research is to develop tools and a
better understanding of approximate models for particle propagation in
heterogeneous media. This project concentrates on transport of particles in
slowly decorrelating media, because it was observed recently that propagation in
slowly decorrelating media has properties with no analogs in rapidly
decorrelating media. One of the outcomes of this project will be a rigorous
justification of the Random Travel Time Approximation - a method used in
adaptive optics. The second project concentrates on anomalous diffusion of
tracer particles in a strong array of opposing vortices. Anomalously fast
transport of particles in presence of strong vortices was observed by
oceanographers in 1980s. A goal of this project is to justify mathematically
this predicted phenomenon.