* 1515628
* Head Start on Engineering: Supporting Engineering Interest Development in Early Childhood
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Marcie Benne, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,070.00

Disparities in engineering participation and achievement by women and
individuals from traditionally underserved racial and ethnic groups have been
persistent. Approaches outside the context of university and school reform,
including approaches to supporting interest development in early childhood, have
not been fully considered by educators and policymakers. This AISL Pathways
project will focus on engineering, which has emerged as a critical topic in the
STEM education field and a prominent aspect of educational standards and
policies. Building on a strong empirical and theoretical base, it will lay the
foundation for future research efforts to advance the field's limited
understanding of early childhood engineering-related interest development,
especially through parent-child interactions; create research tools for studying
engineering-related interest in young children; and identify effective
strategies for supporting long-term engineering interest pathways. "Head Start
on Engineering" is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
an asset-based approach and authentic engagement with families and community
organizations, Head Start on Engineering will pilot research and program
activities that are sensitive to the constraints of low-income families and
build on the resources and funds of knowledge within these communities. It will
test and refine an innovative, theoretical model of early childhood interest
development. The overall design of the pilot study will be mixed-method and
short-term longitudinal, with data collected before, during, and after program
implementation from participating families. Quantitative measures will allow for
consistent comparisons across groups and within families, while qualitative data
will help explore complex factors and processes hypothesized in the theoretical
framework and related to program implementation. This work will allow the team
time to address unanswered questions and issues around how to feasibly
operationalize key aspects of the revised theoretical model in preparation for
more extensive, longitudinal and experimental investigations as part of the next
phase of the project. Understanding and honoring parents' beliefs, knowledge,
and experiences is central to this project. In developing and implementing both
the programs and research activities, the team will adopt culturally responsive
and asset-based perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pathways project is a
collaboration between the Institute for Learning Innovation (ILI), a nonprofit
organization dedicated to the advancement of lifelong, free-choice learning for
all communities through research, practice, and policy initiatives; Mt. Hood
Community College Head Start program; the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
(OMSI), a nationally renowned science museum; and the Center for STEM Education
at the University of Notre Dame. The project involves families with four-year-
old children who attend the Head Start program. The collaboration between
educators, community organizations, and researchers and the integrated approach
to research and program development will ensure that study findings translate to
practical and effective education strategies and that future research efforts
are well-grounded in the realities of practitioners and learners.