* 1515583
* EAPSI:Developing a Novel Simulator for Testing Smart Power Grid Optimization Techniques
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Victor Szczepanski, Szczepanski             Victor         N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Creating more efficient power plants and introducing alternative energies like
solar and wind are making great headway in reducing the cost of electricity, but
these ignore two major problems with current power grids: excessive peak power
consumption and power line failures. To address these, researchers have been
developing the ?Smart Grid? - a power grid that uses sensors to monitor grid
health and provide more fine-grained information about power usage and cost to
consumers and providers. Parallel to these developments, many researchers are
investigating new techniques for automated grid control to reduce peak
consumption and handle situations where failures may occur (due to natural
disasters, etc). Unfortunately, for a class of problems that can model smart
grid problems, known as Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOP),
there is only one simulator for testing algorithms, and it only supports
problems that do not change over time. Thus, the purpose of this project is to
develop a simulator that does support dynamic problems so that researchers can
test their algorithms in a more realistic setting. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Makoto Yokoo at Kyushu University in
Fukuoka, Japan. Dr. Yokoo is well known as the founder of the DCOP field, and
his expertise in DCOP algorithms will prove indispensable for this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FRODO 2 simulator is the de facto standard for
testing DCOP algorithms. It supports an XML formatted problem configuration and
offers an extensible platform for developing new algorithms. However, FRODO 2 is
designed only for static problems ? problems that do not change over time.
Furthermore, FRODO 2 can be cumbersome to extend due to over-use of interfaces
and Java's Reflection API. This project's purpose is to develop a DCOP simulator
that supports dynamic problems (with the main use-case being Smart Grid
problems) and has a cleaner design. Furthermore, we hope to design this
simulator to support true distributed simulations ? FRODO 2 only supports local,
non-parallel simulations. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.