* 1515546
* EAPSI:User-Driven Design of Technology for Increasing Blind People's Independence While Shopping
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Lourdes Morales-Villaverde, Morales-Villaverde      Lourdes        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

The premise behind Assistive Technology research is to enable people with
disabilities to enjoy the same quality of life as people without disabilities,
but despite advances in assistive technologies and technology in general,
shopping still poses a barrier towards independence for blind people. Shopping
can be a necessity as well as a recreational activity for many individuals, and
for some it can even influence their sense of belonging and self-worth within
society. Hence, there is a need for further research on making independent
shopping accessible to blind people. This research will focus on designing and
developing a shopping assistant system to facilitate blind people (from Japan
and the U.S.) to independently explore shopping malls. The research will be
conducted in collaboration with Prof. Muneo Kitajima, a noted expert in the
fields of Human-Computer Interaction and Cognitive Science, at Nagaoka
University of Technology (NUT) in Japan. This research will support the
development of a shopping assistant system for blind people by identifying the
system requirements for such a system and developing a prototype tool through
participatory design, a user-centered design method that involves target users
at every step of the design and development process.

System requirements will be gathered through surveys and focus group discussions
with blind persons and/or store managers from the U.S. and Japan. A system will
be designed based on those requirements and tested with blind individuals from
Japan through cognitive walkthroughs. With the feedback received, system
requirements will be improved accordingly and a high-fidelity prototype of the
system will be implemented on top of an iOS indoor navigation application. User
evaluations of the prototype will be conducted with blind persons from Japan
within a lab setting that mimics a shopping mall environment. Based on the
evaluations, a finalized version of the system will be designed. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS).