* 1515435
* EAPSI: Spatial Heterogeneity in Preferences for Housing Amenities across Household Compositions: Discrete Choice Models for Residential Location Bundles in Beijing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kevin Krivacsy, Krivacsy                Kevin          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award investigates the ways that households value neighborhood attributes
in the residential location decision process in Beijing. It also seeks to
understand the ways vehicle ownership policy constraints unique to Chinese
cities impacts the bundled decisions of households, along with implementing this
into a unique modeling framework to investigate how these preferences vary
across the metropolitan area. In early 2011, Beijing restricted the purchase of
automobiles by distributing license plates through a lottery. This restriction
led to capacity constraints on the choices that were available to each
household. Through simulation of counterfactuals, it is possible to test how
changes in the number of vehicles allowed may alter the urban landscape and
demand for certain location choice characteristics for particular types of
households. This project utilizes the joint decision making ability of
households to present an integrated discrete choice modeling framework for
Beijing that ties together residential location choice with other jointly made
decisions such as work location, commuting distance and vehicle ownership to
further understanding regarding household bundled residential location choice
behavior. The research will be conducted under the supervision of Dr. Wenzhong
Zhang of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Geographic Sciences and
Natural Resources Research, whose expertise and household survey data will be
invaluable to the project. The discrete choice model of bundled residential
location choice is estimated using a unique micro-level dataset covering the
urbanized areas of Beijing?s metropolitan district. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a modeling framework through the incorporation of a household
survey and other relevant data sources to 1) implement a discrete choice model
for an investigation into household?s valuation of neighborhood and structure
amenities, how this changes across household compositions, and the bundled
nature of household decisions, 2) investigate the role of constraints (vehicle
ownership in Beijing) on these bundled residential location decisions along with
the impact of potential policy changes in vehicle ownership on the location
choice process and 3) implement this is a discrete choice modeling framework
that allows for spatial correlation across choice alternatives. This NSF EAPSI
award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in
collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.