* 1515753
* Robust Methods in Mathematical Finance
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Rene Carmona, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2018
* USD 237,220.00

Stochastic models have long been successfully applied to describe financial
markets, make investment decisions, price and hedge financial derivatives, and
manage risks. But this has led to an over-reliance on particular models and a
disregard of the possibility of model misspecification. While in most
engineering applications robust methods have a long history, the standard
approach in mathematical finance is still to describe all underlying uncertainty
with a single probability measure. However, in many real-life situations it is
not possible to determine the precise probabilities of future events, and
financial decision rules that are sensitive to particular assumptions can lead
to disastrous outcomes if reality does not exactly unfold as predicted by the
model. The goal of this project is to develop methods of financial decision-
making that take into account extreme events and are robust with respect to
model misspecification. The outcomes are expected to lead to robust approaches
to investing, asset pricing, hedging, and risk management. Graduate students are
included in the work of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
create robust methods that can be used to address relevant problems in
mathematical finance. Discrete-time as well as continuous-time models are
studied. The plan is to establish non-linear Riesz representation results that
can be used to develop robust versions of the fundamental theorem of asset
pricing together with corresponding pricing duality formulas, robust methods for
pricing and hedging options, as well as approaches to treat optimal asset
allocation problems under model uncertainty. The problems to be addressed lie at
the intersection of mathematical finance, investment theory, and financial
economics. Methods from probability theory, stochastic analysis, functional
analysis, and decision theory are used.