* 1515167
* US-German Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Optimization of Human Cortical Stimulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert MacLeod, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 192,973.00

Electrical stimulation of the surface of the brain is used to map functions,
such as hand movement. This stimulation is vital for both brain research and
patient care. Better methods are needed to precisely direct the electrical
current on the brain surface. Precise stimulation will help research in
restoring damage after neurological injury. Stimulation and recording from the
brain surface have also been used to study memory and attention processes.
Research in the development of neuro-prosthetics and the study of how the brain
interacts with brain-controlled devices may also benefit from more precise
stimulation. This project uses advanced computer modeling to determine better
ways of stimulating the brain. One can predict where the stimulation will go
based on these models. It will be tested whether using these models can
precisely steer the stimulation to target specific brain
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US-German collaborative project combines
expertise from the University of Washington (PI: J. Ojemann, Neurosurgery),
Northeastern University (D. Brooks, Electrical Engineering), the University of
Utah (R. McLeod, Center for Integrative Biomedical Computing) and, in Germany,
the University of Freiburg (T. Ball, Computational Neuroscience and
Neurotechnology). The optimization protocols developed at Northwestern and Utah
can predict the distribution of current delivery, which will be validated in a
sheep model and subsequently used to predict current delivery in human data. For
instance, complex geometries of brain surface (electrocorticography) electrodes
may give varying patterns of current across the brain. By using simultaneous
stimulation and recording data from the cortical surface (in either sheep or
human brain in vivo), the model and optimization algorithms can be assessed.
Successful methods for "current steering" would be applicable across a broad
range of research and patient care applications in
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the
German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).