* 1515241
* Rural Gateways:  Fostering the Development of Rural Librarians as Informal Science Facilitators
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2023
* Karen Brown, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,998,725.00

Due to geographical isolation, rural communities are often underserved by the
informal STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) education
system. As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal
environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds
innovative resources for use in a variety of settings including rural
communities. Thus, this project will help to develop rural libraries and
librarians into STEM learning centers and facilitators who will use community
assets providing new horizons for youth on career choices and adults on an
enhanced STEM knowledge base. Through online professional development exercises,
the library staff will enhance their knowledge, enabling them to develop and
support new STEM learning mechanisms in their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, 110 rural libraries will be
chosen from applicants to obtain advanced knowledge of how to facilitate STEM
learning. It is anticipated that the staff will change from being resource
persons to facilitators of STEM knowledge transfer. The project is a
collaboration between Dartmouth College, Dominican University, the Institute of
Learning Innovation, Dawson, Media Group, and the Califa Group. The research
questions address: a quantitative assessment of rural librarian's STEM efficacy
and professional identity, and a determination of the efficacy and impact of
multiple forms of professional development and learning tools on rural
librarians' ability to participate in and facilitate informal STEM learning.