* 1515476
* EAPSI: Investigating the Mechanisms of Toxin Resistance in Specialized Toad-Eating Snakes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Shabnam Mohammadi, Mohammadi               Shabnam
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Toads are chemically defended by potent steroid toxins, which are lethal if
ingested. Consequently, most predators avoid consuming toads. However, several
species of snakes have evolved resistance to the toxins and actively prey on
toads. The Japanese snake Rhabdophis tigrinus has further evolved the ability to
store the acquired dietary toxins for use in its own defense. The mechanisms
responsible for resistance and physiological consequences of that resistance
remain unknown. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Akira
Mori at Kyoto University, a noted expert on Japanese toad-eating snakes, to
explain the unknown physiological mechanisms and determine their occurrence
among various lineages of snakes, including the uniquely specialized R.
tigrinus. This research will provide a better understanding of the evolution of
toxin resistance in snakes.

Toads are chemically defended by cardiotonic steroid toxins known as
bufadienolides, which exert their lethal effects by binding to, and inhibiting,
Na+,K+-ATPases on cell membranes. Although select lineages of snakes from
several geographic regions actively prey on toads, the Japanese snake Rhabdophis
tigrinus has further evolved the ability to sequester toad toxins for
redeployment in its own defense. The researcher will pursue an integrative
approach to determine the molecular mechanisms and physiological trade-offs
underlying tolerance of toad toxins by clarifying the genetic basis for
resistance and quantifying the physiological responses to bufadienolides in
snakes. Ultimately, character mapping of molecular and physiological results
will determine the extent of convergent evolution of toad-eating adaptations in
snakes. The expansion of sampling to include Rhabdophis tigrinus will contribute
directly to this goal by expanding phylogenetic comparisons to a lineage of
toad-eating snakes distinct from others that the researcher has studied and by
including the only species demonstrated to sequester toad toxins. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science.