* 1515406
* EAPSI: Algorithms for the Design Automation of Microfluidic Laboratories-on-a-chip
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Brian Crites, Crites                  Brian
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research to develop algorithms that will be used in the
automation of the design of microfluidic laboratories-on-a-chip (LoC). These
algorithms will be integrated into a large tool used to create design files for
the fabrication of these devices. Microfluidic LoCs are able to perform
chemistry experiments on the micro-liter scale with higher precision and no
human intervention. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Tsung-Yi Ho, a noted expert on microfluidic design automation, at National Chiao
Tung University in Hsinchu, Taiwan. This project will help lead to the first
full tool capable of creating design files for fabricating microfluidic devices
while also presenting a low bar of entry to chemists, biochemists, and
bioengineers hoping to work in the emerging field of microfluidics. The
widespread use of microfluidics in these fields will lead to faster, more
economical, and more precise chemical experiments, while also freeing up
scientist?s time to work on designing experiments instead of running them.

While there are similarities between very-large-scale integration (VSLI)
algorithms used in the design of integrated circuits (IC) and those used in the
design of microfluidic LoCs, there are several key distinctions in the
manufacturing process that makes the direct use of VLSI design algorithms
impossible. Instead this research uses VLSI design algorithms as a basis for the
development of new algorithms that can meet the specific requirements needed in
the design of microfluidic LoCs. These algorithms will be used to place
microfluidic components and route the connections between the components to
create a microfluidic layer for the flow and manipulation of chemicals. These
algorithms will then be integrated into a larger framework capable of
controlling the experiment and generating the necessary support systems for the
fabrication of a full microfluidic LoC. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.