* 1515295
* EAPSI:Investigating the Evolution of Color Vision in the Japanese Yellow Swallowtail Butterfly
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Nathan Buerkle, Buerkle                 Nathan         P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Changes in brain structure and connections, either through development or as an
adult, are typically associated with negative effects, such as the development
of disease. However, the fact that behavior and brain anatomy vary from species
to species clearly indicates that some changes to the brain can be adaptive.
This project aims to begin elucidating basic principles of brain evolution by
examining color vision in the Japanese yellow swallowtail butterfly, Papilio
xuthus. Unlike most insects, which can see ultraviolet, blue, and green light,
P. xuthus also sees red light. Recordings from the brain and comparisons with
other insects will be conducted to provide insights into how the visual system
of this butterfly evolved to see a larger array of colors. Because evolution is
a fundamental process that shapes and constrains animal diversity, the results
of this study could contribute to a better understanding of basic brain
function. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Michiyo
Kinoshita, a leading expert in the neuroscience of insect color vision, at The
Graduate University for Advanced Studies (Sokendai) in Japan.

Nervous systems play an integral role in producing phylogenetically diverse
behaviors. However, little is known about brain evolution and how altering the
complex and intricate organization of neural circuits can give rise to adaptive
behavior rather than deleterious effects. The evolution of tetrachromatic vision
from a trichromatic ancestor in Papilio xuthus presents an excellent opportunity
to study neural evolution because the utilization of spectrally opponent
processes across insects and vertebrates makes it a tractable and relatively
simple computation to assess within a comparative framework. Color processing in
P. xuthus will be investigated using intracellular recordings from the medulla
and compared to the known opponent processes used by bees and other insects.
These results will contribute new insights into basic principles underlying how
the brain evolves within phylogenetic constraints. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.