* 1515136
* EAPSI: Developing Super-resolution Microscopy to Image 'Jumping Genes' in Living Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Robert Warneford-Thomson, Warneford-Thomson       Robert         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Surprisingly, repetitive 'junk' DNA makes up almost half of the human genome.
One of the most common types of these repetitive elements are retrotransposons
that can copy-and-paste themselves to other locations. While most are now
inactive, there is a subset of these elements that are still mobile. These
transposition events can lead to a reorganization of DNA in the nucleus, and
have been linked to both aging and cancer, yet how they function remains poorly
understood. In order to unravel the function and impact of retrotransposons on
the genome new approaches are necessary. Under the direction of Dr. Yujie Sun of
Peking University, China, an expert in single-molecule super-resolution optical
microscopy, this project aims to develop imaging methods to capture these
'jumping genes' in action in living cells. Recent advances in targeted genome
editing have provided tools to recruit proteins to precise sequences of DNA. A
specific locus can be imaged by expression of a nuclease-deficient Cas9 enzyme
fused to a fluorescent protein and an RNA adaptor that is complementary to the
sequence of interest, referred to as a guide RNA. Transposition events can be
captured in cultured human cells by designing guide RNAs to an ectopically
expressed long interspersed element-1 transposable element. These events then be
captured using single molecule super-resolution techniques such as stochastic
optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM), providing information on the kinetics
of retrotransposition. This approach can also assess the effects of
retrotransposon activity on higher order chromosome structure and nuclear
architecture, both of which are important regulators of the transcriptional
landscape of the nucleus. These methods can aid in the development of a more
dynamic view of the genome, supplementing the wealth of information obtained
from DNA sequencing. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S.
graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of
Science and Technology.