* 1515260
* Structure and Function of Bacteriophage Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Richard Kuhn, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,584,059.00

A virus that infects bacteria (known as a bacteriophage) must be able to
recognize and attach to the specific host cell and then trigger a mechanism by
which the viral genome (its nucleic acid) is injected into the host cell. The
viral nucleic acid is packaged inside a protein coat called the capsid, and the
majority of bacteriophages are assembled with a tail on the capsid through which
the viral nucleic acid can be injected into the host cell to infect it. It has
recently become apparent that members of the Microviridae (a family of small
single stranded DNA bacteriophages) generate their tail at the time of infection
rather than at the time of initial phage assembly. This project is directed at
investigating this process and comparing it with the structural and functional
properties of bacteriophage C1, another type of bacteriophage that has a fixed
tail. The analysis of bacteriophages provides insight into the structure and
function of extraordinarily intricate molecular machines, which could provide
insight for innovations in biotechnology. This project will provide
interdisciplinary training to students and postdoctoral fellows at the interface
of biophysics and biology.

The structure and function of the small, icosahedral phiX174 bacteriophage is to
be compared with that of the podovirus C1, using X-ray crystallography to study
the viral components and cryo-electron microscopy as well as electron tomography
to study the viruses as they invade their host bacteria. This project has two
specific aims. Specific Aim 1: The mechanism by which the phiX174 genome
translocates its genome through the phage encoded H tube into an E. coli host
cell is to be determined. a. The state of assembly of the tail tube in phiX174
virions is to be determined. The assembled tail consists of ten copies of the
virally encoded H protein that form a coiled coil structure. b. The interaction
between phage ST-1 (a close relative of phiX174) and host cell
lipopolysaccharide molecules is to be determined using cryoEM and cryoTM. ST-1
needs to be used for these experiments because the E. coli hosts for phiX174 are
too thick to allow the electron beam to penetrate without too much attenuation.
c. The H-tube assembly is to be studied, by changing the relative lengths of the
A and B domains and by modifying the lengths of the H-tubes. d. The structures
of the H protein in other, distantly related Microviridae are to be determined.
e. The systematically occurring Gln residues in the DNA conduit of phiX174 and
phage T7 are to be changed in order to establish their function. f. Complexes
between the H tubes and ssDNA are to be analyzed. Specific Aim 2: The structure
of bacteriophage C1 is to be determined. a. A near-atomic resolution structure
of the C1 head is to be determined using cryoEM. b. The structure of the C1 tail
proteins are to be determined using X-ray crystallography.