* 1515602
* EAPSI: Evolutionary Effects of Mutualism in Gobiid-Alpheid Communities of Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* William McCraney, McCraney                William        T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research aimed at addressing a gap in evolutionary biology
pertaining to the (co)diversifying effects of mutualism among hosts and their
free-living symbionts using Gobiid-Alpheid communities as a model system. Gobiid
fishes and Alpheid shrimps participate in a remarkable mutualistic relationship
in the Indo-West Pacific where the shrimp provides a home for the fish in its
burrow and the fish warns the shrimp of approaching predators. To study how
mutualism has influenced the diversification, the island of Taiwan and its
offshore territories provide access to suitable habitats for collecting
mutualistic Gobiid-Alpheid samples. Samples will be collected by scientific
diving at Dongsha Atoll National Park and Kenting National Park, and species
identification will be conducted at the National Museum of Natural Sciences. The
research will be conducted under the mentorship of Dr. Keryea Soong of National
Sun Yat-sen University and Dongsha Atoll Research Station, an expert in marine
benthic invertebrates with deep knowledge of fish assemblages at the target
field sites.

Symbiotic relationships are known to influence host-symbiont diversification,
but the evolutionary effects of mutualism in free living taxa are poorly
understood. A molecular phylogenetics study of mutualistic Gobiid fish and their
non-mutualistic sister taxa provides evidence that the mutualism evolved twice
in the Gobiid lineage, has been conserved in both cases, and appears to be
associated with greater biodiversity. However, the comparative diversity of
mutualistic Gobiid fishes has not been statistically tested and nothing is known
about the evolution of mutualistic Alpheid shrimps among their non-mutualistic
congeners. In the current project samples will be collected by scientific diving
at Dongsha Atoll National Park and Kenting National Park, sites at which twenty
two mutualistic Gobiid species from eight genera have been described. Species
identification will then conducted at the National Museum of Natural Sciences.
Phylogenomic methods will be used to estimate time-calibrated phylogenies and
(co)diversification analyses will be used to test for the influence of mutualism
on the evolution of Gobiid-Alpheid biodiversity after summer research
activities. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate
student and is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.