* 1515547
* EAPSI:Understanding How Seabird Guano Impacts Nutrient Availability and Plant Community Composition in Montane Terrestrial Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Julia Rowe, Rowe                    Julia          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

To better understand plant-animal and terrestrial-marine linkages, the project
will study the input of nitrogen (N) by seabirds into forested areas in New
Zealand. This is an important dynamic to understand as some islands are
undergoing predator removal and native habitat and seabird restoration, while
others continue to experience seabird declines. This work will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. David Towns of the Auckland University of Technology
(AUT). Dr. Towns has over 20 years of experience studying ecosystems in New
Zealand as well as many years working with seabird islands and their
restoration. Primary research questions include: how do seabird population
densities impact nutrient subsidies, how much marine-sourced N do the plants
utilize, and do these seabird induced changes in the soil and plants impact the
vegetation community structure. It is hypothesized that as seabird burrow
density increases, N from seabirds will increase, and vegetation community
structure in seabird communities will change, becoming more significantly
composed of native plants adapted to utilize the pulsed subsidies provided by
the seabirds. This New Zealand research will be compared with previous work in
Hawaii to better understand linkages of the marine-seabird-terrestrial ecosystem
as seabirds? populations decline across the globe.

The N isotope composition of soil and leaves will be measured to understand how
N brought from the ocean to the terrestrial system moves through the ecosystem.
High d15N values may serve as a signature of marine source of N. A two end
member, one isotope mixing model will be used to assess the percentage of N in
soil and leaves that is from a marine source, i.e. seabirds. Vegetation
community structure will also be measured to determine if there is an
appreciable difference between seabird and non-seabird areas in terms of
community composition. This award is funded in collaboration with the Royal
Society of New Zealand.