* 1515767
* A Middle School After-School Pilot Program Integrating Computer Programming and Music Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jesse Heines, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 07/31/2018
* USD 288,945.00

The goal of the project is to research ways in which the teaching of basic
computing skills can be integrated into after-school choral programs. The team
will study how to adapt the interdisciplinary, computing + music activities
developed to date in their NSF-funded Performamatics project with college-aged
students to now introduce middle school-aged students to computing in an
informal, after-school choral program. They will investigate how to leverage the
universal appeal of music to help students who typically shy away from technical
studies to gain a foothold in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics) by programming choral music. It is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The team will use a qualitative and quantitative, mixed-methods
approach to study four research questions:&lt;br/&gt;- Can middle school-aged
children follow the connections from singing to digitized sound to MIDI and back
to music and learn to program using the songs they like to sing? To encourage
students to become involved with manipulating sounds and programming music on
their own computers, the approach will employ Audacity and Scratch, two free
music recording, editing, and generation platforms. The team will study how well
programming of music helps them acquire STEM skills by assessing the complexity
and efficacy of the programs they can learn to code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Can
programming their individual parts help students learn to sing in three- and
four-part harmony? The main focus is on learning of STEM, but research on this
question will evaluate whether programming skills can help students learn about
music too.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What resources, models, and tools (RMTs) are
necessary to integrate STEM education into a middle school after-school choral
program? The team will work with local middle schools to research techniques for
integrating computing into after-school choral programs without disrupting their
musical focus. They will identify what choral teachers need in order to do this
integration, and they will devise and evaluate techniques for adding STEM skills
to the students' choral experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Can the involvement
of adults who match the students' racial and/or cultural backgrounds have a
positive effect on the "people like me don't (or can't) do that?" belief that so
often stifles efforts to attract underrepresented groups to STEM? They will
actively seek to involve students of underrepresented groups in the program by
recruiting adult role models from these groups who are involved with both music
and computing. They will use attitudinal surveys to assess whether these adults
have any effect on the students' self-efficacy and the "people like me" syndrome
that hinders some from engaging in STEM.