* 1515346
* Nanoscale Structure and Dynamics of Chromatin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Yuri Lyubchenko, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2020
* USD 627,268.00

The goal of this research is to advance fundamental understanding of the
structure and assembly of centromeres, the specialized segments of chromosomes
that allow them to separate accurately during cell division. The project will
take advantage of cutting-edge molecular biophysics approaches to probe key
differences in the organization of centromeres, relative to other parts of
chromosomes. Scientific and technological advances will be integrated into
hands-on research training for undergraduate and graduate students and will be
incorporated into a formal course of study in structural biology and biophysics.
Application of state-of-the art technology to central questions in chromosome
biology is expected not only to inspire student interest in basic science, but
also to prepare them for careers at the interface of biology and physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In eukaryotic cells, accurate segregation of replicated
chromosomes during cell division is mediated by centromeres. If centromeres
become damaged or removed, chromosomes segregate randomly, thus disrupting the
cell division process. Centromeres differ from the rest of the chromosomes by
containing nucleosomes (DNA-protein building blocks of higher-order chromatin)
in which the typical protein histone H3 has been replaced by a related histone
known as CENP-A. This replacement is presumed to confer new structural
organization to the centromere, thereby enabling it to be recognized by the
segregation machinery. However, details about the structure and the mechanism
underlying the highly specific recognition remain uncertain. The studies in this
project are designed to advance knowledge of centromere chromatin structure at
all levels of its organization and especially to understand what structural
features distinguish centromeres from non-centromeric regions of chromosomes.
High-resolution atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies will be used to assess the
structure of centromere chromatin at different levels of organization. Single
nucleosomes and nucleosome arrays will be visualized directly with the use of
cutting-edge high-speed AFM, enabling dynamic imaging in aqueous solution at
nanoscale with video-rate temporal resolution. The experimental data will be
supplemented by high-power computational analysis. This combined approach will
shed new light on the structure and dynamics of centromere nucleosomes and
nucleosome arrays and will lead to understanding the relationship between
centromere structure and its function during the chromosomal segregation
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by
the Emerging Frontiers Division, both in the Biological Sciences Directorate,
and by the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Physics Division in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.