* 1515489
* EAPSI: Investigating the Influence of the Madden-Julian Oscillation on Northern Hemisphere Winter Blocking in General Circulation Models
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Stephanie Henderson, Henderson               Stephanie      A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Blocking refers to a large-scale quasi-stationary high pressure that can persist
for up to weeks at a time, leading to sudden long-lasting cold snaps and
precipitation extremes during winter. Understanding weather extremes in a
changing climate requires understanding blocking in a changing climate. This is
done using General Circulation Models (GCMs), which allow scientists to alter
greenhouse gases to understand the possible consequences to atmospheric
phenomena. Studies have shown that blocking is poorly simulated in GCMs,
resulting in blocking biases with consequences for extreme events. This award
supports research to understand if blocking biases in GCMs can be reduced by
improving the model Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO). The MJO is characterized by
eastward propagating convective anomalies emitting large-scale atmospheric waves
that impact blocking at higher latitudes. The research will investigate how
model blocking is influenced by the model MJO in collaboration with Dr. Seok-Woo
Son, a specialist in extratropical dynamics, at Seoul National University in
Seoul, South Korea.

The research hypothesizes that in order to improve model blocking, the model MJO
must be improved in addition to the model basic state, which determines the
pathway of the MJO-induced Rossby waves that impact blocking. The hypothesis
will be tested by analyzing and comparing between six GCMs within the Fifth
phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5), where three simulate
a fairly realistic MJO and three a poor MJO as determined by diagnostics of the
MJO Task Force. MJO phases will be derived by projecting model data onto the
leading patterns of reanalysis-derived fields, and the Rossby wave pathway will
be analyzed using wave activity flux analysis. Model blocking frequencies will
be calculated per MJO phase, and results will be compared to reanalysis. Results
will then be used to understand how the model MJO may contribute to blocking
biases. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Korea.