* 1515273
* EAPSI: Probing the Structural Dynamics of Controllable Organic Molecular Films
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kyle McElhinny, McElhinny               Kyle           M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The use of organic materials in electronic devices is an attractive option for
creating the next generation of devices and technologies. Using organic
materials can reduce the manufacturing costs and enable flexible devices with
widely controllable properties. The interface between the organic material and
the inorganic material it is deposited on plays an important role in determining
the properties of these devices. This research will seek to explore and control
the structure of these organic-inorganic interfaces to promote better interface
design. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Kenji Sakurai,
an expert on x-ray reflectivity measurements, at the National Institute for
Materials Science in Tsukuba, Japan. This collaboration offers the opportunity
to have access to unique x-ray reflectivity equipment and expertise that will
advance the understanding of the structural dynamics of controllable organic
molecular films.

The molecular-scale structure and environment of a monolayer of functional
organic molecules on inorganic substrates has an important impact on the
electronic and optical properties of the interface. This project will develop
techniques that will allow these properties to be dynamically controlled through
the use of external optical stimuli and probed through time-resolved x-ray
probes. Dynamic control of molecular conformation would allow charge transfer
mechanisms and rates to be manipulated. However, there is currently insufficient
structural insight available to enable this control. The key challenge is to
develop characterization techniques that match the length scale and time scale
of this problem. To address this challenge, this research will develop precise
time-resolved structural x-ray probe capable of probing monolayer thick samples
on timescales of seconds to minutes. This development will allow measurement of
the monolayer structural dynamics and enable dynamic structural control of the
interface between functional organic molecules on inorganic substrates.