* 1515703
* Microlocal Analysis and Monge-Ampere Type Equations in Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Yanir Rubinstein, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2019
* USD 194,520.00

This project focuses on problems mainly in geometric analysis that can be
formulated as partial differential equations of Monge-Ampere type, broadly
understood. In general terms, the analytic and geometric techniques developed in
this proposal should be useful to researchers working in geometry, physics, and
elsewhere. On the one hand, deepening our understanding of canonical geometries
on Kahler manifolds and Lagrangians in Calabi-Yau manifolds seems to be of
interest to physicists trying to model the geometry of the universe. On the
other hand, these canonical geometries have relations to a wide variety of
established fields in mathematics. Moreover, Monge-Ampere type equations arise
in a wide variety of problems in pure and applied mathematics and have a wide
range of real-world applications, such as meteorology and optimal design of
networks. Developing methods and techniques to construct and approximate
solutions to such equations and to study their regularity could have
applications in other instances where these equations appear. Finally, the
Legendre transform is a classical tool in mathematics, mechanics, and economics,
and seeking generalizations of this theory to other settings, as in this
project, could find a broad range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number
of the equations proposed in this project are new, fall outside of the
traditionally known Monge-Ampere type equations, and have exciting new geometric
applications requiring new analytical tools. A novel feature in this research is
to apply several different tools of microlocal analysis, traditionally
pertaining to linear problems, to study these fully nonlinear equations. Another
theme is to investigate novel relations between convex analysis and geometry and
complex analysis and geometry. The problems investigated include: (1) Kahler-
Einstein metrics with conic singularities. These metrics provide a new powerful
analytic tool in algebraic and complex geometry. (2) The PI will study a new
degenerate version of the special Lagrangian equation. It governs geodesics in
the space of positive Lagrangians on a Calabi-Yau manifold. Understanding
solutions of this equation requires new methods and will have applications to
existence and uniqueness of special Lagrangians, singularities of Lagrangian
mean curvature flow, the topology of the space of Lagrangians, and Lagrangian
intersection theory. (3) The PI shall study the space of Kahler metrics using
geodesics in the space, finite-dimensional Bergman approximations, Fourier
integral operators with complex phase, and the metric space geometry of this
space. (4) The PI is developing interactions between complex and convex
geometry, including a differential theory for the polarity transform in parallel
to the known theory for the Legendre transform. New equations of Hamilton-Jacobi
and Monge-Ampere type that arise from this will be investigated as well as
complex analogues. These equations provide new processes for interpolation
between Banach spaces and new notions of optimal transportation.