* 1515304
* EAPSI:Investigating the Presence of Bat Borne Viruses in Southeast Asia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Eric Laing, Laing                   Eric           D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

Bats have been implicated as the natural hosts of several lethal viruses
including the ebolaviruses, marburgviruses, and henipaviruses. The outbreak of
Ebola virus disease in West Africa has demonstrated that the distribution of
ebolaviruses extends beyond historical geographies in Central Africa. The
circulation of an ebolavirus in humans, domestic pigs, and monkeys in the
Philippines and evidence of ebolavirus infection in bats from Bangladesh and
China illustrates that ebolaviruses are present within the Asian continent. It
is now thought that the geographic distribution of these viruses follows the
geographic range of the natural host, bats. This award supports research to
initiate biosurveillance to examine the footprint of ebolaviruses and
marburgviruses in Southeast Asia with the long-term goal of providing needed
information to support the generation of predictive virus outbreak models. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Gavin J.D. Smith, an expert
in infectious disease surveillance, at the Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School in
Singapore.

As part of ongoing biosurveillance projects, the laboratory of Dr. Gavin J.D.
Smith has catalogued a collection of blood sera from bats native to Singapore
and Southeast Asia. This collaboration with Dr. Gavin J.D. Smith offers an
opportunity to screen bat sera with a Luminex test in development that is
capable of simultaneous detection of antibodies specific to Ebolavirus,
Marburgvirus, and Henipavirus envelope glycoproteins. The presence of antibodies
in bat blood sera specific to ebolaviruses and marburgviruses indicates previous
infection and potential circulation of these viruses in Southeast Asia. The use
of a single multipart method to screen sera collected from bats requires less
sample volume and fewer tests than traditional methods. Using virus envelope
glycoprotein coated beads; sera from bats, other wildlife hosts, and livestock
can be screened in a cost-effective and high throughput fashion that will be
useful for future biosurveillance projects. The award is funded in collaboration
with the National Research Foundation of Singapore.