* 1515248
* Investigating the Role of Turbulence in Hastening Warm-Cloud Precipitation
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Sarma Rani, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 28,552.00

The goal of this project is to make transformative advances in the current
understanding of warm-cloud precipitation by performing a high-resolution,
multiscale computational investigation of the role of turbulence in droplet
coalescence and growth in cumulus clouds. Warm cumulus clouds exert significant
influence on earth's climate by processing atmospheric aerosols, interacting
with electromagnetic radiation from the sun and earth, and redistributing
earth's water and energy through the hydrologic cycle. Current climate models
overestimate the observed times for precipitation initiation, the discrepancy
arising primarily due to an insufficient representation of microscale cloud
processes. The current proposal aims to address this problem by answering the
central outstanding question in cloud microphysics: What are the mechanisms
leading to the formation of fast-growing "statistically fortunate" drops that
hasten the "colloidal instability" of the cloud, resulting in precipitation? The
primary hypothesis of this study is that turbulent shear and acceleration play a
crucial role in enabling droplets bridge the condensation-coalescence
bottleneck, thereby reducing the time for rain formation. To understand the role
of turbulence, it is essential to gain insights into the interactions between
large-scale cloud processes such as entrainment, mixing and intermittency, and
microscale processes such as droplet clustering, collisions and coalescence. The
motion of discrete particles in a turbulent fluid is of great significance in a
broad range of applications, such as understanding the breakup and coalescence
of fuel droplets in combustion systems, quantifying the role of turbulence in
the transport and growth of phytoplankton in oceans or droplets in clouds, and
the effects of aerosols on cloud properties. The principal investigator is
heavily involved in outreach to underrepresented groups, and aims to intensify
these activities through a program called "Let's Party with Particles". This
program will promote direct interactions of the principal investigator with
middle and high school teachers and students, and will also involve developing a
website that allows students to explore particle-laden flows and their
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal obstacle to simulating
turbulence-droplet interactions in a cumulus cloud is the prohibitive
computational expense associated with resolving the entire spectrum of turbulent
scales in a cloud. To address this challenge, a novel multiscale computational
approach is proposed wherein the large-scale and microscale cloud processes are
captured using LES and DNS respectively, while the interactions between these
processes are included through a transfer of inertial-range kinetic energy from
LES to DNS. A multiscale approach is necessary since droplet growth by
coalescence may be extremely sensitive to intermittency in turbulent shear,
which, although occurring on inertial scales, is intimately tied to small-scale
turbulence through the turbulent energy cascade. The LES-DNS approach will
consist of: (1) Performing LES of turbulence from the energy-containing to the
inertial scales in a single cloud, such that inertial-range intermittency is
captured. New boundary conditions representative of cloud-atmosphere
interactions will also be developed for LES; and (2) Performing DNS of
turbulence-droplet interactions in the inertial to dissipative range of cloud
turbulence, such that the microscale processes driving droplet relative motion
are resolved. The overlap between the LES and DNS-resolved scales in the
inertial range will facilitate the inclusion of intermittency effects on droplet
dynamics using a novel LES to DNS energy transfer method.