* 1515637
* EAPSI: Investigating Intermolecular Interactions in the Formation of Polymer-Based Nanowires
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Daniel Acevedo, Acevedo                 Daniel         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

Semiconducting polymers promise to deliver low cost electronic devices such as
solar cells and transistors due to their easy processabililty. Fabrication
conditions have been identified that allows poly(3-hexyl thiophenes) (P3HT), an
extensively studied semiconducting polymer, to crystallize into nanowires (NWs),
which can improve a solar cell?s efficiency. This project aims to understand the
assembly of P3HT into NWs. Both the NW alignment and the orientation of the
polymer chains with respect to the substrate are crucial parameters to control
for ensuring efficient transport of charges in solar cells. In order to
characterize the structural features of the NWs, near edge X-ray absorption fine
structure (NEXAFS), a highly specialized technique capable of proving the
molecular orientation of thin films down to monolayers of the material will be
used. Dr. Kilwon Cho, an expert in surface and electronic device
characterization at Pohang University of Science and Technology, will be the
host for this research, providing a U.S. graduate student vital access and
expertize for NEXAFS analysis.

This project will focus on the surface crystallization of P3HT from graphene
deposited on supporting substrates. Utilizing a metastable solution of P3HT,
with a strong driving force for crystallization that is not sufficient to induce
homogenous crystallization, NWs of P3HT will be formed selectively on graphene.
During the crystallization, the polymer chains in solution interact with
graphene and the underlying substrate. A systematic study of the NW growth from
graphene deposited on modified substrates employing surface characterization
techniques such as NEXAFS will unveil the surface properties and the morphology
evolution of P3HT. This will help us determine the effects of intermolecular
forces on the P3HT crystallization. Ultimately, the beneficial effects of the
NWs will be assessed by the fabrication and characterization of solar cells.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National Research
Foundation of Korea.

This award is jointly funded by NSF and the National Research Foundation of
Korea.