* 1515632
* EAPSI: Maximizing the Velocity of Incoming Ocean Waves with Wave-Enhancing Resonance Chambers for Increased Energy Production
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Maura Sateriale, Sateriale               Maura          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Ocean wave energy will be a critical energy source in the future. It has been
shown that velocity in waves can be increased with resonance chambers,
increasing the amount of electricity that can be extracted from wave energy
turbine harvesters. In the same way that noise reverberates and increases, ocean
waves increase when they propagate into a basin of a certain volume at the end
of a narrow inlet. These bigger ocean waves have a greater velocity which can
turn electric turbines faster, increasing the electricity output from the same
resources. Wave turbines are usually deployed in groups. The arrangement of
turbines affects fluid flow. This award support research that will determine the
ideal arrangement of chambers, when multiple turbines are deployed in an energy
farm. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor Richard
Manasseh at Swinburne University of Technology, a leading researcher in the area
of arrays of ocean wave power machines. Research by the PI at the University of
Hawai'i has shown that Helmholtz resonators can be used to increase the fluid
velocity and energy extracted from ocean waves. Utilization of resonance
chambers in wave-energy applications is fairly novel and a natural next step in
optimizing wave energy technologies. The next step is to apply these resonators
to the type of parallel arrays of wave farms, to determine how to optimize
efficiency in wave machines. A series of simulations will be run on three
chambers in the Swinburne wave tank. Simulations will be run in which all three
arrays have the same dimensions, and also varying the dimensions. Successful
tests will be refined as patterns emerge. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.