* 1515121
* EAPSI:Exploring Foundations for Energy-Efficient, Novel Computing Architectures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Matthew Daniels, Daniels                 Matthew        W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Magnetic materials are at the heart of many modern computing applications, and
their continued study is crucial to the success of emerging information
technologies. Magnetic properties are also of great scientific interest, playing
a key role in many quantum mechanical systems. In a magnetic sample, the visible
magnetic field is due to the cooperation among all the atoms in the sample which
collude to add their microscopic fields together. In this case, all the atomic
fields are parallel. In a typical non-magnet, the atomic fields are randomly
aligned and sum to zero. But in some materials, the atoms can arrange their
fields in coherent but nontrivial ways: such "magnetic textures" include
spirals, vortices, and walls. When magnetic materials adopt these unusual atomic
patternings, the system can be exploited to store and process information. This
research aims to study the Berry phase physics that arises from interactions
between magnons and spin textures in antiferromagnetic insulators. The research
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Jiang Xiao, a noted expert on spin
wave excitation in both ferromagnets and antiferromagnets, at Fudan University
in China.

This research will use a nonlinear sigma model formalism to provide a non-
Abelian gauge theory for antiferromagnets. In particular, we apply the theory to
antiferromagnetic skyrmion textures and search for topological phenomena such as
non-trivial Berry phases and Hall effects. Though previous studies have
demonstrated the absense of a skyrmion Hall effect in antiferromagnets, the
research posits that there is evidence to suspect a chiral Hall effect when the
driving magnon current is chirally polarized---a feature unique to
antiferromagnetic spin waves. Numerical simulations, created in-house as part of
this study, will be used to model these effects and detect topological effects
by solving the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation on a lattice. This NSF EAPSI
award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in
collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.