* 1515132
* EAPSI:Linguistic Analysis of the conceptualization of science by students and instructors in the Korean university context
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Seth King, King                    Seth           L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

What comes to define science in different cultures? It is established that there
are different philosophies as to what is considered ?science? and what is valued
as ?scientific? in a specific culture. This project is concerned with a cross
cultural analysis of science concepts and science education between different
language-cultures, as well as the teaching of subject-matter content in foreign
language contexts. This study will investigate the conceptualization of science
in the Korean university setting at Seoul National University (SNU) in close
collaboration with Dr. Seungho Maeng, a researcher in the department of Science
Education. The project will provide a crucial vantage for the promotion of the
cross-cultural understanding of these topics.

There are few studies that compare the concepts of science between langua-
cultures. This study investigates Korean students, who are becoming an
increasingly large sector of the population of international students at
American universities. As more Korean students become enrolled at American
universities, it is essential that educators in the United States have tools to
understand the origins of scientific concepts of this student population. This
study will document the disconnects between the American conceptualizations of
science and the Korean system, which will in turn assist educators in STEM
fields to develop teaching materials designed to support Korean students who are
studying at American universities as well as Korean scientists who teach or work
in those universities. In order to ascertain these cultural differences, this
study will conduct interviews with students and instructors of science courses
as well as record science classroom interactions. This award is funded in
collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.