* 1515801
* US-French Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Predicting Odorant-dependent and Independent Olfactory Neuron Activation Based on Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Hiroaki Matsunami, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,661.00

Smell is a powerful sense that can trigger intense emotion, stereotyped
behaviors and durable memories. The sense offers an extraordinary opportunity to
connect atomic-level objects (odorant molecules and smell receptors in the nose)
to neural responses. This project will predict which smell receptors in the nose
are activated by a given odor. To accomplish this goal, the team of
investigators will apply computational approaches to develop chemical structure-
based receptor models and test these models using odor molecules interacting
with olfactory receptors. The success of the project will enable the team to
understand more precisely how the brain perceives the external environment. The
results will also have widespread and diverse industrial applications, including
rational design of new flavors and fragrances and development of new biosensors
for detecting various chemicals. Furthermore, this project will make broader
impacts in training and educating high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in various disciplines as well as in outreaching
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of the odor molecules, the large
number of the smell receptors and combinatorial activation of the receptors make
understanding odor coding an enormous challenge. This collaborative proposal
represents the first of its kind that combines computational approaches with
experimental measurements at both the receptor and the neuron level. Affinity
calculations between odorants and the receptors, as well as the receptors'
activation, will be obtained by nanosecond-scale simulations. Atomic-level
simulations, initially assessed by experiments, will predict which odors would
activate the receptors of interest. Comparisons between experimental findings
and computational predictions will lead to a comprehensive computational model
that converges with experimental data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project
is being funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR).