* 1515788
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Early STEM Learning Opportunities Through Tinkering and Reflection
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* David Uttal, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2020
* USD 607,195.00

Nationally, there is tremendous interest in enhancing participation in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Providing rich opportunities
for engagement in science and engineering practices may be key to developing a
much larger cadre of young people who grow up interested in and pursue future
STEM education and career options. One particularly powerful way to engage
children in such exploration and playful experimentation may be through learning
experiences that call for tinkering with real objects and tools to make and
remake things. Tinkering is an important target for research and educational
practice for at least two reasons: (1) tinkering experiences are frequently
social, involving children interacting with educators and family members who can
support STEM-relevant tinkering in various ways and (2) tinkering is more open-
ended than many other kinds of building experiences (e.g., puzzles, making a
model airplane), because it is the participants' own unique questions and
objectives that guide the activity. Thus, tinkering provides a highly accessible
point of entry into early STEM learning for children and families who do not all
share the same backgrounds, circumstances, interests, and expertise. This
Research-in-Service to Practice project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will take place in the Tinkering
Lab exhibit at Chicago Children's Museum. The research will investigate how
reflective interactions between parents and children (ages 6-8) during tinkering
activities ultimately impact child engagement in STEM. Design-based research
(DBR) is well-suited to the iterative and contextually-rich process of
tinkering. Using a DBR approach, researchers and museum facilitators will be
trained to prompt variations of simple reflection strategies at different time
points between family members as a way to strengthen children's engagement with,
and memory of these shared tinkering events. Through progressive refinement,
each cycle of testing will lead to new hypotheses that can be tested in the
subsequent round of observations. The operationalization of study constructs and
their measurement will come organically from families' activities in the
Tinkering Lab and will be developed in consultation with members of the advisory
board. Data collection strategies will include observation and interviews; a
series of coding schemes will be used to make sense of the data. The research
will result in theoretical and practical understanding of ways to enhance STEM
engagement and learning by young children and their families through tinkering.
A diverse group of at least 350 children and their families will be involved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide much needed empirical results on
how to promote STEM engagement and learning in informal science education
settings. It will yield useful information and resources for informal science
learning practitioners, parents, and other educators who look to advance STEM
learning opportunities for children. This research is being conducted through a
partnership between researchers at Loyola University of Chicago and Northwestern
University and museum staff and educators at the Chicago Children's Museum.