* 1515258
* EAPSI: Identifying Relations between Computer-Generated and Manually Annotated Interpretations of Activities for Planning and Plan Recognition Tasks
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Richard Freedman, Freedman                Richard        G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

While humans perceive activities using words and cluster similar activities by
some properties, computers using unsupervised learning algorithms do not
necessarily identify them the same way and thus generate different
interpretations. The goal of this research is to develop an analogy between
human and machine definitions of activities so that artificial intelligence
planning and plan recognition methods do not need to be adjusted for each set of
definitions. Usually, either humans define the activities in a way which is too
vague for machines to make accurate computations or computers define activities
such that people cannot understand the underlying reasoning. Developing an
interpreter for each entity will not only smooth the interaction between users
and devices when solving problems together, but also contribute to bridging the
human-computer gap. This project will use techniques in the research areas of
interest to Dr. Alex Fukunaga at the University of Tokyo who studies many facets
of artificial intelligence, especially those regarding autonomous planning,
search, and optimization.

Extending prior research on unsupervised activity recognition using topic
models, this work proposes a two-step approach consisting of constraint
optimization and heuristic search. The first phase uses constraint optimization
to align a computer's recognized activity sequence with a given human's
annotation of the same sequence. Then the second phase similarly aligns a
computer's recognized activity sequence with an annotation of the sequence
derived by heuristic search over a human-defined hierarchical task network. To
develop these methods, the project will include formalizing the constraint and
search problems, coding their formulations, and testing results of the
identified mappings between the two definition sets. This test will be performed
by combining an unsupervised activity recognition method previously developed by
the PI for machine-interpreted actions with a commonly used plan recognition
method that uses human-perceived action representations. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.