* 1515357
* EAPSI:  Investigating the mechanisms of visual working memory by testing predictions of a computational model
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Garrett Swan, Swan                    Garrett
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2016
* USD 5,250.00

Successfully interacting with the environment depends upon the ability to
briefly retain information in visual working memory. This form of memory is
characterized as a balancing act, with the maximum resolution of each memory
being constrained by the total number of objects stored. How this trade-off is
implemented in the brain remains an open question and one that is vital to
developing accurate theories of memory. The goal of this project is to better
understand this trade-off between quality and quantity by testing memory recall
in individuals with brain damage. The effects that the brain damage has on
memory precision will provide insights into how visual working memory storage is
implemented in the brain. This research will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. David Shum, an expert in memory research at Griffith University in Brisbane,
Australia.

To better understand the mechanisms underlying the trade-off between the quality
and quantity of memories stored in visual working memory, a simulated lesion
model approach will be used. Behavioral data collected from individuals with
brain damage performing a delayed estimation task, which measures the quality of
an individual memory representation, will be compared to simulations from a
computational memory model called the Binding Pool with varying degrees of
simulated damage. The model predicts that damage to the individuation of
memories causes binding errors, but only when multiple items are being stored.
However, if there is damage to the visual features that support memory, then
memory quality will be degraded regardless of the number of items being stored.
The model?s simulations of the effects of brain damage will be compared to the
memory recall performance of individuals with brain damage. Successful
predictions of the model provide confirmatory support for this model of human
memory. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian
Academy of Science.