* 1515454
* EAPSI: Linking Climate Variability and Coral Health Through Great Barrier Reef Coral Records
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Emma Reed, Reed                    Emma
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Coral reef health has declined worldwide in recent decades, in large part due to
changing environmental conditions. However, these trends lack long historical
context. Coral-based reconstructions of past ocean conditions can help
researchers anticipate how reefs will respond to ongoing stressors, such as
warming and acidifying oceans. Three approaches--geochemical, growth banding,
and luminescence--are often used to generate these climate records, but are
rarely used together. Combining these methods reconstructs both past
environmental change and coral growth. This project will generate luminescence
and growth banding records on three coral cores in collaboration with Dr. Janice
Lough at the Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS), which will
supplement existing geochemical measurements. This work will produce a novel
record of both environmental conditions and their effects on coral health.

Three coral cores have already undergone geochemical analyses, both of stable
isotopes (delta-18-O and delta-13-C) and elemental ratios (Sr/Ca). These
measurements correspond to changes in seawater temperature and salinity. At
AIMS, luminescent bands will be used to track changes in terrestrial runoff, and
coral growth will be measured by three parameters (extension, density, and
calcification rate). In conjunction, these methods record changes in ocean
temperature, salinity, and runoff, and their effects on coral growth rate. This
project establishes a methodological basis for future, multi-century records.
This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is
funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.