* 1515850
* Dynamics, Ground States, and Elementary Excitations of Quantum Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Bruno Nachtergaele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Miniaturization of electronics has been the driving force of the ever increasing
power of computers, whether expressed as units of performance per unit of
volume, or per unit of energy consumed, or per dollar expended. Miniaturization
will reach its ultimate limit when the size of individual components in
electronic devices approaches the size of a single atom. Unless we succeed in
implementing a new paradigm of computation, called Quantum Computation, the
growth in computational efficiency, which is often referred to as Moore's Law,
will come to an end. One of the most promising research directions to implement
the ideas of Quantum Computation is the development of topological materials.
Topological materials have the capacity to store quantum information, which
under ordinary conditions is subject to fast deterioration due to a process
called decoherence. In this project the PI and his collaborators will study
mathematical models of topological materials. The main goal is to better
understand the factors that determine the robustness of a quantum memory based
on topological materials.

The project will address three questions that are crucial for the possible
application of topologically ordered materials to the development of reliable
quantum computation devices. First, what determines the rate with which the
spectral gap at critical points vanishes as the system size increases? Second,
under what conditions is the anyonic excitation spectrum of systems with
topologically ordered ground states stable under sufficiently small
perturbations? Third, what is the effect of randomness (such as occurs in doped
materials) on the structure of the ground state and low-lying excitations of
such systems? The project will also investigate the dynamical behavior of the
model systems. Questions regarding the energy of low-lying excitations above the
ground state, i.e., the spectral gap, are central to many issues in quantum
many-body physics. The goal of the project is to significantly extend the range
of applicability of methods to estimate the spectral gap in at least two
directions. One is the situation where the gap vanishes with increasing system
size (critical points or regions). The second aim is to develop methods to
analyze the gap of systems in two or more dimensions, which has so far only been
achieved in a few special cases. Further, in the case of disordered systems the
spectral gap may close, but a so-called mobility gap may play a very similar
role and another goal of the project is to extend current methods to situations
where the spectral gap is replaced by a mobility gap. Techniques from
representation theory, analysis, and probability will be used when available and
new methods will be developed when needed.