* 1515890
* RAPID: The membrane-bound structure of fusion loops of the Ebola virus envelope glycoprotein
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Themis Lazaridis, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2016
* USD 102,549.00

This NSF Rapid response Research (RAPID) project will support a computational
approaches to understand the structure of Ebola virus proteins important in
fusing to cells and causing infection. Currently there are no effective
treatment method against Ebola outbreaks. If the investigators are successful,
results of this proposal would provide a target for a drug design. Once the
structure of the target protein is determined, then computational drug screening
approaches can be used to examine large databases of compounds that are already
available, that could be used to prevent the action of the virus on infected
individuals. In this way, new inhibitors to treat the virus can be identified.

The researchers will use computational approaches to identify the conformation
of the segment of the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola virus that inserts into
host membrane and facilitates fusion of the viral membrane with the host
membrane enabling the entry of virus into the host cell. This segment of the
envelope glycoprotein forms a loop to anchor the virus to host cell membrane.
This project is aimed to determine the conformation of this loop in the
prehairpin intermediate state, which can be target for designing small molecule
and peptide inhibitors as means of preventing the membrane fusion between the
virus and the host cell. The work should lead to new targets for drug discovery
associated with the treatment and/or prevention of Ebola infection.