* 1515541
* EAPSI: Improving the Connections Between Carbon Nanotubes (CNT) and the Surfaces They are Grown On
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Andrew Westover, Westover                Andrew         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Carbon nanotubes (CNT) are one of the most exciting novel materials discovered
in the last few decades. This is in part due to their immense mechanical
strength 100 times greater than steel, their high electrical and thermal
conductivity, and high surface area. Because of these fantastic properties CNT
have been suggested for a wide range of applications. Unfortunately these
applications for the most part have not been realized. One major reason for this
is that although CNT are incredibly strong, the connection between the CNT and
the surfaces they are grown on is in general very weak. CNT are grown by heating
a carbon based gas up to extremely high temperatures, breaking the gas into its
most basic elemental components. The carbon from this gas then deposits on a
specially prepared surface. As more and more carbon deposits it will grow into a
carbon nanotube. It is this connection that is the weak link in CNT based
applications. This research aims to explore the effect of different surfaces and
of different surface treatments on the strength of the connections between the
growth surfaces and the CNT. The goal is twofold, (i) to understand what causes
these connections to be so weak, and (ii) to develop CNT with stronger
connections to the surfaces they are grown on. This research will be conducted
in collaboration with Dr. Shigeo Maruyama of the University of Tokyo in Japan,
one of the leading experts in CNT growth.

Despite the importance of the mechanical strength of the CNT/growth substrate
interface there has been very little research into how to improve the strength
of these interfaces. One of the few studies that has explored the mechanical
strength of these interfaces found that CNT grown on copper substrates had
interfaces with about 3X more mechanical strength than those grown on silicon.
In light of this study, the first step in this research is to grow CNT on a
variety of different substrates, and with various different surface treatments.
The second step will be to perform mechanical measurements of the interfacial
strength via a micromanipulator attached to a scanning electron microscope
(SEM). Using a SEM to observe the failure of CNT films in-situ will allow for
greater insight into the fundamental mechanisms that are limiting the strength
of these interfaces. This project if successful, will aid in the development of
mechanically strong CNT film/substrate interfaces, which has the potential to
have a huge impact on the ability to apply CNT forests to devices ranging across
a whole range of fields including flexible electronics, CNT based solar cells,
and CNT energy storage devices. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.