* 1515696
* Whither Turbulence and Big Data in the 21st Century? (Corsica, April 20-24, 2015)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Luciano Castillo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2017
* USD 30,000.00

The proposal seeks funds to partially cover travel expenses of underrepresented
young faculty and students as well as dissemination expenses related to the
conference entitled, "NSF/ONR: Whither Turbulence and Big Data In the 21st
Century" to be held in Corsica, France, April 20-24, 2015. World class
researchers will participate in his meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
activities in turbulence involve the collection of massive amounts of data from
multi-scale computer simulations and/or large-scale experiments. For example,
highly non-linear time dependent stochastic turbulent flow experiments routinely
produce terabytes of multi-modal data (velocity, pressure, temperature,
acoustics, etc.) in fractions of a second. Such computational and experimental
research presents formidable big data challenges and overcoming them is indeed
critical for achieving real breakthroughs. Better understanding of turbulence
will lead to improved understanding of a number of engineering problems in
aerospace and naval applications, biomedical applications, wind energy
production, energy conservation, etc. The symposium will include breakout
sessions each day to maximize interaction among participants. The organizing
committee is committed to engage senior minority PhDs and junior faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this workshop is to frame the challenges in big data
and turbulence research fluid dynamics for the next several. Other objectives of
the symposium are as follows: (i) The symposium seeks to bring awareness and
basic knowledge on the state-of-the-art fluid dynamics research including:
modeling, experiments, and simulations; (ii) The symposium will provide a unique
cross-disciplinary environment for identifying the current issues and challenges
of turbulence for the next quarter century; (iii) It will foster collaborations
and students exchange with USA, Canada, Europe and Australia; (iv) It will
enable the development of strategies and new initiatives for data reduction and
visualization; including Cyber Infrastructure.