* 1515001
* Black holes in barred galaxies: the Rosetta Stones of secular galaxy evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Monica Valluri, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,491.00

Studies have been showing for some years that the size of a supermassive black
hole in a galaxy is correlated with the size of the galaxy itself, perhaps
unsurprisingly, but also with the appearance (the 'type') of the galaxy.
However, the black hole mass is normally calculated by studying the motions of
stars in the galaxy, and recent work suggests that the presence of a bar in the
galaxy causes a significant perturbation in the stellar speeds, which has not
been taken into account. This leads to a bias that over-estimates the mass and
can hide the effect of galaxy type. This award supports development of a new
numerical method that does not suffer from this problem. Comparison with other
methods and careful checks throughout the work will lay the foundations for
future better understanding of the co-evolution of galaxies and their central
black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will work to correct this
confounding factor in understanding how the co-evolution of black holes (BH) and
galaxies depends upon the host galaxy's morphological type. Recent studies show
that the unique orbital structure of a bar makes significant changes in line-of-
sight velocity profiles, but although nearly 60% of spiral galaxies with
existing dynamical BH mass measurements contain bars, all of those estimates
were derived using axisymmetric models that do not account for the bar. The
resultant systematic over-estimation bias can mask dependencies on host galaxy
morphology. This study will (a) develop the first stellar dynamical orbit
superposition code capable of accurately determining BH masses in barred disk
galaxies; (b) run high resolution self-consistent N-body simulations of bars and
generate mock kinematic datasets for validating the new code; (c) improve the BH
mass measurements in several barred galaxies; and (d) obtain the first stellar
dynamical BH mass measurements for two nearby galaxies with independent
reverberation mapping (RM) estimates. Building a new code is crucial because:
(1) the predicted over-estimate is comparable to the scatter and thus can mask
genuine differences in BH growth mechanisms; (2) using stellar dynamics to
confirm RM BH estimates is important for future high redshift estimates where
only RM is possible; and (3) accurate BH masses for specific galaxies are
critical for modeling the accretion physics of X-ray emitting
gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-faceted project, involving N-body
simulations, code development, and the modeling of real data, will give the
graduate student involved the broad and strong technical skills necessary for a
successful career. Other activities will provide future elementary school
teachers with strong STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics)
foundations through the university's school of education, involve non-science
major undergraduates through a newly-developed course, and use a summer camp to
inspire high school students to pursue STEM disciplines in college.