* 1515036
* EAPSI:Apomixis in Chinese Holly Ferns and Implications for Plant Relationships and Speciation Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Nikisha Patel, Patel                   Nikisha
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Apomictic reproduction is prevalent and important to the evolution of all
plants. Apomictic plants are species that reproduce asexually; they are
essentially clones of their parents. These species often arise from
hybridization. In studying the evolution of groups in which apomixis is
prevalent, it is critical to determine the progenitors, and therefore
evolutionary origins, of apomicts to fully understand their relationships to
other species, as well as their contribution to species diversity. This award
supports research aimed at elucidating the role of apomictic reproduction in a
group of ferns native to China. Specifically, the research uses molecular
phylogenetic methods to investigate the potentially hybrid evolutionary origins
of apomicts in Chinese holly ferns. By developing a better picture of how
asexual ferns have evolved, scientists can better understand how much novel
genetic diversity asexual ferns contribute to biodiversity. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Chunxiang Li of the Nanjing Institute of
Geology and Paleontology and Dr. Libing Zhang of the Chengdu Institute of
Biology. The collaboration will offer insights into little known parts of
China?s biodiversity and advance understanding of key questions in evolutionary
biology.

The genus Polystichum (Dryopteridaceae) is most diverse across Southern China,
and includes several asexually reproducing lineages, most of which belong to the
subgenus Xiphopolystichum. These species will be collected and genetic analysis
performed to understand relationships among these lineages as well as their
potential hybrid origins. Identifying the progenitors of hybrids in the subgenus
will elucidate the extent to which asexually reproducing ferns belong to
reticulate groups and share progenitors. Although asexual lineages contribute to
extant biodiversity, by sharing progenitors they may also share entire genomes
and may not be very genetically distinct. By understanding the evolution of
plant asexuality, a phenomenon important across plants, in Xiphopolystichum, a
better understanding of the evolution of plant biodiversity can be developed.
This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is
funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.