* 1515469
* EAPSI: Evaluating the Geologic History and Impact of River Blockages Caused by Landslides in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Lindsey Belliveau, Belliveau               Lindsey        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Taiwan commonly annually experiences significant natural disasters including
typhoons and earthquakes that can trigger massive landslides. When landslides
fall into rivers they form dams that block flow and lead to sediment deposition
that gets preserved in the river valleys. These sediments can be measured and
dated to gain an overall understanding of Taiwan?s tectonic and climatic history
as they are both responsible for triggering landslides. Better understanding
this behavior can assist in preparing for future events, including the
geohazards brought forth from these dams that affect the safety of people who
live in mountainous areas (such as the tragic 2009 Xiaolin Dam failure). This
research will be conducted using high quality satellite imagery that is only
available in Taiwan and other computerized data processing techniques as well as
field studies. This project will be conducted at Academia Sinica?s Institute of
Earth Sciences in Taipei, Taiwan under the mentorship of Dr. Yu-Chang Chan. This
collaboration provides an opportunity to have access to unique data that will
enable new understanding of landslide impacts in Taiwan and address their role
in changing the physical landscape.

Taiwan is one of the most rapidly eroding and tectonically active regions in the
world, allowing it to be the ultimate natural experiment for research in
tectonic geomorphology (landscape evolution). Landslides are a widespread
feature of erosion in Taiwan, with direct connection to tectonic and climatic
processes. Dramatic landslide events associated with large earthquakes and
typhoons, as well as the increase in sediment transport and deposition that
result from them, highlight the role the landslides play in pacing and shaping
landscape evolution in Taiwan. Few studies, however, have addressed the longer-
term geomorphic record of past landslides events throughout the region on a
national scale and few have specifically investigated the further-reaching roles
that landslide dams have played. Landslide dams have been studied in mountainous
regions around the world and have shown the long-term effects on river incision
and landscape evolution. This project will document and study the diverse record
of paleo-landslides dams in Taiwan attesting to their marks left in the
landscape?s evolution, as well as controls on their spatial variation such as
proximity to active faults, lithology, and historic typhoon density. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.