* 1515360
* EAPSI: Regulation of Neuronal Communication by Protein Lipid Modifications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Krishna Reddy, Reddy                   Krishna
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Protein lipidation is a process that regulates the distribution of molecules
essential to neuron-neuron communication over space and time. The proposed
research aims to explore the role of zDHHC9-GCP16, which is potentially one of
the primary regulators of lipidation in the brain. This project will be done in
collaboration with Dr. Masaki Fukata (National Institute of Physiological
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan), a leader in the field of neurobiology as it
relates to protein lipidation. This collaboration affords us the opportunity to
understand lipidation in the neuron using state-of-the-art techniques in cell
biology. The overall aim of this project is to increase understanding of
learning, memory, and motor function on a molecular level.

Palmitoylation is the post-translational addition of a 16-carbon fatty acid to a
cysteine residue of a substrate, which serves to facilitate membrane
attachment/distribution. In the neuron, palmitoylation may serve a broad role in
maintenance of synapse morphology and function through spatiotemporal
organization of essential synaptic signaling proteins such as PSD95, AMPAR,
NMDAR, SNAP25, and H-Ras. This process is catalyzed by a family of protein
acyltransferases (PATs), and the Ras PAT zDHHC9-GCP16 affects the localization
of synaptic H-Ras. However, the mechanism of enzyme-substrate specificity in the
neuron is poorly understood. This project aims to determine the subcellular
localization of zDHHC9-GCP16 in the neuron, as PAT localization to unique
neuronal compartments is a known mechanism of specificity in other cases. To
determine additional neuronal substrates of zDHHC9-GCP16, a subset of similarly
localized candidate substrates will be selected and the effect of zDHHC9-GCP16
presence on substrate localization will be determined. As zDHHC9-GCP16 is highly
expressed in the brain and is known to regulate distribution of at least one
essential signaling protein, establishing its role in the neuron will lead to
greater understanding of the spatiotemporal organization of the synapse. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.