* 1515043
* EAPSI: Transport of Chromium(III) Under Elevated Glycemic Conditions  in Vivo
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Pandora White, White                   Pandora
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Significant interest exists in treating diabetes, including the potential of
chromium (Cr) to reduce its symptoms. As diabetics have a surplus of glucose in
their bodies, blood serum proteins can be glycosylated to a greater extent than
normal, resulting in detrimental effects on the hosts. Previously glycosylation
of the iron transport protein transferrin (Tf) has shown to alter its function.
As transferrin also transports chromium from the bloodstream to tissues,
glycosylation of transferrin may also significantly affect chromium transport to
the tissues; however, these effects have not been examined to date. This award
supports research to explore the effect of glycosylation of transferrin on the
uptake of chromium(III) using a rodent model system. The research will be
conducted at National Chung Hsing University under the mentorship of Dr. Frank
Moa and Dr. Wen-Ying Chen, experts in the effects of chromium in model rodent
systems.

This project will explore the effect of glycosylation of transferrin on the
uptake of chromium(III) in healthy, type 1, and type 2 diabetic animal models.
Diabetes is a worldwide problem, and a potential therapeutic agent to treat
symptoms of this disease that has received appreciable attention is
chromium(III). Chromium(III) has been shown to increase insulin sensitivity and
improve cholesterol and triglyceride levels in rodent models of diabetes. One
side effect of diabetes is increased blood glucose levels. As a result of the
higher glucose levels, blood serum proteins can become irreversibly
glycosylated. Glycosylation can alter the properties and functions of these
proteins, including the iron transport protein transferrin. Transferrin not only
carries iron in the bloodstream but also appears to be the sole agent that
transports chromium(III) from the bloodstream to the tissues. Thus,
glycosylation of transferrin of diabetic subjects could alter the ability for
chromium(III) to be transferred to tissues and thus increase insulin sensitivity
in tissues. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate
student and is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.