* 1515586
* Improving Math Identity for Underrepresented Populations: An Implementation and Impact Study of After-School Math Plus
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Barbara Sprung, IMPAQ International, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,901,837.00

Most students who pursue math have chosen to do so by high school. Elementary
and middle school experiences are thus vitally important in attracting students
to STEM. Research consistently points to after-school as a golden opportunity to
increase students' exposure to high-quality math learning opportunities and to
develop the key influencers of math participation and persistence: interest and
identity. However, more research on how and under what conditions after-school
programs can foster these factors is needed. The role of identity in math
education has been particularly neglected. The proposed research project
addresses this gap by studying the implementation and outcomes of After-School
Math PLUS (ASM+), an after-school math program designed to address all aspects
of math identity and thus have a positive effect on this key influencer of math
participation and achievement. "Improving Math Identity" is a Research-in-
Service to Practice project funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) Program which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will study the impact of ASM+
through a rigorous randomized controlled trial of 30 elementary-level after-
school sites in South Carolina serving predominately low-income and minority
students (15 treatment using ASM+; 15 control using Mixing in Math). Sites
selected into the study must serve fourth and fifth graders and must operate
five days a week. Through an implementation study, data will be collected in
order to assess the program and understand the experiences of group leaders and
students in the ASM+ program and at comparison sites. Data sources include
surveys, interviews, observations, and administrative data collected from the
treatment and control sites. The study will investigate how and to what extent
ASM+ develops fourth and fifth grade students' math identity and increases math
engagement and interest. It will explore whether increasing identity,
engagement, and interest leads to greater skill development and academic
achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is being conducted by IMPAQ
International LLC, a social science and public policy research and evaluation
firm in collaboration with Educational Equity at FHI 360, a global development
and education organization. The research addresses the need to enhance students'
math identity at an early age and, as a result, change students' educational and
career aspirations. The ultimate goal is to broaden participation in STEM by
underrepresented groups. Results will inform the development of interventions
designed to motivate and retain students in STEM, particularly in informal
settings. Knowledge gained from this research will be broadly disseminated to
practitioners, researchers, program developers, and policy makers.