* 1515018
* EAPSI:Investigating How Australian Kriol Speaking Children Learn the Sounds of English
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Elise Bell, Bell                    Elise          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Aboriginal Australian children face an educational achievement gap as broad as
that faced by African American children in the United States (Bradley et al.
2007; Beresford & Grey 2008). The results of this project will provide critical
information about the learning process that children who speak Kriol (a language
which is often not even recognized as distinct from English) go through when
learning English, which can contribute to eliminating the education gap they
face. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Brett Baker of
the University of Melbourne, whose work on the sound systems of Kriol and other
native Australian languages is supported by a prestigious Discovery Projects
grant from the Australian Research Council.

The focus of this research consists of presenting experimental participants with
sound discrimination tasks conducted on a tablet computer or similar device.
Participants will hear an English word (ex: ?pat? [phæt]), and then choose which
of two following repetitions is the same as the initial word (ex: ?pat? [phæt]
vs. ?bat? [bæt]). By testing the English sound discrimination abilities of first
language Kriol speaking children at different levels of English medium
schooling, this project will shed light on whether English immersion education
is successful in helping Kriol speaking children acquire English sound
contrasts. It will provide concrete information about the difficulties that
Kriol speaking children may face in learning English phonology that can be used
to create learner-centered pedagogical materials and teaching strategies to
begin to eliminate the educational gap faced by Australian Kriol speaking
children. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian
Academy of Science.