* 1515808
* Investigating Novel Biological Activities for the Vitamin D Class of Seco-Steroids
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Matthew Hadden, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences
and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calcitriol is a form of Vitamin D
that provides an important control mechanism for many processes including proper
bone growth, immune function, metabolism (the chemical reactions of life), and
blood pressure. Calcitriol has been shown to inhibit a signaling mechanism that
is responsible for correct embryonic development, but this inhibition appears to
involve a novel mechanism distinct from the well-known vitamin D receptor. This
project will identify the mechanisms through which Vitamin D-based compounds
regulate signaling mechanisms as a first step to understanding their larger role
in embryonic development. A new undergraduate course for non-scientists,
"Molecules in the Media," will incorporate the project findings in the context
of understanding Vitamin D as a natural hormone. Outreach with a local high
school will provide unique opportunities to explore advanced techniques and
instrumentation not typically available in high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent identification of Vitamin D-based seco-steroids
as potent inhibitors of Hh signaling and mammalian development represents an
exciting new avenue of research for this class of endogenous regulators. The
physiological activity of these compounds is traditionally attributed to the
direct binding of calcitriol to VDR and subsequent activation of a canonical VDR
signaling cascade; however, there is an increasing amount of evidence to suggest
that this is a simplified description of endogenous Vitamin D signaling.
Specifically, the anti-Hh effects of several structurally related Vitamin
D-based seco-steroids are not regulated via VDR or Smoothened (Smo), a
7-transmembrane GPCR-like receptor that is a key Hh pathway component and the
initially described target of calcitriol. The overall goal of this project is to
study cellular signaling during mammalian embryogenesis by utilizing a series of
direct target identification approaches to fully identify cellular proteins that
mediate inhibition of the Hh signaling pathway by Vitamin D-based structures. To
accomplish this goal, a series of Vitamin D structures incorporating a defined
label (alkyne, biotin, or fluorescent) will be synthesized and utilized as
chemical probes to explore global binding interactions between Vitamin D and the
cellular proteome.