* 1515366
* EAPSI:Social Networks, Fractal Complexity, and Parasites in Japanese Macaques
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kelly Finn, Finn                    Kelly          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Fractals (complex patterns that are self-similar at different scales) are
ubiquitous in nature and help systems remain efficient and stable, but little is
known about these patterns in relation to animal behavior. This research will
investigate the fractal complexity of Japanese Macaque behavior patterns in
relationship to parasite infection and an animal?s social network. This
collaboration offers a unique opportunity to conduct behavioral observations on
Koshima Island, one of the most influential research sites in the history of
animal behavior, while learning statistical methods for fractal analysis under
the mentorship of Dr. Andrew Macintosh of Kyoto University. This research will
advance our understanding of how internal and external factors such as health
and social environment influence behavior, and how individual behavior relates
to societal stability.

Fractal patterns in behavior offer deep mechanistic explanations of how animals
allocate energy to specific activities, a fundamental feature of behavior linked
to the ability to adapt to environmental variability or changes. To investigate
how the energetic costs of parasite infection affect organizational complexity
in behavior, fractal analyses will be run on discretely categorized locomotion
and foraging sequences recorded during focal-follows of Japanese macaques in
varying health states. In addition, to examine the relationship between
individual behavior patterns and social network, data from an adjacent study
will be integrated using computational network tools that reveal dominance
certainty and community structure. These findings will illuminate the bigger
picture of modulation between an individual?s physical condition, the core
structure of individual behavior patterns, and group level organization. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.