* 1515927
* All-Sky Automated Survey for Supernovae: Big Science with Small Telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Krzysztof Stanek, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2020
* USD 629,962.00

Even in the present day, only human eyes monitor the entire night sky. There is
no optical survey that frequently images and records the entire celestial
sphere, seeking out the transient, variable, and sometimes violent events that
occur in our Universe. The "All-Sky Automated Survey for Supernovae" (ASAS-SN)
will automatically survey the entire visible sky every other night. ASAS-SN is
already producing a steady stream of important discoveries. ASAS-SN will also
provide a critical training ground for the next generation of time-domain
astronomers, a field that will eventually be transformed by the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope.

The major scientific goal of this proposal is to significantly enhance our
understanding of supernovae, both core-collapse and thermonuclear. This team
will complete an unbiased census of bright, nearby supernovae, and they will
study these events and their hosts in detail. ASAS-SN is currently making more
than 50% of all the bright (<17 mag) SNe discoveries and recovering most of the
rest. Bright and nearby SNe, discovered early by this high-cadence survey, are
especially valuable, as they and their host galaxies are easy to study using
small (1-2m) telescopes. ASAS-SN should lead to new, unbiased derivations of
supernova rates and a better understanding of supernova properties as a function
of stellar age and metallicity. This survey will be publicly releasing data,
already including a transient list, just released "ASAS-SN CV Patrol", and
future "ASAS-SN Patrols" of continuously updated light curves for other
interesting classes of objects. All-sky catalogues of variable stars will be
gradually released as well.