* 1515572
* PRAC - Ensembles of Molecular Dynamics Engines for Assessing Force Fields, Conformational Change, and Free Energies of Proteins and Nucleic Acids
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Thomas Cheatham, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

Using the Blue Waters petascale resource, our research centers on developing and
applying accurate methods for the simulation of biomolecules using the AMBER
software. Using ensembles of these simulations, we can efficiently model the
conformational distributions of biomolecules to better understand their
structure, dynamics and interactions, and ultimately this provides detailed
information about their function. This information can be used to design drugs
to modulate function and to help determine how to alter the biomolecular
structure and dynamics to influence function. Over the past few years, using
these technologies we have shown the ability to reproducibly converge the
conformational distributions (i.e. the set of conformations sampled under a
particular set of conditions, such as at a particular temperature, pH, or
specific environment) of various RNA molecules. We have also improved the
molecular "force fields" that allow proper modeling of the structure and
dynamics. This generally allows us to better understand how biomolecular
machines, including various protein and RNA molecules, function. For example,
one of our goals is to understand how riboswitches recognize specific
metabolites which in turn leads to conformational changes that alters regulation
of those metabolites. Another goal is to better understand the structure and
dynamics of biomolecules in the crystal and this will lead to a better
understanding of the role of structure and disorder in protein function. The
methods and "force fields" developed are in wide use by a larger community that
is aiming to provide realistic insight into biomolecular structure, dynamics,
and function. Although not all research groups have access to the Blue Waters
petascale resource at this time, the technology we are developing and applying
now will become routinely accessible to the larger community who can then easily
apply these methods on future resources. Since computer power and accessibility
continues to grow at a rapid pace, the broader community will see the impact of
these technologies within a few years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances
in simulation methods and increases in computational power have coupled together
over the past few decades to transform our understanding of biological
macromolecules; we can watch small proteins fold to their correct structure, we
can help design new therapeutics, and improved simulation methods can help
refine low resolution or ambiguous experimental data. The biomolecular
simulation methods we apply add to experimental data by exposing information not
readily measured about the motions of biomolecules across many size and time
scales, ranging from the fastest bond vibrations to slower collective motions.
This allows elucidation of the dynamic landscape of proteins and nucleic acids
as a function of time, especially at smaller scales. Access to petascale
computational resources allows us for the first time to fully explore the
structural, dynamic and energetic landscape of complex biomolecules. In our
current PRAC, we have been able to fully converge the conformational ensemble of
DNA helices, RNA tetranucleotides and tetraloops, we assessed and improved the
force fields, and we also developed novel multi-dimensional replica-exchange
methods and analysis tools. With further collaboration of an experienced team of
AMBER developer?s, we aim to decipher the full landscape of protein and nucleic
acid structure and function, with a heavy focus on RNA, DNA and proteins and
their complexes. On Blue Waters we will continue to hierarchically and tightly
couple ensembles of highly GPU optimized molecular dynamics engines to fully map
out the conformational, energetic and chemical landscape of biomolecules. This
will be done not only to assess, validate and improve currently available
biomolecular force fields, but also to provide novel insight into DNA structure
in the crystal and in solution, RNA riboswitch dynamics and function, and also
protein-nucleic acid interactions. Additional aims focus on the development of
new analysis methods and dissemination of the simulation data to the larger
community for deeper and broader inspection.