* 1515302
* EAPSI:Investigating Vitamin B2 as a Possible Regulator of Metabolism in Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Skylar Johnson, Johnson                 Skylar         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award will be a collaborative effort to investigate a possible regulatory
role of vitamin B2 (riboflavin and its derivatives) in the metabolism of the
plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The research will be conducted under the direction
and expertise of Dr. Miyako Kusano, a noted expert in the field, at RIKEN in
Yokohama, Japan, and at University of Tsukuba, also in Japan. Finding that
flavins can modulate metabolic pathways in plants as they do in bacteria will be
useful for engineering plants which are more resistant to environmental stresses
in the field, such as drought, salt, and heat, or for aiding in the production
of plants which produce desired compounds.

Flavins are essential cofactors for hundreds of enzymes involved in diverse
metabolic pathways, and are a promising metabolic regulator. Profiling of the
small molecule products of primary metabolism through metabolomics and
comparison of these profiles between plants producing different levels of
flavins will allow insight into which pathways are affected by flavins.
Integration of this data with information on all of the genes being transcribed
in the plant, gained from a transcriptomics analysis, will allow a more global
understanding of how flavins affect a wide variety of metabolic pathways. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.