* 1515437
* EAPSI:Investigating Sulfur Sources and Sulfate Oxidation Chemistry in New Zealand Aerosols
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Tanya Katzman, Katzman                 Tanya          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Sulfate aerosols are a critical part of climate change, the water cycle, and
significantly impact human health, yet we do not completely understand the
sources of sulfur, nor how it is oxidized into sulfate in the atmosphere. In
order to study the impact of sulfur in the environment, researchers in
collaboration with the Institute of Geological and Nuclear Science (GNS) will
collect aerosols at Baring Head, located on the southern tip of the North Island
of New Zealand. In contrast to the Northern Hemisphere, where man-made sulfur
dominates, the majority of Southern Hemisphere sulfur is from natural sources
and of marine origin. Many Baring Head aerosols are of marine origin, which
allows researchers to assess marine sulfur chemistry without terrestrial
influences. In addition to the unique sampling location, GNS possesses the
experience, expertise, and analytical capability required for evaluating the
sulfur chemistry in this project.

To assess sulfur chemistry, researchers will utilize the stable isotope
concentrations of sulfur (d34S) and oxygen (d17O, d18O, D17O) to evaluate
sources and oxidation pathways. Sulfur isotopes allow for the differentiation of
sulfur sources (low d34S for land sources; elevated d34S for marine sources), as
the value of d34S is retained during oxidation. Oxygen isotopes provide insight
to the oxidation pathways (gas phase oxidation, D17O = 0; aqueous phase
oxidation, D17O > 0) that form sulfate. Additionally, by collecting size
segregated aerosols, researchers will be able to analyze gas and aqueous phase
oxidation of a comparable air mass. Coarser aerosols are more likely to undergo
aqueous phase oxidation than the finer fraction, as sea water in this region is
slightly more alkaline thus promoting aqueous oxidation. Once combined, the
analyses preformed will create a robust data set that will compliment future
modeling projects and enhance the understanding of the impact sulfate aerosols
have on climate change, the water cycle, and human health worldwide. This award
is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.