* 1515644
* EAPSI:Investigating the Physics Underlying the Brilliant Structural Color of Morpho Butterflies for Reproduction and Incorporation in Electronics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Evangeline Wong, Wong                    Evangeline
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Integrated circuit technology and optical communication drive the information
revolution, but sustaining continued progress of the information revolution
requires merging the two into one monolithic technology. Since silicon (Si) is
the material used to manufacture integrated circuits, silicon photonics, defined
as photonics using Si-based materials and Si-compatible processes, can be the
solution. Investigating the unique physical mechanism by which the Morpho
butterfly generates its vivid color will inform the design of Si photonics. This
project will contribute to the current effort to study the physical processes
behind the brilliant colors of Morpho butterflies and to recreate them on a
large scale for practical applications. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Professor Jung Shin at the Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology, who specializes in research of materials and structures
that can enable realization of Si photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the
chemical process of selective wavelength absorption found in pigments, dyes, and
paints, the Morpho butterfly?s structural colors emerge via a physical process:
interference effects as light interacts with the nanostructures on the surface
of a material. Structural colors are mainly based on elementary optical
processes, such as thin-layer interference, diffraction grating, and light
scattering, but these processes mix together in natural systems to produce
complex optical phenomena that have yet to be fully understood. Multi-cluster
numerical simulation using Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) modeling will
elucidate the photophysics generating the Morpho butterfly?s colors. A
fabrication process involving nanoimprinting lithography, sputter deposition,
and dry etching of multilayer samples will be conducted. Optical
characterization of the samples, and then comparison with the results from the
previous numerical simulation, will reveal the effectiveness of the fabrication
technique in replicating the color-generating nanostructures in the Morpho
butterfly. The NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Korea.