* 1515423
* EAPSI:Investigating the Ultrafast Charge Dynamics in Polymer Solar Cells Incorporating Nanostructured Silver Electrodes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Christopher Petoukhoff, Petoukhoff              Christopher    E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,266.00

In the search for sustainable energy sources, low energy consumption
technologies are critical to minimize our environmental impact and maximize the
energy harvested. Polymer solar cells are lightweight, flexible alternatives to
traditional solar cells and have potential energy payback times as low as one
day (compared to >2.5 years required for solar cells made from silicon), if
their efficiency can reach >15%. One way to improve the efficiency of polymer
solar cells is to employ light-trapping techniques, such as using nanostructured
metallic electrodes. While polymer solar cells incorporating metallic
nanostructures are known to have improved light absorption in the polymer active
layer, this does not always translate to improved electrical output. This study
seeks to fundamentally understand why improved light absorption does not
necessarily lead to improved electrical output in the presence of nanostructured
metallic electrodes. To do this, ultrafast time-resolved photoinduced absorption
measurements will be conducted at Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology in
collaboration with Professor Keshav Dani, who is an expert in conducting
ultrafast time-resolved measurements.

Nanostructured Ag electrodes will be fabricated with the structure of Ag
nanoparticle arrays on a Ag thin film (AgNPA/Ag). To mitigate the effects of
charge recombination at the AgNPA surface, a series of ultrathin interfacial
layers (exfoliated MoS2, Ag2O, and graphene oxide) will be applied to the
AgNPA/Ag and compared to AgNPA/Ag without an interfacial layer. The prototypical
polymer:fullerene blend, P3HT:PCBM, in which the photophysics are well-
established, will be used as the active layer coating. Two-color pump-probe
measurements will be employed, in which P3HT:PCBM will be optically pumped with
a wavelength within its absorption band, and the probe wavelengths selected will
be those corresponding to photoinduced absorption from P3HT excitons (bound
electron-hole pairs) and P3HT:PCBM polarons (free electrons and holes) over a
time scale of tens of fs to 1 ns. This will allow the elucidation of whether the
initially improved population of excitons in the P3HT:PCBM layer translates to
an improved polaron population, with the expectation that both exciton and
polaron photoinduced absorption should both be greater in the presence of the
passivated AgNPA/Ag, which would eventually translate to improved solar cell
device efficiency. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.