* 1515636
* Capacity Building for Control System Security Collaborative Project
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Terry Marbut, Jacksonville State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2018
* USD 229,296.00

With an ever-increasing part of our nation's critical infrastructures in the
hands of public and private employees via computer systems, the need for a
cybersecurity educated workforce has never been so great. Since the operation of
these infrastructures is heavily dependent on control systems, it is imperative
that the future workforce be educated and trained on the security of such
systems. This project will serve as an instrument to that purpose and its
novelty in enhancing cybersecurity education--in particular control systems
security--is predicated on total learning immersion utilizing problem-based-
learning techniques and hands-on experimentation. Collectively, the activities
and the corresponding evaluation process for continuous improvement present a
transformative educational system that is replicable at the national setting.
Most importantly, this project is well-positioned and has the capacity to bring
about unprecedented improvement in cybersecurity education particularly to
members of the underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the
urgent need to protect our nation's critical infrastructures, this collaborative
capacity building project undertakes a series of intertwined tasks with the
primary objectives of developing control systems security curriculum materials,
enhancing cybersecurity curricula by offering professional development workshops
to instructors of community colleges and 4-year institutions, evaluating the
effectiveness of these learning and teaching materials, and disseminating these
materials for widespread national adoptions. The project presents a unique
opportunity for faculty to expand and retool their cybersecurity curricula to
address the current gap in control systems security education and research. The
collaborative effort in the design and implementation of the course modules and
the virtual testbed facilitates the adaptability of those curriculum tools and
materials in all levels of higher education. The project builds on two highly
successful grant projects: the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded Critical
Infrastructure Security and Assessment Laboratory (CISAL) project that was
completed in May 2013 and the Department of Defense (DoD) sponsored gamification
of security awareness training project that was completed in December 2013. The
portable and cost-effective toolkit that evolved with the CISAL project and the
freely accessible course modules provide generous motivations for widespread
curriculum adoption across national settings.