* 1515569
* EAPSI: Investigating the Electronic Properties of Topological Insulator in the Presence of Magnetic Impurities
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Zahra Pedramrazi, Pedramrazi              Zahra
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

A topological insulator (TI) is a new phase of quantum matter. TIs are unique
since they have insulating bulk as well as conducting edges. These edges
transmit energy and information without loss, regardless of their length. These
properties are very robust and the only way to change them is by introducing
magnetic impurities. This project will fabricate a tunable system that can be
changed from a metallic edge state to an insulating edge structure. The research
will be conducted in collaboration with Professor Woong Yeom Han's group at
Pohang University of Science and Technology in South Korea, one of the few
groups in the world capable of fabricating and characterizing two-dimensional
topological insulators. Hence, this collaboration provides a unique environment
to characterize and fabricate a tunable topological insulating system.

TIs are protected by time-reversal symmetry. This symmetry can withstand any
defects and damage with the exception of magnetic impurities that break time-
reversal symmetry. Therefore, to truly control the electronic properties of a
topological insulator, one must understand its behavior in the presence of
magnetic impurities. Although theoretical studies of two-dimensional TIs with
magnetic defects have predicted that time-reversal breaking magnetic defects
open a gap in the otherwise gapless edge state, there has been no experimental
studies reported to verify this hypothesis. This project is focused on
fabricating and characterizing a topological insulating Bi(111) bilayer on
Bi2Te2Se in the presence of Kondo impurities using a scanning tunneling
microscope (STM). This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the
National Research Foundation of Korea.