* 1515551
* Regulating Synaptonemal Complex Assembly: Mechanisms that Control Protein Aggregation During Meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Sarit Smolikove, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/29/2020
* USD 555,000.00

This project examines the process of meiosis, which involves a unique cell
division essential for the formation of cells such as egg and sperm. These cells
are required for sexual reproduction, and when they are improperly formed the
outcome is sterility. This project will investigate a critical protein complex
in meiosis, named the Synaptonemal Complex (SC), in order to understand how it
is formed and stabilized, and what are the factors that affect its structure and
function. The project will also offer training opportunities in genetics, the
science of heredity, to help develop the next generation of successful
scientists and teachers. Students in various stages of their careers will be
involved, including high school students, undergraduates, and graduate students.
In particular, this project will help address the lack of diversity within STEM
disciplines by involving underrepresented minorities in research performed at
the University of Iowa. The Iowa Genetics Research program for high-school
students in the department of Biology (iGRHB) will expose students to scientific
methodologies, experimental design, and data interpretation in an investigation-
based lab setting. iGRHB students will be recruited from the Iowa City area,
from a local community with a majority of STEM-underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SC formation is essential for generation of
viable egg and sperm cells, and this function is evolutionarily conserved. In
some aberrant conditions, proteins composing the SC aggregate, which leads to SC
dysfunction. The project will investigate the molecular mechanisms regulating SC
protein aggregation, which in turn affects the proper assembly of the SC. These
studies will be performed in the multi-cellular organism Caenorhabditis elegans
by using a combination of genetic, cytological, molecular, and biochemical tools
available for this model system. The first aim will identify the mechanism by
which protein modification regulates SC assembly by the prevention of SC
aggregation. The second aim will investigate how nuclear transport controls SC
assembly and reduces SC protein aggregation. Overall, these studies will provide
crucial insights on the mechanisms regulating SC assembly and, therefore, the
fundamental biological and genetic processes required for reproduction.