* 1515501
* EAPSI:Building a Mathematical Model of Infectious Disease Spread in Multiple Interacting Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Irina Berezovik, Berezovik               Irina
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The spread of infectious diseases can be described by a set of mathematical
equations that convey the behavior of the disease in both the short and long
term. Accurate mathematical models are used to analyze patterns of disease
spread, contributing to more effective prevention and treatment. Models
describing the dynamics of infectious diseases in a single community are well
researched, but there is little work done on models to analyze the spread of
infectious diseases between multiple interacting communities. In the case of
China, interactions between densely populated urban groups, such as
Beijing/Tianjin, Guangzhou, Shanghai/Hangzhou, and Chengdu provide a good
example of such a multi-community model. Multi-community models are becoming so
complex as to be difficult to analyze using traditional theoretical methods.
This challenge can be overcome by considering the interacting communities as
identical and the interactions as symmetric. This award supports research to
provide a general framework for such a multi-community model analysis, building
on previous work performed at University of Texas Dallas. The research will be
conducted under the mentorship of Dr. Yicang Zhou from Xi'an Jiaotong
University, who is a world class authority on complex nonlinear models for
diseases.

The purpose of this project is to apply the equivariant topological degree
method to building and studying the symmetric generalizations of the most
recently developed epidemiological models of infectious diseases. The
generalized models, in which we will be assuming that the interacting
communities are identical, will be represented by systems of differential
equations with symmetries. In particular, the investigator is interested in
analyzing the oscillatory phenomena that may occur when an epidemic equilibrium
is destabilized in such a multidimensional system, i.e. there is an appearance
of a symmetric Hopf bifurcation. Periodicity of solutions is of the utmost
importance to the researcher since it corresponds to the reoccurrence of
epidemics, which may exhibit various symmetric properties/patterns. Using the
equivariant degree method, supported by computer pro- grams such as GAP, the
investigator is planning to perform a direct analysis of such symmetric Hopf
bifurcation problems. By computing the equivariant bifurcation invariants, the
investigator will provide the full classification of symmetric properties of the
bifurcating branches (patterns), which will allow to make predictions for the
existence of periodic solutions. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration
with the Ministry of Science and Technology of China.