* 1515227
* EAPSI:Tracing the Evolution and Distribution of an Alpine-Arctic Plant Between North America and China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Rebecca Stubbs, Stubbs                  Rebecca
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The discontinuous distribution of plants between Eastern Asia (EAS) and North
America (NA) represents one of the most remarkable patterns in the North
Temperate Flora, and it has fascinated biologists for over 150 years. Multiple
conflicting hypotheses have been put forth to explain it, and there is much to
be gained by investigating a group that shows this distribution pattern.
Micranthes (Saxifragaceae), is an alpine-arctic herbaceous plant genus found in
the mountains of Asia and North America, and is an excellent candidate for
investigating this pattern. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Chun-Lei Xiang, who has done extensive fieldwork in China, from the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming Institute of Botany in Kunming, China. This
research will test hypotheses offered to explain the EAS-NA distribution, and
will allow the researcher to assess how plants adapted and radiated in response
to historic climate change between and within continents. This information can
be used to predict how plants will respond to future climate change and will be
broadly applicable to other species.

Understanding how and why a species has obtained its current distribution allows
for insights into evolutionary processes and helps to unravel general patterns
of biodiversity and diversification. This research will evaluate hypotheses
about this disjunction and provide new input about the mechanisms of evolution
and radiation in the northern hemisphere. This will serve to hypothesize routes
of migration and subsequent bursts of diversification in response to historic
climate change. Southern China possibly served as the center of origin for some
of the endemic taxa, and these taxa provide an important connection for trans-
continental movements. A comprehensive biogeographic reconstruction of this
clade will delineate routes of migration and subsequent surges of
diversification in response to historic climate changes. Extensive fieldwork,
herbarium research, next generation sequencing, and cutting-edge computational
analyses will all be used to unravel the evolution and biogeography of this
group. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and
is funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.