* 1515871
* Topics in Optimal Transport and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Marian Bocea, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 362,999.00

Transport problems involve the study of the movement of mass from one location
to another. Optimal transport is the study of exactly how to do this so that the
cost of transportation is the smallest it can be. This is a very broad field
with many applications, from the planning of urban transportation networks to
molecular transport. The present project considers several important
generalizations of the classical optimal transport problem which have not been
previously studied. For example, a natural question to consider is what happens
if there are two or more entities transporting the same initial mass to another
location, each having its own costs to minimize. This is the "game theoretic"
version of the optimal transport problem. Another problem deals with time-
dependent transportation costs. This considers various cases when moving objects
is more or less expensive depending on the time of movement. Overtime payments
or transport in congested periods fall into this category. Transport problems in
which one seeks to minimize the worst possible costs (instead of some average
cost) are also important in applications and are considered here. Since optimal
transport arises in many economic, biological, engineering, and other scientific
areas, the mathematical theory developed for the problems considered in this
project could have a significant practical impact. In addition, the project will
study several new mathematical models arising in image processing and in
understanding the motion of frontal boundaries due to flame or plasma
propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relaxed version of the optimal transport
problem involves finding a measure, called a "transport plan," that minimizes
the integral of a given cost density, subject to the constraint that the
transport plan has given marginals. This is a one-player transport problem.
Several generalizations of this much studied problem will be considered in this
project. For example, if there are two players, each with their own cost density
and each choosing their own transport plan, then they are coupled through the
cost densities and, more importantly, through the given marginals. Another
generalization of the original problem is to consider cost densities that depend
on time. When that happens, the transport plan and map will also depend on time.
Yet another line of investigation is driven by issues in the emerging area of
L-infinity optimal transport, where the cost to be minimized is represented as
the essential supremum of a cost function rather than the integral of a cost
density. Optimal transport differential equations for the transport maps in the
game model should lead to generalized Monge-Ampere systems. Dynamic programming
of the time-dependent and perhaps the game-theoretic transport problem should
lead to Hamilton-Jacobi equations in measure spaces. Existence of a generalized
Nash equilibrium in the non-zero-sum case will be established. Finally, several
PDE models arising in the study of quasiconvex functions and in the theory of
stochastic differential games will be analyzed. The techniques used to tackle
the problems proposed in this project will involve nonlinear functional
analysis, game theory, and nonlinear partial differential equations arising from
dynamic programming, as well as the theory of viscosity solutions for first and
second order partial differential equations and modern methods in the calculus
of variations.