* 1515213
* EAPSI:How Does Ecology Influence Biogeography? A Study of a Well-Known Parasitic Plant
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kathryn Massana, Massana                 Kathryn        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Parasitic plants?plants with limited or no photosynthetic ability?are reliant on
hosts for survival. Many parasitic plants have been understudied and work
regarding their ecology, evolution and biogeography would be a substantial
contribution to understanding symbiosis. This research supports study of the
biogeography of mistletoe, a well-known parasitic plant found mainly in the
Southern Hemisphere. The research aims to understand the distribution of New
Zealand mistletoes by considering their dependence on other organisms (through
reliance on parasitic associations with trees and on birds to disperse seeds)
and by understanding how the shape of the landscape affects their dispersal.
This study will use a new model developed by the PI to ascertain how ecological
factors affect the distribution of organisms. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Dave Kelly, a noted expert on mistletoe ecology and
evolution who has comprehensive knowledge of the location of mistletoes, and of
bird-mistletoe-tree host associations in New Zealand. The work will address
questions never before asked from a historical biogeography perspective.

The study will use a novel likelihood modeling approach developed by the PI to
assess the historical biogeography of New Zealand mistletoes. Many parasitic
plants have been understudied and work regarding their ecology, evolution and
biogeography would be a substantial contribution to understanding symbiosis. By
focusing on a small clade of mistletoes (Loranthaceae) and using parasite, host
and dispersal agent/barrier and vegetation type data, the PI will be able to
ask: What biotic factors have structured the historical biogeography of
mistletoes? Does host and dispersal agent biogeography correlate with parasite
biogeography? How does heterogeneity in the landscape affect mistletoe
distribution? Currently, no study has tried to assess the biogeographic history
of parasitic plants and we lack understanding of ecological factors have
influenced the biogeographic history of parasitic plants. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.