* 1515648
* From Core to Outflow: The Dynamics of Binary Interactions and the Generation of Collimated Flows in Evolved Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Eric Blackman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 388,013.00

How stars are born and how they die represent the most fundamental kinds of
questions we can ask about the Universe. For many years astronomers believed a
star like our own sun would end its life by shedding it outer layers in a series
of powerful winds leading to the formation of what is called a 'planetary
nebula', a brightly glowing gas cloud that can span a light year or more. In
this study the investigators explore how planetary nebula can form when stars
are born with a sibling. More than half the stars in the sky live their entire
life with a companion and that proximity can change the course of evolution for
both stars. They seek to understand how two stars with about the same mass as
the sun can interact at the end of their lives exchanging mass and driving winds
that will create a planetary nebula. It may be that only binary stars form such
nebula and our ideas of the Sun's eventual demise must be revised. Using
powerful supercomputer simulations they will track the gas flows from the two
orbiting stars and determine how these mass exchanges can alter the fate of the
stars. These kinds of supercomputer algorithms are also used for other purposes,
such as the high performance computer industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is focused on understanding magnetized outflows in evolved
binary stars through specific new studies of Planetary Nebulae (PNe). As the
final stage of mass loss for these stars, PNe represent a critical step in the
mass and chemical evolution cycle for more than half the material ejected into
the ISM. The ubiquity of PNe and their ease of observation also make them
premier laboratories for testing new astrophysical theories. They will explore
the dynamics of binary star mass transfer and mass loss through collimated
outflows. The research will explicate routes through which accretion disks can
form in evolved binary systems and attempt to provide limits on the accretion
rates onto and through those disks. Using the conditions in the disks they will
then study the formation and propagation of magnetic tower collimated outflows.
These Poynting-Flux Dominated flows are of fundamental interest because they
represent a different category of MHD outflow from the kinetic energy dominated
flows that have received greater study. The binary evolution (Common Envelope),
mass transfer and magnetic outflow processes they study are of fundamental
importance to the study of many astrophysical systems from Type Ia SNe to
Microquasars. In addition their work developing the AstroBEAR AMR code is of
particular benefit computational astrophysicists &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Beyond
the direct scientific research benefits of their study and the dissemination of
the AstroBEAR software, the PI is a co-founder of National Pubic Radio's 13.7
Cosmos and Culture Blog, a regular on-air science commentator for NPR's All
Things Considered and regular contributor to the New York Times. In this project
they will develop a series of on-air programs for radio that will track the
progress of a student and the post-doc as they carry out the research project.