* 1515085
* EAPSI:The Evolution and Development of Extreme Weapons: Have Weapons Reached their Limit?
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Devin O'Brien, O'Brien                 Devin          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

Animal weapons represent some of the world's most incredible morphology. Traits
such as the massive antlers of elk, or the incredible tusks of elephants, occur
in thousands of animal species. But despite this diversity of form, one thing
remains constant across these traits: those individuals with the largest weapons
win the most fights and, as a result, are expected to have the highest
reproductive success. This should lead to strong directional selection for large
weapons. However, when biologists go out in the wild and quantify how selection
is acting on these weapons, this is not what they find. Instead, animal weapons
are often characterized by weak net selection for large weapons. Contrary to
what is expected, males with the largest weapons do not have the highest mating
success. Why? In this award, potential limits to extreme weapons are explored
through analyses of metabolism, biomechanics, and developmental mechanisms of
exaggerated growth in frog-legged beetles. This work will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Teruyuki Niimi at the National Institute for Basic
Biology in Okazaki, Japan, one of the leading researchers in the field of
exaggerated growth and animal weapons. This work will help advance understanding
of a fundamantal puzzle in evolutionary developmental biology and enhance
communication of basic science in public outreach on this strangely beautiful
species in collaboration with a local children's museum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the non-model system, frog legged beetles, two
potential limits to extreme weapons will be examined. These are the metabolic
costs associated with large, muscle filled weapons, and the biomechanical limits
weapons experience as they get very large. These factors will be measured
directly in the field to determine how they can curb the reproductive benefits
associated with bearing large weapons. This work will be paired with genetic
analyses focusing on the developmental basis of extreme growth in animal
weapons. RNA knockdowns will be performed on candidate growth pathways to
elucidate how exaggerated weapons develop and to gain a better understanding of
potential targets of selection in extreme weapon systems. This NSF EAPSI award
supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration
with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.