* 1515344
* EAPSI: Diversity and Evolution of Gyroporus, a Globally Distributed Group of Ectomycorrhizal Fungi
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Naveed Davoodian, Davoodian               Naveed
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Gyroporus is a genus of ectomycorrhizal fungi with representatives on every
major continent except Antarctica. These fungi mutualistically associate with an
array of plant species around the world, including members of the pine, beech,
and myrtle familiesThese symbioses are essential ecosystem features;
understanding their origins and geography is crucial given accelerated species
extinction and range shifts. In addition to functioning as symbionts in forests
worldwide, Gyroporus species are important as wild edible mushrooms. Though most
of the species are edible, at least one is currently known to be toxic,
underscoring the need for careful systematic studies in this group. Despite a
long history of formal recognition, significant details within Gyroporus have
yet to be elucidated. This is primarily because many of the taxa represent
widespread species complexes, harboring semi-cryptic lineages. To address this
problem, a combined taxonomic and phylogenetic approach will be used to examine
species limits and infer relationships within the group. Japan is an ideal
landscape for this research, as the country harbors a diverse set of Gyroporus
species, including poorly known and endemic species. Field, laboratory, and
herbarium work will be conducted with advisement from Dr. Kentaro Hosaka,
mycologist at the National Museum of Nature and Science.

Morphotaxonomic data will be drawn from original study of specimens collected
from the field and those already housed in Japanese herbaria. Protein-coding
loci will be emphasized for phylogenetic studies. Namely, the nuclear gene rpb2
and the mitochondrial gene atp6 will be utilized. The nuclear gene tef1 will
also be used for select specimens to allow for divergence time estimation. These
data will be analyzed in tandem with any publicly available DNA sequences and
preliminary data already generated by the principal investigator. Phylogenetic
analyses will further elucidate Gyroporus diversity and facilitate the
assessment of species limits. Phylogenies will also aid in the evaluation of
biogeographic hypotheses, such as proposals regarding the temporal and
geographic origin of Gyroporus, the evolution of ectomycorrhizal partnerships,
and dispersal-vicariance scenarios. Additionally, select exemplars of other
ectomycorrhizal Boletales will be included in these analyses for comparative
study. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.