* 1515156
* EAPSI:Developing an objective prior for the Negative Binomial distribution
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* John Snyder, Snyder                  John           C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Bayesian statistical methodology involves the natural updating of information
from a priori knowledge to a posteriori knowledge. In this framework, the prior
belief about quantities of interest is updated through the observation of data
to obtain a ?posterior distribution,? which contains the updated information
about these quantities in light of our observations. This type of analysis can
suffer from a poorly chosen prior structure which will have an impact on the
posterior results. In objective Bayesian methodology, mathematical techniques
are applied to the assumed distributional structure of the observed data so a
prior can be computed while maintaining minimal impact on the posterior
distribution. This is important because statistics is commonly being applied by
scientists directly, and an objective prior takes away the potential for biased
results. This project seeks to develop an objective prior for the negative
binomial distribution, which to date does not have this structure when both
parameters are unknown. This research will be conducted at East China Normal
University in Shanghai, China, under the guidance of Dr. Yincai Tang, who has
contributed several important results to the objective Bayesian community.

Because of the discrete nature of the parameter space of the negative binomial
distribution, historically available methods for deriving objective priors do
not apply. The 2014 method of Villa and Walker assigns ?worth? to every element
in this parameter space by examining how much the overall model structure
changes when each element is removed and the objective prior is derived as a
function of these values. After the prior is obtained and the posterior is
derived, the performance of this structure will be examined under simulation
where data with known properties is generated to see how well the method
recovers these properties. This NSF EAPSI award supports reserach by a U.S.
graduate student and is funded in collaboratin with the Chinese Ministry of
Science and Technology.