* 1515500
* EAPSI:Assessing the Impacts of Sea Level Rise on Coastal Semi-Aquatic Snake Distributions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Philip Vogrinc, Vogrinc                 Philip         N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Global-mean sea level is projected to rise by roughly one meter over the next 85
years. These changes are expected to detrimentally impact mangrove and coastal
wetland habitats that contain high levels of species diversity. Of particular
concern is Singapore that on average lies only 15 m above sea level and has lost
much of its native mangrove habitat. Many semi-aquatic snake species of the
family Homalopsidae rely on this imperiled habitat and changes in sea-level
could cause species extirpations. Particularly concerning is the fact that many
of these poorly understood snakes are found nowhere else and new species are
described regularly. As regulating predators in coastal ecosystems, snake losses
could result in unnatural levels of some prey species, such as fish and
crustaceans, and the disappearance of others - directly impacting fisheries and
other economically important coastal recreational activities. In this study,
semi-aquatic snakes will be sampled across Singapore to gather information on
distribution and abundance necessary for predicting species responses to sea
level rise. This research is in collaboration with Dr. David Bickford at the
National University of Singapore, a world-renowned expert in evolutionary
ecology and conservation.

Occupancy analysis will be used to model species occupancy, detectability, and
habitat associations for semi-aquatic snake species. Up to 30 coastal sites
representing a gradient from pristine (i.e. National Parks) to sites heavily
influenced by urban development will be sampled. Surveys will be conducted at
night in mangroves, intertidal creeks and mud flats at low tides when snakes are
most active. Habitat and landscape variables such as salinity, land cover, urban
land use, and vegetation cover will be included as covariates, to assess
relationships between natural and anthropogenic factors and species occupancy
and diversity. Predicted distribution maps for each species will be created
using the results from occupancy modeling. Potentially inundated areas will be
mapped using multiple probabilistic sea level rise scenarios for estimating
impacts on costal habitat. These maps will then be overlaid to estimate impacts
on species persistence. This study is the first of its kind investigating
occupancy parameters in Asian snakes and responses of snakes to projected sea-
level rise. This award is funded in collaboration with the National University
of Singapore.