* 1515214
* Glycolipid Immunostimulants, A symposium at the American Chemical Soc. meeting, Boston 2015
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Richard Franck, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2017
* USD 5,000.00

"Glycolipid Immunostimulants" is a symposium to be held at the Boston 2015
National Meeting of the American Chemical Society. The founding discovery
leading to the titled symposium occurred 20 years ago when scientists isolated a
small family of galactosylceramides (Galcers)from an Okinawan sponge.
Surprisingly, Galcers stimulate mammalian immune systems. The short-term
objective of the 2015 symposium is for the 100-150 participants to exchange
ideas about the design and synthesis of the ideal glycolipid immunostimulant
(probably a Galcer variant). The longer-term goal is to achieve a more detailed
understanding of the chemistry of this significant life process. The
lecture/discussion format will bring together a majority of the chemists who
have synthesized the dozens of the small molecule glycolipid ligands inspired by
the sponge material. There are 14 lectures planned for the one-day session. Each
lecture is followed by a discussion period. This is the first-ever major
symposium where the focal point is design and synthesis of ligands that are
crucial for the glycolipid-based immune pathway. This symposium will foster the
intellectual exchanges that will likely induce progress toward enhancing the
availability of ligands for exquisite control of the immune system. The open
exchange of ideas among an international group of chemists who will then
interact with immunologists is also a benefit. The idea exchange will reinforce
the American science ideal. Free, open and unfettered research is the way
forward for science to benefit society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the initial
observations of the immunostimulatory effect of the sponge glycolipids, their
fascinating molecular biology has been elucidated. The glycolipid acts as a
"linchpin" which connects a receptor on the surface of antigen-presenting cells
(APC) to a receptor on natural killer T cells (NKT). When the ternary complex of
APC-glycolipid-NKT is formed, a burst of cytokines ensues which signals for the
ultimate immune defense. For the first dozen years of work by synthetic chemists
to design and synthesize analogs of the parent sponge Galcer, the research plan
was largely empirical. The structural features of the interaction of the ligand
with the 2 protein receptors had not been defined. In 2007, the X-ray structure
of the ternary complex was finally reported. Thus, it has become possible for
chemists to incorporate the observed H-bonding and van der Waals repulsions
within the complex as part of the design of newer ligands. The ultimate goal is
to have ligands that favor the induction of one cytokine. At this writing, it is
not yet understood as to which of the observed bonding and/or repulsion effects
are determinative for which cytokine. A planned outcome of the symposium
discussions is a better understanding of these details.