* 1515331
* Leading CanariCam Science Team Mid-IR Astronomy at the 10.4-m GTC
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Charles Telesco, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2020
* USD 127,805.00

Located in the Canary Islands, the 10.4-meter diameter Gran Telescopio Canarias
(GTC) is the largest optical-infrared telescope in the world. The PI of this
award led the team that built the GTC's "CanariCam", a unique camera that images
heat radiation from galaxies, star-forming regions, young planetary systems,
supernovae, and other phenomena at the frontiers of astrophysics. To maximize
the science productivity of telescope time provided in return for CanariCam
development and to forge a strong international science collaboration, the
CanariCam Science Team (CCST) was formed to provide access to this enormous
telescope to US astronomers, including graduate students and post-docs, who
would not otherwise be permitted to use it. This NSF award supports essential
activities of this international team, particularly science planning, observing,
analysis, and dissemination of results. This program also introduces many US
astronomers to observational techniques with which they are unlikely to have had
much previous experience, and it provides graduate students and post-docs an
unparalleled opportunity to receive training in an international environment
while exposing them to advanced astronomical techniques and research at the
world's largest telescope.

This NSF award provides critical on-going support to assure the success of the
CanariCam Science Team (CCST). A highly diverse set of science programs proposed
by individual scientists on the CCST are shaped by the PI into a coherent super-
program to be carried out across several observing semesters and on any
particular night. Especially for more complex programs, the PI meets face-to-
face with CCST members and travels to the telescope for some observing runs to
ensure that all CCST observations are carried out smoothly and efficiently by
GTC staff. Data reduction for CanariCam is supported formally in publicly
available IRAF routines, but this award also supports community-wide
dissemination of high-quality, mostly IDL, reduction and analysis routines
developed by CCST members for their own purposes. Finally, annual team meetings
supported by this award play a critical role in engaging and training students
and postdocs, since they are scientifically intense and hands-on experiences in
which real science is being planned, discussed, and debated.