* 1515519
* EAPSI:Examining Visual Processing in Infants from Monolingual and Bilingual Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Dylan Antovich, Antovich                Dylan
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Infants from bilingual environments must overcome learning challenges beyond
those faced by monolinguals, including the need to rapidly categorize linguistic
input and to discover unique properties of multiple languages. This project will
add to the literature exploring how bilingual infants accomplish this feat.
Continued research on this topic is essential, as bilinguals are a majority in
the world, but remain a minority in research on early development. One body of
work suggests that very early bilingual experience may instill cognitive
benefits, which in turn helps infants navigate multilingual environments. Many
of the tasks used in these studies entail rapid visual processing, which may be
one source of the observed bilingual advantages. Bilinguals must index their
language input using numerous speech cues, including subtle differences in mouth
movements across languages. Early experience identifying these visual cues in
language may hone bilinguals? visual processing. To investigate this
possibility, monolingual and bilingual infants will complete tasks that assess
several language-relevant aspects of visual processing. This project will be
undertaken in collaboration with Dr. Leher Singh at the National University of
Singapore. As a diverse, multilingual country, Singapore is an ideal location
for research on bilingualism, and will facilitate this investigation of
cognitive development in bilingual environments.

Early experience processing multiple languages may enhance visual short-term
memory (VSTM) and visual selective attention (VSA) in infancy. VSTM encodes and
retrieves visual features over short intervals. Bilingual processing may require
VSTM to exploit the dynamic, rapidly changing details relevant for language
discrimination. Categorizing language input in real time may also require
infants to employ flexible VSA to discover the visual cues that identify each
language. Continual use of these systems for language categorization may advance
bilingual infants? domain-general VSTM and VSA, facilitating continued bilingual
acquisition. In the current project, infant VSTM will be examined with a color
change detection task. In this task, object color must be remembered across a
brief delay in order to detect a change. VSA will be assessed with an object
categorization task. Infants? ability to identify features that are diagnostic
of an object?s category membership will be evaluated. We will use infrared eye-
tracking to measure infants? success in both tasks. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Singapore.