* 1515639
* EAPSI:Evaluating Anticipatory Communication Strategies for Human-Robot Teaming
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Abhizna Butchibabu, Butchibabu              Abhizna
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Robotic systems are being integrated into complex and safety critical domains,
where these systems work with humans as teammates. For example, in domains such
as emergency response systems, robotic systems are deployed to conduct tasks
that may not be feasible by humans. One of the challenges for fluent human-robot
teaming is effective communication, where the human and the robot exchange of
the right information at the right time is critical. Prior work shows that high-
performing human teams tend to share information by anticipating the needs of
their teammates (referred as implicit coordination) and that to work effectively
with a human teammate, the robot must be interpredictable and communicate in a
way expected by the human teammate. The objective of the project is to develop a
computational model for the robot where the robot will proactively communicate
with human teammates using implicit coordination strategies. This is one of the
first studies to address how anticipated communication strategies could be used
by robots to improve team performance when working with humans and how these
strategies could be learned by the robots using machine learning artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques. This award will provide a U.S. graduate student
with the opportunity to work in collaboration with Professor Liz Sonenberg, an
expert in human-robot teaming, in the Department of Computing and Information
Systems at the University of Melbourne, Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
computationally model the robot?s AI, a Mixed Observability Markov Decision
Process (MOMDP) framework will be used. This framework is commonly used as part
of machine learning to learn from prior data and optimize on a reward function.
The MOMDP framework for this study will use previously collected human-human
team communication data. In this framework, a reward function will be
implemented where using implicit coordination will provide higher reward for the
robot. This will enable the robot to compute the optimal policy and solution
space for communicating with the human teammate. This model will be then
evaluated through human-subject experiments at MIT starting in September after
the EAPSI program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.