* 1515559
* Connecting Eruptive Transients and Their Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Nathan Smith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2020
* USD 382,365.00

The investigators will study an important class of massive stars, which have
bright eruptions of material from their surface. These stars are in the last
stages of their stellar life cycle, sometimes just before stellar explosions as
supernovae (SNe). The investigators will use telescopes of the University of
Arizona to study Luminous Blue Variable (LBV) stars. They will study the
material ejected around nearby LBVs and the connection between SNe brightnesses.
The material from the LBVs appears as bright rings of gas surrounding the stars.
The material is visible in observations with optical telescopes and sensitive
cameras. These observations provide the only way to measure the ejected mass and
speed, as well as the typical time period between large eruptions. The
investigators will study the environments of LBVs in the Milky Way and nearby
galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will mentor in CAMPARE, a
program that fosters diversity in science by recruiting minorities and
statistically underrepresented groups for a summer undergraduate research
experience at Steward Observatory. The investigator will continue as a Sky
Ambassador, working with Tucson elementary and high-school science teachers. As
part of this program, they will develop instructional materials concerning the
Sun and stars, supernovae, and the origin of the elements. There research
program will also fund one Ph.D. thesis and several undergraduate researchers,
providing them with experience with complex multi-wavelength observational data
and time-variable phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators focus on
observations to understand the stellar life cycle and explosive deaths of
massive stars, since SNe dominate feedback in galaxies. SNe enrich the
interstellar medium with elements, and they can be used probe conditions in the
distant universe. The use of SNe to estimate of distances to galaxies hinges
upon understanding the connection between massive stars and the various types of
SNe they produce. Eruptive mass loss is influential in stellar evolution, and
violent eruptions preceding core collapse can lead to some of the most luminous
SNe known. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This LBV/SNe connection was initially
controversial because stellar models place massive LBVs in an earlier phase, but
recently a dramatic confirmation of the connection between LBV stars and SNe was
observed. In 2009 an LBV star was noted in a survey of massive stars, and then
in 2012 this star became a core-collapse SNe. LBV-like eruptions may hold
critical clues about stellar instability during the final phases of nuclear
burning, vital to understanding core collapse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
these studies, the investigators will detect a large number of extragalactic
transients, and constrain the luminosity, mass-loss rates, duration, and outflow
speed of the eruptions. Some of these eruptive transients will soon explode as
SNe, so the observations will have tremendous value for understanding the
prelude to core collapse of massive stars.