* 1515930
* US-French Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Predicting Odorant-dependent and Independent Olfactory Neuron Activation Based on Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Minghong Ma, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2018
* USD 154,339.00

Smell is a powerful sense that can trigger intense emotion, stereotyped
behaviors and durable memories. The sense offers an extraordinary opportunity to
connect atomic-level objects (odorant molecules and smell receptors in the nose)
to neural responses. This project will predict which smell receptors in the nose
are activated by a given odor. To accomplish this goal, the team of
investigators will apply computational approaches to develop chemical structure-
based receptor models and test these models using odor molecules interacting
with olfactory receptors. The success of the project will enable the team to
understand more precisely how the brain perceives the external environment. The
results will also have widespread and diverse industrial applications, including
rational design of new flavors and fragrances and development of new biosensors
for detecting various chemicals. Furthermore, this project will make broader
impacts in training and educating high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in various disciplines as well as in outreaching activities.

The complexity of the odor molecules, the large number of the smell receptors
and combinatorial activation of the receptors make understanding odor coding an
enormous challenge. This collaborative proposal represents the first of its kind
that combines computational approaches with experimental measurements at both
the receptor and the neuron level. Affinity calculations between odorants and
the receptors, as well as the receptors' activation, will be obtained by
nanosecond-scale simulations. Atomic-level simulations, initially assessed by
experiments, will predict which odors would activate the receptors of interest.
Comparisons between experimental findings and computational predictions will
lead to a comprehensive computational model that converges with experimental
data.

A companion project is being funded by the French National Research Agency
(ANR).