* 1515522
* EAPSI: Evaluating Beachgoer Vulnerability to the Rip Current Hazard
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Sarah Trimble, Trimble                 Sarah          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Rip currents are strong, narrow seaward flows of water that originate in the
surf zones of many global beaches. They are related to hundreds of international
drownings each year, but exact numbers are difficult to calculate due to
logistical difficulties in obtaining accurate incident reports. Annual average
rip current fatalities are estimated to be ~100, 53 and 21in the United States
(US), Costa Rica, and Australia respectively. While physical rip current
behavior is relatively well understood, we know little about the social aspect
of rip current hazards. Recent research shows that beachgoers drown from a
combination of physical and social factors, with the latter related to beachgoer
age, swimming ability, knowledge, and ability to spot a rip. The rip current
hazard has been exacerbated by information disconnects between three groups:
beach scientists, beach safety practitioners, and the general public. This
project will use a mixed-methods approach to address these disconnects by
combining novel methods of measuring rip current channel morphology and measured
beachgoer knowledge to determine behavior from subject proximity to rip current
channels. Results will help improve design of rip current education
interventions in Australia, the United States and globally. The project will be
overseen by Dr. Rob Brander, Associate Professor at the University of New South
Wales and noted rip current expert. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interviews will be
analyzed for spatial relationships to rip hazard locations, as determined from
bathymetric maps that will be created from multispectral imagery captured by
Digital Globe?s WorldView2 (WV2) satellite. The depth of penetration for
different bands of the electromagnetic spectrum captured by this satellite can
be used to derive bathymetry. Because rips form in topographic lows in
bathymetry, their location can be interpreted from channels in the surf zone.
This method has the highest accuracy in clear waters like those around Sydney.
Rip locations, combined with interview results and locations, will determine if
subjects? observed behavior (choice in location within a beach) reflects their
knowledge of beach dynamics. Results of this study will clarify how gaps between
coastal geomorphologists, policy makers, and beachgoers can be bridged to lower
rip-current related fatalities and injuries in Australia and the United States
(US). This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian
Academy of Science.