* 1515247
* EAPSI: Design of Ultra-thin Nanostructured Silicon Solar Cells: Coupled Optical and Electrical Modeling
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Natasa Vulic, Vulic                   Natasa
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Ultra-thin silicon solar cells are promising candidates for future generations
of photovoltaic devices due to decreased material cost and higher performance.
However, poor light absorption in silicon necessitates the use of light-
enhancement methods. The Solar Power Lab at Arizona State University has
previously developed a repeatable, large-area nanostructuring process for
increasing light absorption in thin silicon substrates. What is presently needed
is predictive theoretical modeling to guide development of a device fabrication
process that experimentally investigates the suitability of nanostructured
silicon in high-efficiency solar cells. The proposed project is to work with Dr.
Stephen Bremner, a noted expert in design and fabrication of third generation
silicon solar cells, at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in Sydney,
Australia to create and optimize coupled optical and electrical models of ultra-
thin nanostructured silicon solar cells.

The project will utilize the empirically calibrated optical models of
nanostructured substrates using finite difference time domain (FDTD) numerical
methods to obtain the optical generation rate in the substrate. The optical
generation rate will then be input into device models based on thick silicon
solar cells to evaluate optical gains when conventional microtexturing methods
are replaced with nanotexturing. Then, the project will analyze alternative
solar cells designs based on ultra-thin silicon solar cells where conventional
microtexturing is no longer a viable option due to large feature size compared
to the thickness of the substrate. Finally, the project will analyze and
iteratively refine the coupled optical and electrical model and identify
potential designs for experimental verification in the lab. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.