* 1515533
* EAPSI: Using Ancient DNA to Determine Biological Kinship in a Bronze Age Cemetery, China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Alyssa Bader, Bader                   Alyssa
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The analysis of ancient DNA (aDNA) recovered from individuals excavated from
archaeological contexts has become a valuable tool for improving understanding
of past populations and their cultures. This research project will use aDNA as a
tool to delineate the biological kinship relationships present, if any, amongst
individuals excavated from the Hanshu II Burial Group 1 of the Houtaomuga
cemetery in Da?an, Jilin Province, China. Analysis of genetic relatedness
between the sampled individuals will determine if individuals buried at
Houtaomuga are biologically related and, if so, whether kinship is socially
stratified within the cemetery. As this culture marks a period of social
transition from a pastoral economy to mixed agriculture subsistence, this is a
particularly important research site for understanding social organization. The
research will be conducted under the advisement of Dr. Yinqui Cui at the Jilin
University Ancient DNA Laboratory, in collaboration with the Chinese Center for
Frontier Archaeology at Jilin University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this
period, individuals were buried in either joint burial catacomb tombs or single
burial earthen graves, indicating social stratification between individuals. The
proposed project will analyze aDNA extracted from individuals excavated from
both tomb types to reveal the probability of biological kinship within burials,
as well as the biological relationship, if any, between individuals interred in
high-status and lower-status burials. The hypervariable region (HVRI) of the
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) will be sequenced for each individual, as well as the
Y-chromosome of male individuals. If the rate of aDNA recovery is sufficient,
analysis of biparental autosomal genetic markers will also be conducted. No
genetic analysis of intracemetery kinship has thus far been performed on remains
from the Hanshu II cultural period of Bronze Age China. Thus, this project will
contribute to a more nuanced understanding of Hanshu II culture at a time of
economically significant social transition. This NSF EAPSI award supports the
research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.