* 1515223
* EAPSI: Understanding the Contribution of Class I Myosins to Cellular Processes Involving Membrane Deformation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Sarah Barger, Barger                  Sarah          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Plant cells are bound by a rigid cell wall, yet animal cells rely only on a
plasma membrane and the underlying meshwork of cytoskeletal fibers, called actin
filaments, for support and stability. As the cell boundary, the plasma membrane
both enables and restricts any shape changing process. Adherence of the plasma
membrane to the actin meshwork beneath generates resistance to deformation but
also allows cells to maintain complex shapes. Non-muscle Class I myosins are
motor proteins capable of binding both plasma membrane and actin filaments;
therefore, they may link the plasma membrane to the actin cytoskeleton. That
Class I myosins are structurally conserved from yeast to humans is indicative of
their functional importance. However, their precise role in processes involving
membrane deformation, such as cell migration and phagocytosis, remains elusive.
In collaboration with Dr. Nils Gauthier, an expert in membrane-cytoskeletal
interactions at the Mechanobiology Institute at the National University of
Singapore, this research will evaluate the participation of Class I myosins in
membrane-cytoskeletal adhesion during physiologically important processes that
involve membrane deformation.

In this project, the strength of membrane-cytoskeletal attachment in macrophages
(cells of the innate immune system) lacking Class I myosins will be measured
using a calibrated optical tweezers system, which uses a focused laser to
measure forces applied to microscopic objects. Cells will then be subjected to
tests on cell motility, cell traction and cell spreading to assess membrane
deformation ability. These experiments will also be performed on macrophages
expressing truncated myosin constructs to further our understanding of the roles
of the individual protein domains. With the expertise of Dr. Gauthier and the
specialized core facilities of the Mechanobiology Institute, this work will shed
light on the workings of an ancient motor protein and its role in moving the
plasma membrane. This award is funded in collaboration with the National
Research Foundation of Singapore.