* 1515396
* EAPSI:Understanding and Controlling the Properties of Magnetic Semiconductor Nanomaterials based on Europium
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Nicholas Rosa, Rosa                    Nicholas
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,000.00

The next generation of electronic devices rests upon two advances in the
materials used in their construction: new materials with novel properties and
shrinking devices to the nanoscale. Magnetic semiconductors are an exciting but
poorly-understood class of materials that display a number of interesting
effects desirable for modern electronics applications. In these materials, the
electronic, optical, and magnetic properties are highly coupled, leading to a
strong interdependence among them. This interdependence allows for control of
all of these properties based upon changes in only one. For example, when in a
magnetized state, these materials exhibit a large change in their electrical
resistance or interaction with polarized light. Understanding how to make these
materials and how to control the properties on the nanoscale is an important
first step in harnessing them for use in devices from displays to hard drives to
processors and quantum computers.

For understanding the fundamental properties of magnetic semiconductor
nanomaterials, an excellent model system is the europium chalcogenides: oxide
(EuO), sulfide (EuS), selenide (EuSe), and telluride (EuTe). All of these
materials are indirect bandgap semiconductors that display a range of magnetic
behavior from ferromagnetic in EuO and EuS to metamagnetic in EuSe to
antiferromagnetic in EuTe. Recently, nanostructures of the europum chalcogenides
have been synthesized by the PI?s home research group at Georgetown University
and the research group of Yasuchika Hasegawa at Hokkaido University, where the
PI will work under this award. These nanostructures are an ideal platform to
study the fundamental behavior and coupling exhibited on the nanoscale. Toward
this understanding, this project will investigate the synthesis and
characterization of cation and anion doped EuS and EuSe nanostructures as a
means to control electronic, optical, and magnetic properties by controlling
composition. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.