* 1515170
* EAPSI: The Effect of Asperities on Geological Properties and Forearc Topography at Subduction Region
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Xinyue Tong, Tong                    Xinyue
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research to study the effects of impinging bathymetric
features on the relationship between seismic cycle and long-term uplift and
subsidence cycles observed in places such as the Solomon and New Hebrides
subduction zones. This project is based on numerical experiment. A robust,
adaptive, multi-dimensional, finite element method solver, Dynearthsol2D/3D,
will be used to accomplish the project in order to accommodate large spatial (up
to 400 km) and time (up to 105 years) scales. This project will take place at
Academic Sinica, Taiwan, under the mentorship of Dr. Tan Eh, one of the major
contributor to Dynearthsol2D/3D. The preliminary results will not only help to
improve explanations of tectonic observations within the scientific community.
They will also help officials with long-term earthquake/tsunami prediction as
well as preparation and mitigation of subsequent hazards in Sumatra, Solomon,
and regions with similar geological settings.

The relationship between the earthquake cycle of elastic strain accumulation,
release and longer-term tectonic deformation at convergent margins is still
poorly understood. Long-term accumulation of inelastic strain that results in
topographic changes at subduction zones is believed to occur over multiple
earthquake cycles. However, while the mechanism releasing slip co-seismically on
the seismogenic zone is well understood, the way strain accumulates
interseismically, causing long-term deformation in the forearc region of
subduction zones, is still a matter of debate. Moreover, when integrated over
time, coseismic uplift poorly matches the longer-term vertical deformation in
places such as the Solomon and New Hebrides forearc regions where large
bathymetric features are being subducted at the trench. Based on this and
similar observations, it is inferred that coseismic slip is not the only
mechanism dominating the long-term deformation processes at forearcs. This
project will investigate numerically how coseismic slip and long-term
deformation accumulate and interact at subduction zones with the presence of
large asperities at the subduction interface. This NSF EAPSI award supports the
research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.