* 1515876
* A Search for Failed Supernovae and Other Observational Constraints on the Supernova Mechanism
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Krzysztof Stanek, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 309,929.00

The goal of this project is to better understand the final fates of massive
stars. At the end of their lives, all stars more than roughly ten times the mass
of our Sun build an iron core which collapses from the size of the Earth to the
size of a city once its mass exceeds a critical limit. In many cases this
results in an luminous, supernova explosion, but there is increasing evidence
that this is not the only outcome. This work will (a) discover or set useful
constraints on the fraction of massive stars that produce a black hole without a
supernova explosion; (b) clarify the boundary between the least luminous
supernova explosions and the variability of massive stars that does not lead a
supernova explosion; and (c) measure the properties of these stars just before
their deaths, including pioneering studies of their variability. The project
will advance our scientific understanding of these massive stars while training
the next generation of scientists.

The research steps for a better understanding of the fates of massive stars
include using unique, multifaceted observational and theoretical approaches. The
centerpiece is a project using the twin 8.4m Large Binocular Telescope to
monitor all the massive evolved stars in 27 nearby star-forming galaxies. The
primary goals are to: (1) Discover or set interesting constraining limits on the
fraction of core collapses that fail, producing a black hole without a supernova
explosion; (2) Measure the properties of SN progenitors while pioneering studies
of their variability and binarity; (3) Explore the boundary between the faintest
SN and stellar outbursts, in particular by better understanding the nature of
the SN "impostors" and the SN2008S class of dusty transients. While doing so,
the project will advance the training of students and post-docs and broaden the
public's understanding and interest in science, aided by their fascination with
stars and their complicated roads to death.