* 1515755
* Development of Non-Perturbative Approaches to Partial Differential Equations Arising in Physical Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Saleh Tanveer, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2020
* USD 470,000.00

It is well-recognized that better understanding of nonlinear processes is key to
progress in many areas of science and technology, including climate prediction
and development of advanced materials. Theoretical progress in nonlinear
sciences depends on advancing the frontiers of theoretical and computational
tools of mathematics in complex problems. Computational tools, while generally
suitable for nonlinear problems, usually lack mathematical rigor. Mathematical
rigor is important in validating the models used in applications. Rigorous
methods of mathematical analysis are, on the other hand, usually restricted to
special, simpler settings. This project seeks to bridge the gap between
mathematics and computer-based approaches for a class of important applications
from mathematical physics and fluid dynamics.

The project focuses on an extensive development and refinement of rigorous
nonperturbative methods discovered by the principal investigators to answer
important open questions that arise in mathematical physics and fluid dynamics.
The problems include, in particular, the following: (a) stability of regular or
blow-up solutions in super-critical partial differential equations, especially
in Yang-Mills theory and wave maps; (b) investigation of steady solutions in
viscous fingering in nonperturbative regimes with different regularizations, and
of their linear and nonlinear stability; and (c) investigation of the stability
of oscillating parallel fluid flows of large amplitudes.