* 1515203
* EAPSI: Using Tomographic Reconstruction of Liquid-Phase Extinction Measurements to Assess Fuel Spray Breakup Outcomes in Internal Combustion Engines
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Gina Magnotti, Magnotti                Gina           M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Atomization and fuel spray processes are known to largely impact combustion and
emissions formation in direct injection engines. In order to accelerate the
development of clean-combusting and fuel-efficient combustion technologies,
physically-based and predictive spray models must be developed. In this project,
we plan to assess the physical mechanism by which a liquid fuel spray breaks up
into smaller droplets under engine-relevant conditions by comparing
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model predictions of spray breakup outcomes,
such as droplet size and number density, with quantitative spray measurements.
The proposed work will foster current and future collaboration with Dr. Michael
Brear?s Thermodynamics Laboratory at the University of Melbourne, Australia. Dr.
Brear?s lab is uniquely positioned to collaborate with us on this proposal as
they specialize in combustion diagnostics and have applied tomographic
reconstruction to optical emission measurements of laminar flames.

The goal of the proposed work is to assess the relative importance of
hydrodynamic instabilities and liquid turbulence on the breakup of a liquid fuel
spray in direct injection internal combustion engines using quantitative spray
measurements. It is hypothesized that under in-cylinder conditions at full
compression, aerodynamically-induced instabilities govern spray breakup and
subsequent droplet sizes. However, for early or late injections, we expect
liquid turbulence-induced breakup to play a more dominant role in spray breakup
and droplet formation. Previously, CFD spray simulations were employed to
evaluate and compare the predicted spray morphology for each of these spray
breakup mechanisms in isolation. A measurement that can quantify spray breakup
outcomes, such as joint distributions of droplet size and number density, is
therefore needed to assess the physical validity of these breakup theories. It
has been shown in previous work that there is a direct correlation between
predictions in liquid-phase laser extinction and spray morphology, and have
demonstrated that this measurement technique shows promise of assessing primary
spray breakup models. In this proposal, tomographic reconstruction to 2-D laser
extinction measurements will be employed to yield 3-D spatial information
regarding local spray structure and asymmetry for robust model validation. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of
Science.