* 1515438
* EAPSI:Seismic Performance of Reinforced Concrete Buildings with Shear Walls
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Travis Marcilla, Marcilla                Travis
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This project will closely analyze structural deficiencies that lead to total
collapse and non-repairable damage of reinforced concrete buildings due to
earthquakes. There will be specific concentration on buildings that have or can
benefit from using shear walls. The main focus of this project is to study in
detail the series of failures that lead to total loss, and to evaluate the
economic benefits of adding shear walls. Research will be conducted at GNS
Science located in Lower Hutt, under the mentorship of Dr. S.R. Uma, a renowned
expert in the field of earthquake engineering and structural response. In depth
engineering reports will be made available that focus on structural failure
details from the 2010 and 2011 Christchurch earthquakes. The outcomes of this
project will lead to improved recognition of dangerous buildings, improved
accuracy of computer modeling, and greater understanding of the economic
benefits of retrofitting dangerous structures. New Zealand is an optimal
location to study seismic performance because of the Christchurch earthquakes
which destroyed many structures and because of the detailed engineering reports
that have been produced since.

This project will help develop nonlinear structural analysis skill and technique
to accurately simulate localized failures in concrete structures. Nonlinear
computer simulation of structures is a still-developing tool for engineers to
study how a building behaves as a whole under dynamic loading. In the United
States, nonlinear modeling techniques are being used to evaluate the seismic
risk of structures that were built before modern buildings codes and structural
analysis tools. Even with recent advances in nonlinear modeling techniques, it
is difficult to accurately simulate the total collapse of buildings like the
Pyne Gould building in Christchurch which killed 182 people in 2011, because of
the multitude of smaller local failures that lead to the global collapse.
Understanding the deficiencies of concrete structures and taking steps to
retrofit them must allow for, at a minimum, life-safety of building occupants,
minimal loss of building functionality, and economic viability. By improving
understanding of retrofit options and trade-offs, this project will inform
decision-making about the identification and improvement of dangerous RC shear
wall structures in the U.S. and around the world. This award is funded in
collaboration with the Royal Society of New Zealand.