* 1515267
* EAPSI: Effects of Ocean Acidification and Eutrophication on the Green Macroalgae Ulva spp
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Leah Reidenbach, Reidenbach              Leah           B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports research that will investigate how the changing marine
environment affects the growth rate of a weedy macroalgae, Ulva spp. Two factors
that may act synergistically on Ulva spp. growth rates are ocean acidification
and eutrophication. Ocean acidification is caused by increasing absorption of
atmospheric carbon dioxide in seawater, which changes water chemistry and lowers
pH. Eutrophication is caused mainly by human activities increasing the nutrients
in seawater. Eutrophication alone is known to cause green-tide blooms of Ulva
spp., and it is predicted that ocean acidification may increase growth rates of
Ulva spp. because of increased carbon dioxide availability. How these two
factors affect the growth rate when occurring simultaneously has not been
thoroughly investigated. A state of the art ocean acidification incubation
system will be used to investigate the synergy of these effects at the
University of Tasmania in collaboration with Dr. Catriona Hurd, an expert in
macroalgal physiology. Ocean acidification is occurring worldwide and
eutrophication occurs near heavily populated coasts. This project will increase
our ability to make predictions about the abundance of Ulva spp. in future
marine environments.

Ocean acidification changes seawater chemistry by increasing the CO2(aq)
concentration, which is the form of carbon used by the photosynthetic substrate
Rubisco. Presently, dissolved CO2 in water makes up less than 1% of the total
inorganic carbon in seawater. The more abundant form of inorganic carbon is
bicarbonate (H2CO3). Most macroalgae can utilize both forms of inorganic carbon
for photosynthesis, however the uptake of CO2 is less energetically costly as it
occurs via passive diffusion through the cell membrane. Uptake of H2CO3 requires
energy for carbon uptake, so we predict that the increase in CO2 may result in
energetic savings that can be allocated to growth and nutrient uptake. This
project will investigate if increasing dissolved CO2 will increase the ability
of Ulva spp. to perform nutrient uptake of nitrogen. The results of this
experiment will inform us about how human activities and environmental factors
interact in future climate conditions for marine primary producers. This NSF
EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in
collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.