* 1515395
* EAPSI: Generating Models for Systems Based on Their Response to Unmeasured Inputs
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Aaron Estes, Estes                   Aaron          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Automatic control permeates modern life--from the autonomous navigation of
ground and air vehicles to the regulation of glucose levels in the bloodstream
via an artificial pancreas; but the quality of controllers stems from an
intricate understanding of the underlying processes they manipulate. System
identification is the technique of building a mathematical model for a dynamic
process by observing its reaction to different inputs. The identified model
uncovers the fundamental interactions at play in the system, and helps inform
the design of controllers. However, the inputs creating a system response are
often uncertain, or unmeasured; such as the turbulent forces buffeting an
aircraft during flight. This research will develop techniques for generating a
model for a system when its response is observed, but the input causing this
response is unknown. This research will be conducted at National Cheng Kung
University in Tainan City, Taiwan, in collaboration with Dr. Jer-Nan Juang, a
pioneer in the field of system identification.

The popular Eigensystem Realization Algorithm (ERA) will be extended to identify
models for linear time-invariant systems where only output data is available.
Specifically, the outcomes include: 1) the rigorous definition of the set of
conditions a system must satisfy in the presence of input uncertainty in order
to be identifiable; including the locations of sensors and/or actuators, and the
relative modal content of the system and the input; 2) an augmentation of the
ERA algorithm permitting the identification of plants and inputs, down to a
constant scaling factor, from output-only data; and 3) a linear solution for the
recovery of the transformation which maps the identified system into physical
coordinates, allowing for the decoupling of system modes and input modes. This
NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology in Taiwan.