* 1515763
* Between the Disk and the Star: Boundary Layers in Astrophysical Accretion Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Roman Rafikov, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2020
* USD 226,186.00

This study will explore a tantalizing new mechanism for explaining activity
within the region between an inward flow of material and the central object onto
which it is falling. Detailed numerical work including for the first time all of
the relevant physical ingredients will predict what should be observed. The
project promises finally to make progress after a long time spent on ideas that
simply did not work, and it will train students in this cutting-edge research
topic.

Astrophysical accretion often proceeds onto a central object with a surface, in
which case a boundary layer forms at the inner edge of the disk. Energy release
in this layer dramatically affects the spectra and variability of accreting
objects, which requires a good working model of the boundary. This project
starts with a recently discovered important new mechanism for angular momentum
and mass transport across this region. The transport mechanism comes from
supersonic shear flows that give rise to global acoustic waves that dissipate in
weak shocks. It appears to be very efficient and robust, and needs to be further
studied. This work will identify and explore the properties of acoustic modes in
fully three-dimensional, magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) boundary layers, in which
the effects of radiation transfer and/or radiation pressure are important. The
study involves detailed simulations using a three-dimensional (3D) MHD code and
careful analysis of the results, trying to find simple physically motivated
models of transport driven by acoustic modes. The culmination of the work is a
set of simulations combining these previously explored physical ingredients.
This parameter space exploration to understand the global geometry and
characteristics of the boundary layer has never been done before, and will lead
to direct prediction of observable quantities. These calculations will be the
first self-consistent model of the structure and evolution of boundary layers
not relying on ad-hoc angular momentum transport prescriptions.

The project will make special efforts to recruit students from minority and
underrepresented groups, training personnel highly qualified for future success.
The simulations will result in visualizations appropriate for the general
public, for public talks and general outreach purposes.