* 1515441
* EAPSI: Cultural Variation Underlying the Impact of Residential Mobility
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Brandon Ng, Ng                      Brandon        W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Changing one?s residence is becoming ubiquitous; at the same time, the
psychological literature portends a bleak future for the residentially mobile.
Mobility has been found to predict anxiety, stress, and most strikingly,
feelings of anticipated loneliness. In short, a mobile mindset causes a severe
threat to belonging. Most of the existing research on mobility has focused on
culturally westernized samples from the United States?a relatively
individualistic and geographically large region. No studies have explored how
the culture or geographic size of a region may influence the psychological
impact of residential mobility. The present work, to be conducted with Dr. Bobby
Cheon at Nanyang Technological University, aims to address this gap in the
literature. Singapore is an ideal location for this research, as it is
economically and linguistically similar to the United States, but is relatively
small in geographic size, as well as immensely culturally diverse.

Cultural differences in responses to threats to belonging are robust. For
example, following an instance of being misunderstood, Western participants
became more approach-oriented, whereas East Asian participants became more
withdrawal-oriented. In this way, although mobility may motivate participants
from individualistic cultures to seek affiliative opportunities, and thus
demonstrate heightened attention to positive, acceptance cues, participants from
collectivistic cultures may become motivated to avoid further rejection, and
thus become more attentive to negative social cues. The present work will employ
a cultural neuroscience approach to explore this question. Singaporean
participants will be randomly assigned to either a mobile or stable prime
condition. They will then complete an emotional face perception task consisting
of positive and negative social stimuli while EEG is recorded. We plan to focus
on the activity of the N170, an ERP component that has been found to be
particularly active during the structural encoding of facial stimuli. This NSF
EAPSI award is a fellowship to a U.S. graduate student funded in collaboration
with the National Research Foundation of Singapore.