* 1515028
* Dynamics and Energetics of Secondary-Active Glutamate Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Christof Grewer, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2019
* USD 530,993.00

The plasma membrane separates the interior of the cell from the extracellular
space and provides a barrier to cell entry/exit for many molecules (for example
nutrient or signaling molecules) that are essential for cell survival. Glutamate
is one such molecule, which is not only an amino acid needed for the synthesis
of proteins, but also the most important neurotransmitter in the mammalian
brain, responsible for the majority of excitatory neurotransmission. Glutamate
is transported across the plasma membrane through active glutamate transporters,
which play essential roles in controlling the levels of glutamate in the
mammalian brain and other tissue. This project explores the fundamental
principles by which these transporters work. Understanding these principles is
important because it will contribute to our knowledge not only of the role of
glutamate and nutrient movement between cellular compartments in the mammalian
brain, as well as other organs of the body, but also glutamate homeostasis,
which is important for cellular function in general. Furthermore, the developed
methods for analyzing transport will be applicable to potential future studies
of other neurotransmitter and/or nutrient transporters and membrane proteins. On
the educational level, the project provides an invaluable opportunity for
undergraduate students to become involved in cutting-edge biophysical research,
providing training in basic physical, quantitative approaches to be applied to a
significant biological problem. The investigator is continuing previous efforts
of undergraduate involvement (including members of under-represented groups),
which has led to many publications with undergraduate students as co-authors, as
well as students successfully moving on to careers in research. The investigator
is also very active in local and regional activities that promote the sciences
at all levels, including demonstrations at schools, science fair involvement,
and assuming leadership roles in the local American Chemical Society (ACS)
section and the Science Olympiad. Such activities are necessary to ensure a
vibrant local science community and to foster excitement of the upcoming
generations of young scientists for science and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active glutamate transport is a multi-step process that
requires multiple ion/substrate binding steps, as well as conformational
changes. Despite recent progress towards understanding the transport process
through functional studies, as well as the identification of structural models
of a bacterial homologue of mammalian glutamate transporters in several states,
basic questions about the mechanism, specificity, and dynamics of interaction of
the transporters with cations, in particular K+ and Li+, as well as the
energetic contributions to energy barriers that control the transport rate and
specific structural changes in the transport cycle remain unresolved. Answers to
these questions are obtained by applying a combination of experimental and
computational methods, allowing the investigation of the dynamics of glutamate
transport in real time, with microsecond time resolution, and to test
predictions from all-atom and simplified molecular models. This work has the
potential to reveal new aspects of glutamate movement across the cellular
membrane, in particular with respect to the cooperation of polar and non-polar
forces, which are fine tuned to adjust the energy barriers associated with
ion/substrate binding, as well as conformational changes. The novel insight may
uncover more general concepts that are employed by membrane transport proteins,
in order to provide a permeation pathway for polar molecules across the
hydrophobic membrane.