* 1515511
* Computational and Experimental Systems Biology of Cyanobacterial Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Desmond Lun, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 699,904.00

Cyanobacteria, sometimes called blue-green algae, can harness solar energy to
convert carbon dioxide into biofuels and bioproducts. Thus they provide a
potential for sustainable production of fuels, materials, and other chemicals.
Realizing this potential in a cost-effective manner will require a deep
understanding of the metabolism (chemical reactions) of cyanobacteria and this
project will apply the latest computational and experimental techniques to study
cyanobacterial metabolism. The goal of this research is to produce a
comprehensive computational model that describes how cyanobacteria utilize
carbon and light or chemical energy in light or dark environments. This approach
will lead to predictive models for the control of carbon flow in the synthesis
of metabolites, a key tool for improving the ability of cyanobacteria to produce
valuable bioproducts. The project includes initiatives to advance undergraduate
and graduate science education, including a summer undergraduate research
program focusing on underrepresented groups in science; new undergraduate and
graduate teaching materials based on the advanced computational and experimental
techniques used in the project; and a workshop for high-school teachers and
students.

Systems biology approaches will be combined to advance understanding of
metabolism and growth in aquatic phototrophs. Experimental approaches
(comprehensive metabolite measurements made over many growth conditions and
including 13C kinetic flux profiling) and computational approaches (mathematical
kinetic flux model of metabolism at the whole-cell level) will be applied to
quantify and predict three basic growth physiologies in the cyanobacterium
Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002: photoautotrophic growth, oxidative respiration, and
auto-fermentation. This integrated approach will lead to predictive control of
metabolic fluxes, including carbon branching and intracellular energy balance.
The project will develop and apply a whole-cell kinetic model fitted to the
experimental measurements and the computational model will be validated by
prediction and experimental testing of the effects of genetic knockouts and up
or down regulation of identified targets. The project will search specifically
for genetic manipulations that increase glycogen accumulation during
photoautotrophic growth and hydrogen production during auto-fermentation. This
knowledge will be widely applicable to understanding cyanobacterial metabolism
and to improving yields of many bioproducts, not just biofuels.

This award is funded jointly by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Biomedical Engineering
Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.