* 1515384
* EAPSI: Understanding Alzheimer's Disease through Modifying the Electrical Stability between Two Key Amino Acids of an Important Protein
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kevin Chen, Chen                    Kevin          H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive, neurodegenerative disease that
affects 5 million elderly Americans and this number is expected to triple by
2050. AD is currently the 6th leading cause of death in the United States.
Despite decades of AD research, there is no cure for this deadly disease. A
significant challenge in AD research is studying the mechanism that makes an
ordinary protein transform from its natural, non-toxic state to an abnormal,
toxic form. Often, differences in protein structure can lead to drastically
altered biological activities. Unfortunately, this rapid transition between the
two distinct structural identities is not well understood. Experimental evidence
suggests that there are favorable molecular interactions that stabilize the
abnormal form. This award supports research that aims to study the electrical
interaction between two key amino acids of an important AD protein, amyloid-
beta, in order to evaluate the protein's structural stability. The research will
be conducted at National Taiwan University under the mentorship of Dr. Richard
Cheng, whose expertise in one of the experimental techniques will be critical to
the outcome of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental design of this
basic Alzheimer's disease research integrates the specialties from both the home
and host laboratories. A series of peptide structural models of amyloid-beta
will be synthesized using standard solid-phase peptide synthesis followed by
product purification and characterization. These synthetic peptides will
incorporate fragments of amyloid-beta that are known to initiate uncontrolled
aggregation which can be subsequently suppressed by a well-placed hydrogen-bond
blocker. To probe the electrostatic interaction between two key amino acids
(lysine and glutamic acid) of amyloid-beta, they will be systematically replaced
by amino acid derivatives. The modifications should either enhance or reduce the
electrostatic interaction, which can lead to structural stabilization or
destabilization of these peptides, respectively. Circular dichorism
spectroscopy, a specialty of Dr. Cheng, will be used to quantify the stabilizing
energies. The results of this project will afford deeper insights of a key
molecular interaction that can stabilize the toxic form of amyloid-beta. This
information may assist other AD researchers in their own endeavors and lead to
future Alzheimer's disease discoveries that will benefits society. This NSF
EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in
collaboration with the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.