* 1515138
* Collaborative Research: Population Genetics of Machu Picchu
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Lars Fehren-Schmitz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 248,720.00

The Inca citadel of Machu Picchu is an iconic landmark of human social history
and technical endeavor. Built in the 15th century, Machu Picchu integrates
refined architecture with dramatic landscape, and provides an archeological case
study in understanding social centers of ceremony, politics, astronomy and
agriculture. Although the site is among the most outstanding examples of human
interaction with the natural environment, we know relatively little about the
human component. This project uses genetic analyses to examine the biology and
population dynamics of the people who lived and worked at Machu Picchu, and in
doing so addresses questions in disciplines ranging from anthropology and
history to evolutionary biology and environmental science. The project will also
generate a wealth of genomic data for ancestral human populations, which will be
a public resource for new avenues in genetic research and training. Moreover,
given the status of Machu Picchu as an internationally recognized landmark and
UNESCO World Heritage site, this project provides an ideal opportunity to engage
wide audiences in human genetic history and archeological conservation. The
project participants will conduct bilingual public seminars in the US and Peru
to promote public understanding of human history and diversity. The project will
also be integrated into parallel bilingual museum exhibits, further promoting
longer-term international educational and research collaborations. This project
uses cutting-edge methods to sequence many types of ancient DNA (nuclear DNA,
Y-chromosome, and mitochondrial DNA) to examine the genomes of people from
throughout the Inca Empire. This includes the first comprehensive genetic
analysis of the Machu Picchu skeletal remains from over 100 burials at the site.
Genetic analyses of these individuals, and the biological relationships among
them, will allow us to test many of the hypotheses surrounding this enigmatic
site. These include questions regarding the functional role of Machu Picchu and
its residents, and patterns of diversity, migration and labor diaspora in the
Inca Empire. The investigators will compare the results of the genetic analysis
with the previous archaeological, morphological and isotopic data from Machu
Picchu, thus providing a more comprehensive understanding of the site and its
socio-historical context. Understanding the population dynamics of the Inca
Empire will in turn have broader impacts for understanding human genetic history
and adaptation prior to European colonization.