* 1515150
* PDEs with highly oscillatory coefficients: homogenization and beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Wenjia Jing, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 64,987.00

This research is directed to development of new mathematical tools for
investigation of important phenomena where the parameters determining these
phenomena and the environment change rapidly in time and/or space. Such
phenomena are ubiquitous, for example, in material science, atmospheric science,
combustion, biomedical imaging, and the dynamics of financial markets. In this
context the rapidity is determined by the scale: it might be days or hours for
atmospheric phenomena, or seconds and milliseconds for chemical processes. In
mathematical terms these phenomena are modeled by partial differential equations
(PDE) with oscillatory coefficients. This research will foster both qualitative
and quantitative understanding of solutions of underlying PDE through
mathematical analysis and computer simulations. In particular, the project will
result in the design of multi-scale numerical methods to simulate heterogeneous
PDEs; performance of the methods in capturing the large-scale behavior and
certain micro-scale information about the fluctuations of the solutions will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will carry out the
following studies: (i) develop homogenization theory for Hamilton-Jacobi
equations in dynamic random environments where the Hamiltonian and/or the
diffusion coefficients are highly oscillatory in space and time; in particular,
new techniques will be developed to overcome the lack of uniform Lipschitz
bounds due to the time dependence of the cell problem; (ii) for linear and semi-
linear elliptic equations with random potential, for which effective potential
is given by averaging, characterize the limiting probability distribution of the
homogenization error, and generalize the studies to the case where the
differential operator involves heterogeneous coefficients; (iii) study multi-
scale numerical methods and evaluate their performance in capturing not only the
macro-scale property of the heterogeneous PDEs but also certain micro-scale
information about the fluctuations of the solutions, and to improve such
methods.