* 1515297
* EAPSI: Ultra-Rapid Freezing to Maintain Stem Cell Developmental Potential in Rainbow Trout
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Tawny Scanlan, Scanlan                 Tawny          N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The establishment of novel technologies for the long-term storage of fish
genetic resources has become critical as aquatic species around the world are
experiencing rapid declines due to overexploitation and global climate change.
This project will examine an innovative area of reproductive stem cell biology
to investigate optimal conditions for vitrification of spermatogonial stem cells
from Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Vitrification involves ultra-rapid
cooling that results in instant solidification of the cell without
crystallization. Development of a vitrification protocol is desirable since
vitrification is fast and the process avoids trauma to cells by eliminating
intracellular ice formation and instead creates a glass-like (vitreous) state,
resulting in higher cell survival. This study will be conducted at the Tokyo
University of Marine Sciences and Technology in Tokyo, Japan in collaboration
with and under the supervision of Dr. Goro Yoshizaki, a renowned expert in fish
reproductive stem cell biology. The proposed study will provide insight into
fundamental aspects of stem cell cryobiology and could lead to real-world
application of an inexpensive, economical method for preserving fish genetic
resources for the conservation of endangered fish and aquaculture purposes.

The proposed experiments for this project will use Gfp-vasa+ transgenic rainbow
trout to 1) determine the effects of the vitrification process on spermatogonial
stem cell survival and 2) investigate the functionality of vitrified
spermatogonial stem cells. Stem cell survival will be quantified by using flow
cytometry, which will separate cell populations into viable or non-viable based
on fluorescence patterns. A germ cell transplantation assay will be utilized to
determine if the viable vitrified stem cells retain their functionality
potential to colonize and proliferate in recipients. This research will improve
understanding of the complex effects of cryopreservation and vitrification on
stem cell function while providing the information necessary to successfully
implement stem cell research as a novel artificial reproductive technology
method to maximize genetic diversity for the conservation of threatened aquatic
species. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).