* 1515084
* Collaborative Research: Rethinking the Fundamentals of Massive Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Aaron Romanowsky, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2019
* USD 40,718.00

A Globular Cluster is a tight group of hundreds of thousands of stars bound
together by gravity. There are hundreds of Globular Clusters orbiting around our
own Milky Way galaxy. Globular Clusters serve as fossils that trace conditions
in the universe at the earliest times, when galaxies were just starting to form.
Intriguing differences are observed between individual Globular Clusters, which
provide clues about the formation of our Galaxy. In Globular Cluster stars, the
concentrations of atoms belonging to different chemical elements vary in ways
that challenge conventional wisdom about the ages, origins and life cycles of
stars. The investigators will make observations with some of the world?s largest
and best-equipped telescopes to test theoretical models of how stars, star
clusters and galaxies come to be.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal work
involves (a) developing a unified scenario for self-enrichment among star
clusters; (b) understanding the stellar content of Globular Clusters through
novel dynamical and stellar population investigations; and (c) studying the
relationship between Globular Clusters and galaxies at the extreme upper limit
of the Globular Cluster mass function. New optical and near-infrared photometric
and spectroscopic observations will be made to explore how measurable quantities
(such as mass-to-light ratios and abundance anomalies) depend on age,
metallicity, stellar initial mass function, and dynamical evolution. Intriguing
trends, many of which confound standard interpretations, have already been
identified: 1) self-enrichment appears to be implicated in abundance spreads in
Galactic Globular Clusters and in a mass-metallicity relation found in
extragalactic Globular Cluster systems; 2) observed properties of galaxy stellar
halos, and initial measurements of gas in intermediate-age clusters, each
challenge the favored mechanism for self-enrichment; 3) the dependence of mass-
to-light ratio on metallicity is opposite to that expected from stellar
evolution models; 4) an expanding zoo of compact stellar systems has been
identified, including ultra compact dwarfs, that could be formed either by tidal
stripping of dwarf galaxies or from Globular Cluster mergers; 5) the elevated
mass-to-light ratios of ultra compact dwarfs may be explained by massive central
black holes. The investigators will clarify each of these issues, test stellar
evolution and population synthesis models, and trace the origins of compact
stellar systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since Globular Clusters are more complex
than formerly realized, understanding their properties and how they relate to
other types of stellar systems has wide implications in astrophysics; inferences
drawn from Globular Clusters inform theories of the formation and evolution of
stars, galaxies, black holes, and dark matter. This fundamental work impacts
forefront research from star formation to cosmology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
promote the broader impacts of this research effectively, the partnership with
the non-profit organization, ?Science Buddies?, will be continued. This highly
successful pilot program has already engaged thousands of K-12 students from
diverse backgrounds, including disadvantaged groups. A vigorous program of
professional and public outreach will continue, with a proven record of
including women, undergraduates, and minorities in forefront research. A
successful pilot program to involve undergraduates in Massive Clusters research
will be expanded. Students and post-docs will receive excellent training with
access to world-class facilities and to senior researchers, participating in all
aspects of the research process. A user-friendly, legacy catalog of newly
discovered compact stellar systems and their fundamental properties will be
publicly available online.