* 1515100
* EAPSI:Mechanical Behavior and Microscopic Changes of Arterial Tissues under External Loading
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* TRI NGUYEN, NGUYEN                  TRI            D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Heart disease is the leading cause of death for both men and women. Development
of new treatment methods has focused on the use of mechanical tools, including
mechanical material removal processes to remove plaque. To best develop these
processes to fight cardiovascular diseases, researchers must understand the
structural changes of the arterial system under similar loading conditions. This
award supports research that aims to describe changes in the macro and micro
structures of blood vessel tissues experiencing extensile load. The proposed
research is innovative in that it uses animal arteries and incorporates the
expertise and recently advanced technology of multi-photon microscopy from Dr.
Leo Hwa Liang?s Biofluid Mechanics Research Laboratory at the National
University of Singapore. In addition to scientific benefits, the project will
help a graduate student broaden his interaction with researchers in
biomechanical engineering leading center of excellence in Asia. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of
Singapore. Due to the histological inhomogeneity of arterial walls, a study at
the microscopic level is important for understanding the nature of the artery
and its response to external loading conditions. In this study, aortic arteries
will be cut into tensile test samples in longitudinal, circumferential, and
angular directions. The samples will be horizontally stretched using a
specially-designed tensile tester under a multi-photon microscope. Various
changes in the displacement and interactions of each arterial layer will be
analyzed in the areas of deformation, stress, and morphology of elastin and
collagen fibers. The significance of the results will explain the role of
elastin and collagen fibers in responding to in-body and out-body loading
conditions. The proposed research will provide better understanding of
mechanical loads on the microscopic architecture of the artery for medical
device research and development including machining processes for removing
arterial plaque.