* 1515149
* EAPSI: Investigating the Purpose of the Conspicuousness Coloration and its Relationship with Self-Synthesized Toxins in Australian Frogs
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Justin Lawrence, Lawrence                Justin         P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,544.00

Warning coloration (conspicuous coloration coupled with a negative consequence
such as toxins) is a common defensive strategy throughout the animal kingdom.
The best examples of warning coloration in vertebrates come from amphibians.
Despite how common warning coloration is, little is understood about how it
evolves and diversifies. Traditional evolutionary theory dictates that predator
cognition should constrain diversification of warning signals, but a number of
species exhibit a wide variety of signals both within and among populations.
While collaborating with Dr. Michael Mahony (University of Newcastle) and Dr.
Stephen Donnellan (University of Adelaide) in eastern Australia, this project
will examine the evolution and diversification of conspicuous coloration in a
group of small, toxic frogs (Pseudophryne). This project will elucidate 1) the
purpose of conspicuousness coloration in this genus and 2) how predators can
influence diversification of color signal in a group of Australian endemic
frogs.

By using clay models to mimic phenotypes found in Pseudophryne, this project
aims to understand if 1) dorsal coloration acts as warning coloration, 2)
ventral coloration acts as warning coloration or disruptive coloration, and 3)
how predators generalize to color signals based on past experiences with local
forms. Clay models will be placed on transects in areas where Pseudophryne are
found to allow predators accustomed to local forms to prey upon models. Models
will be placed either on natural or white backgrounds to determine if signals
are warning coloration or not. Models will be collected and scored for type of
predator attack based on dentition left in the plasticine clay. This will allow
for the determination for what predators may be influencing color evolution in
this group as well as how they react to novel signals. Pseudophryne are the only
group of frogs that synthesize their own alkaloid toxins, which are common in
other aposematic animals, but derived by diet. This research has implications
for understanding how mode of toxin acquisition may influence the evolution of
warning signals. Findings of this research will be applicable to a number of
aposematic species around the world.

This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australia Academy of
Scienc