* 1515343
* EAPSI: Polarized Waves and Chiral Wallpaper Groups
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Sarah Kostinski, Kostinski               Sarah          V
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Periodic 2D patterns consist of repeating units in the plane (e.g. a
checkerboard) and can be made of metallic structures, such as antenna arrays,
which are engineered to have specific optical properties. Such patterns can be
classified into 17 types, known as ?wallpaper groups,? based on reflection,
translational, and rotational symmetries. This project will investigate how
these pattern symmetries, made by a technique known as colloidal lithography,
affect their optical properties (i.e. scattering of light). The findings will
contribute to the design of novel optical materials and advance applications of
colloidal lithography. The research will be conducted in collaboration with
Professor Yuri Kivshar, a noted expert on optics, at the Australian National
University in Canberra, Australia.

Colloidal lithography is a scalable technique in which colloidal crystals serve
as masks for patterning planar substrates with, e.g., metallic nanostructures
and is therefore useful for making 2D optical metamaterials. The project will
focus on the interplay between their wallpaper symmetries and polarization of
the incident light. Specifically, the presence of circular dichroism and
birefringence in scattering of polarized waves by chiral planar patterns will be
theoretically examined.

This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of
Science