* 1515404
* Collaborative Research: Cross-correlation of WISE quasars with the Planck CMB lensing maps: A new probe of black holes and large-scale structure
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Adam Myers, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 10/31/2017
* USD 176,197.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. One important aspect of understanding galaxy formation and evolution
is to study supermassive black holes (SMBHs) at the centers of galaxies and how
these SMBHs are linked to their host galaxies. Another major question in
astrophysics involves the concept of "dark matter," an unidentified type of
matter believed to have the properties of gravitation but not to emit any light
(hence, "dark"). Thereby addressing two major astrophysical problems, this
project aims to link SMBHs to the dark matter structure of their host
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All-sky surveys with the Wide-Field Infrared
Survey Explorer (WISE) and Planck cosmic microwave background (CMB) satellite
have now produced groundbreaking data sets, which are used together to obtain
constraints on the evolution of structure in the Universe. WISE uncovered
millions of the previously "hidden" obscured quasars, rapidly growing
supermassive black holes that are shrouded in gas and dust and so are not
detectable using traditional ground-based optical and near-IR techniques.
Recently, Planck produced the most precise all-sky map to date of dark matter
structures via the lensing of the CMB. This project will combine these data sets
along with ground-based imaging and spectroscopy to obtain a uniquely powerful
measurement of the link between rapidly growing black holes and their host dark
matter structures by cross-correlating the density field of WISE-selected
quasars with the CMB lensing convergence maps obtained from
Planck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this project will use astronomy to
build problem-solving intuition in students through order-of-magnitude (OOM)
estimation, or "Fermi Problems." Building on successful OOM activities in
introductory astronomy courses at Dartmouth College, the investigators will
develop OOM exercises for use at the middle, high school, and undergraduate
levels, in which real-world estimation problems are combined with more abstract
questions based on astronomical concepts. The investigators will organize
workshops in which teacher participants learn to incorporate OOM activities in
their classrooms and help develop new OOM exercises. Both Dartmouth and the
University of Wyoming are located in rural areas, and the investigators will
focus on under-resourced schools. By developing OOM exercises and instructing
teachers in implementing them in their classrooms, this project will serve to
foster students' problem-solving intuition. These skills are particularly useful
when applying scientific or mathematical thinking to real-world problems, and
success in problem solving will help create enthusiasm and future opportunities
for students in STEM. The exercises and teacher reference materials produced by
this program will be disseminated to the wider educational community via the
web, conferences, and publications, providing a resource for all interested
instructors at multiple levels to incorporate OOM activities into their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will (1) produce the first all-sky
measurement of quasar clustering bias using the WISE and Planck data, and (2)
directly compare the halo masses of obscured and unobscured quasars, using wide-
area deep optical imaging from the Dark Energy Survey (DES) and SDSS, and
measure the evolution of those biases with redshift, using a technique
independent of spatial clustering. This project will enable a significant step
forward in our understanding of the cosmic evolution of black holes and their
host halos, and will yield valuable tools for future studies with WISE, Planck,
and upcoming ground-based surveys.