* 1515550
* Using Big Data and Visual Analytics to Investigate the Long-term, Cascading Effects of Informal STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Hasan Jamil, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,999.00

In concert with the overall strategy of the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding
of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments,
Principal Investigators from Oregon State University, University of Idaho, and
University of Texas at Dallas, will study a range of data in online social
networks to identify evidence of the long-term impact of informal STEM
education. Tracking informal learners over time to understand the impact of
informal learning experiences has been a longstanding, daunting, and elusive
challenge. Now, with massive amounts of data being shared and stored online,
education researchers have an unprecedented opportunity to study such data and
apply data analytics and visualization technologies to identify the long-term,
cascading effects of informal STEM learning. Research findings will inform the
design and development of a data-analysis tool for use by education
practitioners to improve STEM learning experiences online, through television
and film, and at informal education institutions. An independent external
critical review board of learning scientists, computer scientists, engineers,
informal STEM education practitioners, participating partners, broadcast media
professionals, and policymakers, will ensure a robust evaluation of the research
and effectiveness and utility of the data analysis tool to improve practice. A
summary report for the field will be written on the scientific and practical
reliability and validity of the research and data-analysis model, and the value
of the work for audiences beyond informal STEM education practitioners and
policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is contemporaneously relevant,
advancing innovative use of data-mining and data-analysis processes to better
understand how informal learners communicate STEM learning experiences and
interact with STEM content over time, across a range of social networks.
Investigators will research: 1) whether learners who engage in informal STEM
education experiences further their learning through discussions and sharing of
information in social media networks, 2) which types of data are present in
social media that are relevant for understanding the cascading impacts of
learning over time, and 3) how learning may evolve independently within shared
social networks, which, if discovered, could provide a predictive computational
model with implications for significant impact across both formal and informal
education. Investigators will employ existing and modified data crawlers to
search for key terms and phrases, assess spikes and deformations in posts,
queries, and blogs, and experiment with their test data to find which types or
configurations of keywords or search terms deliver the most reliable and
accurate results. A variety of formats will be explored to test various
strategies with participating partners and practitioners. Data will be
visualized to represent the following dimensions of learning: a)
Interest/Affect, b) Recommendations, c) Understanding/Knowledge-Seeking, and d)
Deeper Engagement.