* 1515957
* Characterizing astrospheres created by winds from low-mass binaries interacting with the ISM
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Hans Mueller, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 292,109.00

The investigator will numerically model the environment around stars that are
gravitationally bound to each other rather than in isolation. This question is
important because most stars are found in pairs or multiple star groups, not
isolated like our Sun. The investigator notes that our nearest stellar
neighbors, Alpha, Beta and Proxima Centauri are in a group of stars. This
proposal will explore the conditions that any planets around these stars may
experience due to the interaction of the outflows of material from the stars.
The investigator will model the environmental conditions in multiple-star
systems; the models can be tested by appropriate observations of the Centauri
group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will strongly connect
undergraduate students with this research project. The investigator will also
mentor first year undergraduate students, who will work on this project through
the auspices of the "Women in Science Project" at Dartmouth College. This
program encourages more women to pursue a career in STEM through early exposure
to hands-on research experience, role modeling, and mentoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will study the region of interaction of
stellar winds with the surrounding interstellar medium; a region the
investigator calls the 'astrosphere'. In particular, the research focuses on
astrospheres of binary stars, which have the additional feature of wind-wind
interactions between the two stellar winds. Both the wind-wind and the wind-ISM
interactions produce shocks and associated radiation/particle interactions. The
investigator?s central theme is the ramifications for any planets that might be
associated with the system. Effects can include the planet's thermal and
chemical atmosphere structure, and over the long-term erosion of the planet's
atmosphere, as is thought to have happened with Mars. The interaction of
magnetized solar winds with the planet's magnetic field also affects cosmic ray
transport and exposure Such effects are important for shaping the expected
properties of a planet's atmosphere, and studies of those atmospheres will
become important during the coming years when current lists of recently
discovered exoplanets will be observed in more detail.