* 1515494
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of Wound-healing at the Single Cell Level using Microfluidics-based Microsurgery
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Wallace Marshall, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2018
* USD 249,999.00

Wound healing is critical for survival in all living things, including humans.
It is also the key feature that distinguishes living from non-living matter. Due
to the small size of a cell, a key challenge is the lack of a tool that can
wound cells in a systematic and scalable manner. The goal of this project is to
employ a new micro-engineering platform and to establish a standardized
procedure for wounding cells and for measuring the healing efficiency. This
platform enables the study of the molecular and mechanical mechanisms that
underlie wound healing. The broader significance and importance of this project
is the understanding of the way cell repairs wounds and restores its normal
function for survival. It will provide insights into how a cell knows that it
has been injured, what mechanisms it uses to start the healing process, and how
it knows when healing is complete. The Broader Impacts of this work include a
graduate summer course, outreach activities for K-12 students, and outreach
activities for the general public at the Bay Area Science
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wound healing is essential for maintaining
homeostasis and, ultimately, for survival. Cells, such as skeletal muscles, are
wounded regularly under physiological conditions. Understanding wound response
at the single-cell level is critical for determining fundamental cellular
functions needed for cell repair and survival. Key barriers to answering these
questions are the lack of a tool that can introduce wounds reproducibly to a
large number of cells and a quantitative assay to measure healing efficiency.
The goal of this project is to investigate the mechanisms underlying single-cell
wound healing, by employing a microfluidic platform and using Stentor coeruleus
as a model organism. Stentor coeruleus, a single cell capable of recovering from
drastic wounds within 24 hours, is selected as a model because of its robust
wound healing capacity, and the ability to perform gene knockdown experiments in
a high throughput manner. The project objectives are to: 1) establish standard
assays to wound cells in a reproducible manner using a continuous-flow
microfluidic splitter, and to quantify the healing efficiency of cells, 2)
investigate the molecular pathway of wound healing by examining gene expression
during the healing process, and 3) profile the changes in the mechanical
properties of the cell during the healing process. The significance and
intellectual merit of this project lies in the elucidation of the molecular
mechanisms underlying single-cell wound healing and the corresponding changes in
the physical and mechanical properties of the cell. The transformative potential
of this project is the novel application of microfluidics to generate
controllable wounds at the single-cell level in a reproducible manner. The
collaboration between Marshall Lab with expertise in cell biology and Tang Lab
with expertise in microfluidics creates unique opportunities to solve high-
impact problems at the interface of engineering and life sciences not possible
in a traditional single-discipline project. The broader impact of this research
is development of a powerful experimental model for understanding how single
cells repair and maintain homeostasis. The project will identify factors that
trigger the initiation of the healing response, and the cascade of molecular and
physical processes a single cell employs to heal and restore normal cell
function. Furthermore, the work will enable the elucidation of how healing
relates to other important cell functions such as morphogenesis, as well as how
single cell-level and tissue-level healing are related and coordinated.