* 1515243
* EAPSI: Assessing Paleoclimate Using Ice Age Amphibian and Reptile Communities from Southern Chinese Caves
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Hannah Darcy, Darcy                   Hannah         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The project will investigate fossil remains of frogs, salamanders, and reptiles
from caves in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region in southern China. Research will
be conducted in collaboration with cave expert Dr. Changzhu Jin and
paleoherpetologist Dr. Yuan Wang at the Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and
Paleoanthropology (IVPP) in Beijing, China. IVPP will provide access to
previously-collected cave sediments, including some fossils available for
immediate examination and additional fossils to be produced by sediment
processing at IVPP during the course of the investigation. These sediments
record multiple ice ages as well as the intervening warmer periods. Because
amphibians and reptiles have specific temperature and moisture requirements,
understanding what animals lived in southern China during these extreme climatic
events will aid in reconstructing paleoclimate. Predictions of future climate
change utilize paleoclimatic data to generate more robust models to inform
mitigation policies for water resource availability and agricultural practices.
The project will investigate fossil herpetofauna from Pleistocene deposits in
caves from Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region in southern China. Previously
collected sediment will be available at IVPP. Some fossils will have already
been recovered, and work will begin immediately to identify the remains. Further
work will require wet-sieving and screening of sediment, allowing intermittent
drying to fully breakdown clays. Recovered bones will be sorted under a
microscope according to taxon. Preliminary identifications of all fossil will be
made in Beijing; identifications will be confirmed utilizing the modern
comparative collection at East Tennessee State University. Environmental
requirements of modern taxa will be used to approximate Pleistocene climate in
the region. Amphibians are more sensitive to climate change than reptiles, and
their range changes can be used to predict the severity of future climate
change. Understanding their response to the dramatic changes of the Pleistocene
will allow for more robust prediction models. This NSF EAPSI award supports
research by a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.