* 1515145
* EAPSI: Development of a Novel Method for Monitoring Marine Ecosystem Health Using Red Carotenoid Coloration of Copepods Under Current and Projected CO2 Levels
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Ryan Weaver, Weaver                  Ryan           J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Aquatic pollutants affect marine animals by inhibiting key physiological
processes necessary for normal growth and development. Moreover, projected
climate changes may exacerbate the effects of existing stressors on marine
ecosystem health. In collaboration with Dr. Yung-Che Tseng, assistant professor
of marine organismal physiology and climate perturbation at National Taiwan
Normal University, this project will examine the effects of heavy metal toxicity
under current and projected CO2 levels on the health of an abundant marine
copepod that has bright red carotenoid coloration. Production of red carotenoids
is sensitive to environmental stressors, thus, the ability copepods to produce
red pigments will serve as a measure of physiological stress induced by
environment pollutants. Using carotenoid color as a proxy for environmental
stress will provide a simple, inexpensive, and informative measure of marine
ecosystem health. The outcome of the proposed research may greatly benefit
society by providing a novel way to monitor the health of the world?s oceans.

Understanding how cellular responses to environmental stressors manifest in the
phenotypes of marine animals will greatly increase our capacity to monitor
marine ecosystem health. The marine copepod Tigriopus japonicus is abundant
along the Eastern Coast of Taiwan and has been well studied in ecotoxicology.
However, the use of its bright red carotenoid coloration as a biomarker for
environmental stress has largely been unexplored. Copepods will be exposed to
sub-lethal doses of copper under current or elevated CO2 levels in a 96-h acute
toxicity test. Mitochondrial function, copper content and carotenoid content
will be analyzed and compared to control groups. As copper concentrations
increase copepod coloration is expected to decrease from a rich red color to a
dull orange-yellow color. This effect is expected to increase greatly under
elevated CO2 conditions. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S.
graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.