* 1515795
* Complex Monge Ampere equation, the Kahler Einstein Problem and constant scalar metric problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Xiuxiong Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 353,181.00

As a branch of Mathematics, Differential Geometry studies the shapes of spaces
through distances and angles. The key concept involved is that of a so-called
curvature, the simplest kind being the scalar curvature function on a space. The
extremal cases are often the most interesting to study. In particular, the
existence of a constant scalar curvature metric is of a major importance in
Differential Geometry. It has a strong impact on other fields of sciences such
as physics. For instance, the work of Calabi-Yau directly provided a
mathematical foundation in mirror symmetry. According to A. Einstein, the theory
of gravity can be interpreted as the geometry of the space-time. Therefore, the
research in complex geometry is crucially important in physics and cosmology.
The research proposed here also has impacts on algebraic geometry and partial
differential equations. The project has an integrated education component which
will enable the PI to continue supporting graduate students financially to
pursue their research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, striking progress
has been made in Kaehler geometry, particularly on the existence of the Kaehler-
Einstein metrics and the limiting behavior of the Kaehler-Ricci flow solution,
both in Fano manifolds. More exciting progress will follow after these works in
this and adjacent area. In Kaehler geometry, the focus of the field is now on
the existence of constant scalar curvature Kaehler metrics which is more general
and harder than the existence of the Kaehler-Einstein metrics. This program on
constant scalar curvature Kaehler metrics, which was first proposed by E. Calabi
in 1950s, amounts to solving a 4th-order partial differential equation which
naturally interacts with metric geometry as well as algebraic geometry. In this
project, the PI will study a network of problems centering around the existence
of constant scalar curvature metrics and other related areas. These include some
fundamental problems in complex Monger-Ampere equations, a priori estimates for
constant scalar curvature metrics, metric geometry as well as geometric flow
(the Calabi flow and the Kaehler-Ricci flow).