* 1515459
* EAPSI:Quantifying Effects of Sensor Network Reliability on Modal Identification of a Five-Story Steel Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Thomas Matarazzo, Matarazzo               Thomas         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Structural engineering researchers and practitioners invest an immense amount of
time and money into reliable data acquisition systems with the ambition of
obtaining up-to-date information about the true behavior of existing
infrastructure. However, even state-of-the-art technologies are susceptible to
missing packets, erroneous values, and other malfunctions. The finite
reliability of sensors and data acquisition systems disrupts data-driven methods
designed to extract important structural information. Furthermore, the
likelihood of sensing failures and corresponding incomplete datasets increases
during extreme weather events. This award supports research using large-scale
experiments to discover the true impact of sensor network reliability on the
estimation of important structural features of structural health. The work will
be conducted under the mentorship of Professors Masayoshi Nakashima and Masahiro
Kurata at the world-renown Disaster Prevention Research Institute at Kyoto
University, Japan.

The main hypothesis of this project is despite their missing content, there is a
substantial amount of crucial features available within incomplete datasets.
Without suitable processing methods, this data is often considered damaged
beyond repair then partially or fully discarded, leaving important structural
information unknown. Structural responses of a five-story steel frame will be
measured using a data acquisition system with a low reliability. New techniques
that accurately estimate structural modal properties using incomplete datasets
will be proposed. Central analytical goals of this project will focus on
location-based knowledge in these cases, e.g. the quantification of total
spatial information in terms of total network reliability and individual sensor
reliability. Consideration of this data class in large-scale structural tests is
essential for the development and validation of new computational tools that
extract maximal information using measured responses from existing
infrastructure. The structural health monitoring methods that support incomplete
datasets offer expedited post-event assessments of structural integrity,
permitting prompt notification to engineers, local governments, and society.
This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.