* 1515450
* EAPSI: Studying Exotic Nuclear Matter with a Particle Tracking Detector and Radioactive Beams
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Justin Estee, Estee                   Justin         B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

This award supports preparation and testing of a large detector for an upcoming
experiment at the RIKEN Rare Isotope Beam Facility (RIBF) in Japan. This work
will be performed with Dr. Hiroyoshi Sakurai, Chief Scientist of RIBF. The
detector will be used to study exotic forms of matter produced by colliding
radioactive beams only available at RIBF. Creating exotic nuclear matter in the
laboratory has applications ranging from identifying and treating tumors,
converting waste radioactive material into more manageable forms, to
understanding the reason behind why matter is stable at all. There are hundreds
of chemical elements that may be produced beyond that which can be found on
earth. These elements are related to the naturally abundant elements in that
they are heavy, or lighter, versions of the same element species. By adding or
subtracting neutrons from an element, we can create exotic forms of matter which
have interesting nuclear properties.

One of the future goals in the nuclear science community is to understand the
asymmetric contribution to the nuclear Equation of State (EoS) which relates
pressure, energy, and temperature of nuclear matter. This asymmetric
contribution is related to the cost, in energy, you must pay when moving from
matter that has an equal number of protons and neutrons to unstable, neutron
rich matter. The highest uncertainty of the functional form of the EoS is around
nuclear densities twice that of normal nuclear matter. RIKEN is currently the
only place to access beams with high enough incident energy to produce
collisions reaching this density. This project will prepare a Time Projection
Chamber (TPC) to be operational for an upcoming experiment. In this experiment
we plan to measure the light charged particles produced in these exotic
collisions thus extracting information about the nuclear EoS. This NSF EAPSI
award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science.