* 1515702
* RAPID: Capturing Behavioral Response and Perceived Risk to Ebola Using Social Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Christopher Woolverton, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 12/31/2015
* USD 41,197.00

Affirming the fact that infectious disease respects no geographic boundary,
residents of northeastern Ohio, specifically the Kent State University
community, were faced with a potential Ebola exposure during September 2014 when
nurse Amber Vinson visited relatives who worked on campus. Students, staff,
faculty, and nearby residents responded to the potential risk of Ebola, like
many people around the world, by changing their behavior based on available
information and their perceived risk of infection. This Grant for Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) project will investigate these mechanisms and improve our
understanding of information spread through social media and how it translates
to on-the-ground perceptions and behaviors. This is vital if social media data
are to be used to enhance situational awareness in emergency response and
disease surveillance systems. Within the context of these systems, social media
may provide real-time information to decision makers, emergency responders, and
health officials to speed the process of detection, prevention, control, and
community action, thus benefiting society as a whole by reducing the health and
economic impact of major risk events including epidemics, natural disasters, or
human-caused disasters. In addition, this project will help address disaster
related social vulnerability by identifying how information barriers may
disadvantage certain social groups. Specifically, this project will compare and
contrast the behavior response of those inside a closed system, such as a
university or hospital, to those living outside that system. Expected results
will help inform how to improve equity in critical information flows across
social systems to eliminate such disparities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple
disciplines now regard social media as a lens into social communication, belief,
and action. Yet, little research has been conducted to validate the potential
and pitfalls of these data, in particular, how social and geographic variation
between groups impacts the potential utility of social media as a data source.
This transformative research will consider both these aspects within the
framework of the Protective Action Decision Model for risk communication. By
examining the linkages between the flow of information and the change in
behavior in response to a major risk event, this project addresses an unresolved
fundamental question: are data from the social media platform Twitter
representative of on-the-ground perceived risk and behavioral response? This
project addresses this question by validating Ebola-related tweets on and around
campus with two timely surveys fielded to almost 60,000 people designed to
collect risk perception and behavioral response data. Expected results will not
only improve situational awareness for various scenarios including epidemics,
and natural or human-caused disasters, but also advance theory surrounding each
by validating social media as an appropriate data source. We will advance
understanding of communication flow across socioeconomic, institutional,
geographic, and physical-virtual boundaries for an at-risk community. Outcomes
will be used to inform theoretical development across the disaster and health
sciences, and general risk communication using social media by revealing the
utility, nuance, and limitations of social media as a data source.