* 1515737
* RUI: Adaptation of MCH Receptor Function During Differentiation of Adipocytes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Laurie Cook, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2019
* USD 409,145.00

The control of hormone signaling before, during, and after cell maturation
requires an intricate program of coordinated activities. During growth and
development, tissues undergo expansion and specialization to adapt to the
physiological needs of the animal. Variations in cell-to-cell responsiveness
within a tissue depends on the portfolio of proteins available for signaling
cellular change. Cell sub-compartments, or microenvironments, may enhance or
desensitize signals according to environmental cues. This project tests the
hypothesis that melanin-concentrating hormone, or MCH, signals changes as a fat
cell matures, and that MCH also participates in the fat cell maturation process.
Results will enhance our understanding of the interplay between appetite
signaling and fat storage. Hands-on student learning is emphasized through
independent research experiences, and by providing an interdisciplinary
framework that engages undergraduate and Masters students in the scientific
method and technological advances in receptor biology, within the context of
human obesity. Basic research on the development of adipose tissue is relevant
to biology, medicine and food science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To gain a more
complete understanding of how cells respond to G protein-coupled receptor
(GPCR)-derived signals, the role of membrane microenvironments must be
considered; that individual sub-populations of proteins may vary across
different regions of the cell, and that differentiation alters those
microenvironments. The differentiating 3T3-L1 adipocytes and the GPCR signaling
pathway were chosen as a signaling microenvironment. It is targeted by melanin-
concentrating hormone (MCH), which signals appetite in many mammals. This
project specifically addresses the following Aims to increase understanding of
the function of the MCH receptor (MCHR)1 in different cellular contexts: 1)
Determine the importance of MCHR1 localization to primary cilia in
differentiating pre-adipocytes; 2) Analyze MCHR1 signals that could promote
expansion and proliferation in of adipose tissue; and 3) Analyze localization
and trafficking of MCHR1 in 3T3-L1 cells in different states of cellular
differentiation. Biochemical isolation methods, RNA Seq, mass spectrometry,
immunodetection and confocal microscopy will be used to accomplish these aims.
Experiments are designed to enable the participation and success of
undergraduate and Master's research students.