* 1515456
* Quantitative Cell Geometry - Defining Cell State at the Organelle Level
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Wallace Marshall, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 06/30/2019
* USD 899,997.00

Cells are complex machines filled with molecules that can perform simple logic
functions like the circuits inside a computer. Many cells can perform complex
behaviors such as engulfing other cells, movement towards a source of food, and
remembering past events. Even though most cellular components are believed to be
discovered, it is still unclear how the molecules in a cell work together to
perform relatively complex actions. This project seeks to solve the problem by
applying concepts from theoretical computer science to understand how the cell
switches from one activity to another. This will open up new possibilities for
re-engineering cells by reprogramming their internal controls. This research
program will create novel educational and outreach opportunities based on
exposing students from a variety of scientific backgrounds, as well as members
of the public with interests in electronics and computer hobbies, to the idea
that cells can be viewed as computing machines; therefore awareness of
quantitative cell biology among the next generation of engineering students will
increase. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While general understanding of the molecular
biology of cells is constantly increasing, it has proven difficult to integrate
this molecular scale information into a global view of how cells make decisions
and perform complex behaviors like migration, phagocytosis, and division. The
goal of this project is to connect the huge gap in complexity and detail from
the molecular scale to the level of cell behavior by using concepts from
computer science. In computer science, the highly complex details of electronic
circuitry can often be understood, analyzed, and designed by using abstract
models in which a complex system is represented by a finite set of states,
allowing behavior to be represented by transitions between states. Such models
are called finite state automata and they are the most fundamental
representation of a computing device. In this project cells are described as
finite state automata, by using organelle size measurements to identify and
define distinct states. It is hypothesized that an organelle-level state
description will allow for the reduction of the dimensionality of the state
space from millions of dimensions corresponding to individual molecules in the
cell down to a much smaller number of dimensions based on organelle
morphological measurements that are readily observable in living cells. Large
numbers of cells will be imaged at high resolution, numerical descriptors of
each organelle will be described, and a state space for cellular organization
will be defined using statistically rigorous methods to define states and state
transitions. The investigators will explore how chemical and mechanical inputs
to the cell drive transitions within this state space, thus providing a way to
view the cell as a type of finite-state automaton. Such a representation will
also provide a framework for synthetic biology applications in which the
regulatory pathways that determine state transitions could be re-wired to
produce different behaviors, essentially turning a single cell into a
programmable microdevice. The conceptual framework of the cell as a decision-
making computational device will be harnessed to present outreach exhibits at
Maker Faires, which are an ongoing series of events that bring together
electronics, computer, and crafts hobbyists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is co-funded by the program in Cellular Dynamics and Function in the division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological Sciences and
the programs in Statistics and Mathematical Biology in the division of
Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate of Mathematics and Physical Sciences.