* 1515312
* EAPSI:Aerodynamics and Stability of Hawk Inspired Ornithopter Utilizing a Multi- Degree of Freedom Wing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Alexander Matta, Matta                   Alexander
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,311.00

In recent years the field of flapping flight has grown dramatically as flapping
allows an aircraft or animal to achieve flight at low air speeds. The efficiency
of flapping mechanisms at these low airspeeds makes them well suited for
incorporation into the design of drones, more specifically micro air vehicles.
This project aims to study the aerodynamics and stability of a hawk inspired
aircraft to see how changes in wing motion effects performance of the aircraft.
This research will be conducted at KAIST in Daejeon, South Korea in
collaboration with Dr. Jae-Hung Han, an expert in the field of biologically
inspired flight.

Larger birds such as eagles, hawks, and gulls are known for their low energy
consumption during cruising flight. These birds are believed to use four degrees
of freedom (DOFs) per wing, more than smaller, less energy efficient birds, and
thus this project?s focus is on quantifying how change in design complexity,
determined by the number of degrees of freedom (DOFs) in the wing, effects
flight performance of an ornithopter. Flight performance in this scenario is
dependent on magnitude of body forces (lift and drag), energy consumption, and
stability of the ornithopter. This investigation aims to assess these three
areas on an experimental ornithopter with a total of four DOFs per wing in which
between one and three of the DOFs can be removed through locking mechanisms.
Body forces as well as energy consumption will be measured during wind tunnel
tests. Stability will be examined in a special facility at KAIST called KARPE,
an indoor positioning facility with motion capture system. Ultimately the
results of this study can be used to validate analytical models and
computational studies that try to isolate the contribution of each DOF. This
award is funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.