* 1515002
* Light Quality and Quantity Inputs Into Phytochrome-Dependent Regulation of Anterograde Signaling, Photosynthesis and Growth During Photomorphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Beronda Montgomery, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

Light is an important stimulus that triggers gene expression in biological
organisms. The light dependent gene expression needs to be coordinated in
different parts of the plant for efficient light harvesting and plant
development. In this project, investigators will investigate how the proteins
that perceive light (photoreceptors) in plants control a number of light
dependent growth and development responses that occur in different parts of
individual plant cells. The investigators will use bioinformatic, genetic and
molecular approaches to examine different mechanisms of light triggered control
of gene expression. In addition to training undergraduates, graduate students
and postdoctoral scientists, broader impacts of the research include
contributing to the understanding of how plants use light-dependent
photoreceptors to tune chloroplast function to changes in the external
environment. Such understanding is a prerequisite to allowing targeted
regulation of plant photosynthetic efficiency and tuning of productivity. The
project also includes structured mentoring in hands-on research of
undergraduates from groups underrepresented in the sciences.

The theory that plant photoreceptors provide quantitative and qualitative
control over distinct anterograde signaling networks from the nucleus to plastid
to tune plastid protein-pigment content and plastid function to the external
environment will be tested. The specific mechanisms by which phytochromes
influence expression of nuclear-encoded sigma factors to match expression of
nuclear and plastid genomes will be explored using bioinformatic analyses
together with network modeling to build and test a signaling network responsible
for phytochrome regulation of chloroplast development, tuning of photosynthesis
and photomorphogenesis. Additionally, sigma factor-dependent effectors will be
identified through transcriptomic and gene discovery approaches and
characterized through plant phenotyping. In addition to the essential training
of students and postdoctoral scholars, broader impacts of the research include
investigating quantitative phytochrome-regulated processes to allow targeted
regulation of phytochrome-mediated plant responses. A training component of the
research is designed to develop the ability of undergraduate science majors and
students from underrepresented groups, including women and underrepresented
participants, to think analytically and critically through the participation in
hands-on research. The project will include participation as a host lab for the
Michigan State University Plant Genomics Summer Research Experience for
Undergraduates, a program for visiting undergraduates from underrepresented
groups and small and/or research-limited institutions.