* 1515220
* Collaborative Research: Integration of metabolic cues and life cycle decisions in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* James Umen, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2019
* USD 700,000.00

Single-celled organisms, such as protists and bacteria, inhabit fluctuating
environments where nutrient availability isn't always guaranteed. To cope with
this "feast or famine" uncertainty, cells have evolved processes that allow them
to respond appropriately by growing and dividing when nutrients are present
(proliferation), or by becoming dormant and adopting an energy-conserving state
when starved (quiescence). This project utilizes a single-celled reference
organism, the green alga Chlamydomonas, to investigate how molecular switches
that govern proliferation and quiescence are controlled and how they are
coordinated to ensure that they don't interfere with each other. Microorganisms
like these can accumulate large quantities of valuable compounds, e.g. oils, but
only when starved. It is anticipated that knowledge about the molecular switches
governing transitions between the states of proliferation and quiescence will
allow predictions about how these states can be controlled and engineered. Thus,
newly discovered details about these molecular switches provide potential
engineering strategies to uncouple high yields of valuable compounds from
starvation responses. Students and postdoctoral fellows from the two research
locations will collaborate to identify and model the interactions between key
regulators of quiescence and proliferation that have counterparts in many other
species including plants and animals. The diversity of approaches and
quantitative training components prepare the trainees for science careers in
industry or academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this project
is to gain a predictive understanding of how nutrient and metabolic cues are
integrated into coherent decisions that control life cycle state transitions. In
the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, two nuclear protein
complexes, CHT7-C and RB-C, have been identified that govern the transitions
between nutrient-deprivation induced quiescence, cell growth, and commitment to
cell division. It is hypothesized that the quiescence regulator CHT7-C, and the
cell cycle commitment regulator RB-C form an interlocking transcriptional
network that coordinately controls cell growth and division responses to
nutrient or metabolic cues. The objectives of this project are to: (1)
characterize purified CHT7-C and RB-C complexes in order to define their subunit
composition and modifications under different life cycle states; (2) Identify
CHT7-C and RB-C target genes followed by generation of a transcriptional network
model to observe common nodes that functionally couple the two complexes; (3)
combine mutations affecting different components of the two complexes into
isogenic lines to obtain synthetic phenotypes that provide insights into
function and interrelation of the two complexes in vivo; and (4) build a
testable logic switch model and develop quantitative markers to test and revise
the model. The collaborative approach taken for studying the interactions
between quiescence and cell proliferation regulators is aimed at transforming
the understanding of the networks that establish and maintain coordinated global
responses to metabolic and nutritional cues.