* 1515410
* EAPSI: Determining the Effects of a Changing Global Climate on the Early Life Stages of Jellyfish
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Laura Treible, Treible                 Laura          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Jellyfish are important organisms in many coastal systems. Blooms of jellyfish
have implications for coastal food webs, including voracious consumption of
mesozooplankton, as well as recycling nutrients within the water column and
contribution to benthic production. Despite little data, jellyfish are
frequently claimed to be robust to many environmental stressors. Interactive
effects of multiple climate stressors must be studied to determine what will
realistically happen to these organisms with a changing climate. As with any
organism, the health and survival of early life stages is a major factor
determining the size of the adult populations. The growth and survival of early
life stages can directly determine the size of adult populations, but most
jellyfish research has focused on the adult forms, or medusae. This study will
determine the combined or interactive effects of environmental stressors on
jellyfish polyps, the early life stage which directly determines the size of
adult populations. This research will be conducted under mentorship of Dr. Kylie
Pitt, one of the top global jellyfish scientists, at Griffith University School
of the Environment in Gold Coast, Australia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In hypoxic
waters, pH will decrease due to enhanced respiration. Even under normal oxygen
conditions, if CO2 concentrations are high, organisms are not able to respire
normally despite the normoxic conditions. Thus, it is essential to look at the
interaction of acidification and hypoxia, because in nature they occur
concurrently. This study will test the response of Catostylus mosaicus polyps to
hypoxia, reduced pH (i.e. more acidic conditions) and the synergistic effect of
both, by determining changes in rates of growth, asexual reproduction, and
respiration. In addition to results specific to forecasting localized jellyfish
blooms, data produced from this project will allow direct quantification of the
response of jellyfish polyps to a changing climate; information which can be
built in to climate and ecosystem models. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in
collaboration with the Australian Academy of Science.