* 1515436
* EAPSI: Elucidating the Role of SYP132A during Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Symbiosis in Oryza Sativa
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Christina Stonoha, Stonoha                 Christina
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Plants often recruit soil microbes in order to enhance nutrient availability and
absorption by an assortment of mechanisms. Nitrogen-fixing (NF) symbiosis and
arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbiosis are two important examples. NF symbiosis
has major growth effects on the crops that can form this relationship such as
soybean, common bean, pea, peanuts, alfalfa, etc., while AM symbiosis can do the
same for many crops that form this symbiosis such as maize and rice. Rice (Oryza
sativa), specifically, can have a significant grain yield increase when
inoculated with mycorrhizal fungi because of the enhanced nutrient uptake. This
can be especially important in parts of the world that rely on this particular
crop for the majority of its calories. This award supports research to
investigate the role of the SYP132A gene in rice (Oryza sativa) by defining the
mycorrhizal phenotype of rice SYP132A mutants.The research could ultimately shed
light on a fundamental process in rice (AM symbiosis) that has the potential to
greatly increase yield if optimized. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Ertao Wang, an expert in AM symbiosis in rice, at the
Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology in Shanghai, China.

The nitrogen-fixing (NF) symbiotic pathway in plants evolved from the arbuscular
mycorrhizal (AM) symbiotic pathway, and therefore the molecular mechanisms share
many common elements. Protein trafficking from the plant to the bacteria during
NF symbiosis has been shown to be indispensable, but protein trafficking during
AM symbiosis is most likely important as well. For this proposed project, I will
study the role of a syntaxin gene (SYP132A) in mycorrhizal symbiosis. This gene
was previously identified to have a role in NF symbiosis in M. truncatula,
namely, it specifically marks the membrane surrounding the intracellular
bacteria for targeted protein delivery. I will investigate the function of
SYP132A by characterizing the mycorrhizal phenotype of rice T-DNA mutant lines.
My hypothesis is that this protein marks the membrane that separates host from
the fungus within plant cells. This study will provide evidence that the
function of SYP132A is universal and spans multiple host and microbial species.
This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate student and is
funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.