* 1515005
* CAREER: Material Design and Research Oriented Multidisciplinary Education: Amorphous to Nanocrystalline Electronic Materials with Applications to Thermoelectrics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Daryoosh Vashaee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Amorphous based materials can possess fundamentally different electrical and
thermal properties than crystalline or nanocrystalline forms of the same
material. Although, amorphous materials have found applications and continue to
show promise for modern technologies, charge carrier and phonon transport in
these materials remain a point of dispute. The lack of long- and short-range
order in amorphous materials leads to complicated interplay between structure
and energy transport. In this project a novel class of electronic materials
based on bulk amorphous structures in the form of amorphous-crystalline
nanocomposites will be developed and their thermal and electrical properties
will be tailored. The application will be focused on thermoelectric materials,
but the results are expected to produce new science applicable to other
functional materials including optical and magnetic materials. Parallel to the
research endeavors, an educational plan will be implemented which incorporates
and develops a new teaching initiative in the upper-division undergraduate
curriculum, involves undergraduates in research, promotes student international
collaborative research, exposes the field of energy materials to the general
public, and provides a resource web-site for advanced thermoelectric material
studies. The available resources in the Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (OK-LSAMP) and Multicultural Engineering Program (MEP)
programs will be used for expanding the participation of minority students and
the recruitment of high school students.

This research plan addresses the essential need for a physical description of
charge and phonon transport in amorphous based materials, characterization of
their structural dependencies, and application of this understanding to enhance
the thermoelectric performance of amorphous and the more complex structure of
amorphous-crystalline nanocomposite materials. The focus will be especially in
the regime where the carriers energy remains at non-equilibrium state due to the
consecutive passage through material domains with different equilibrium energy
distribution of carriers. The multi-mode transport of charge carriers in
extended and localized states in disordered multi component amorphous-
crystalline nanocomposite structures will be addressed. This is a new scientific
problem with many unresolved scientific questions. Further understanding of
charge carrier and phonon transport in such amorphous based materials will
directly impact their material design and offer novel material structures for
electronic applications. Parallel to theoretical studies, an efficient and
scalable top-down approach for synthesizing such structures will be developed.
The material is processed in a single transversal mode microwave cavity that
provides an extraordinary route to create a new state of amorphous materials in
a rather quick and convenient way. The decrystallization process happens by
merely subjecting the solid material to a strong E or H field in the cavity. The
method results in in-situ formation of such structures, which is not possible by
conventional bulk processing methods. This unique capability opens a new
landscape for engineering non-equilibrium structures.