* 1515574
* EAPSI: The Interfacial Relationship of Graphene and Silicon Carbide in Mitigating Radiation Damage
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Shelly Arreguin, Arreguin                Shelly         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Nuclear reactors release zero greenhouse gases in the production of electricity
and they may reduce society's dependence upon natural gas and oil. However,
insights from the Fukushima incident revealed the need to develop more accident
damage tolerant materials. The feasibility of next generation nuclear reactors
depends upon the development of new material systems with increased lifetimes
and accident damage tolerance (a long-term objective of this work). The
opportunity to pursue this research at the University of Queensland (UQ), Center
for Microscopy and Microanalysis (CMM) with Professor John Drennan, an expert in
the field, will give great insight to the low-temperature limit (point defect
swelling) and high-temperature lifetime for the design window of molecularly
designed Silicon carbide (SiC) ceramics. This research will contribute to
current priorities in designing new materials for the next generation of nuclear
power plants that are anticipated to have increased efficiency, minimal waste,
decreased risk of proliferation and increased accident damage tolerance.

A novel class of SiC based nanocomposites have been developed and bombarded with
ions to explore their functionality in mitigating radiation damage. These
ceramics have microstructures and interfaces that are systematically controlled
through tailoring of the molecular architecture of the starting pre-ceramic
polymer. The nanostructured grain boundaries and interfaces will be explored in
their ability to function as sinks for radiation-induced point defects. At UQ,
Small Angle X-ray Scattering will be utilized to determine the size distribution
and densities of the defect clusters associated with the irradiated SiC. The
nature of the radiation-induced defects is only visualized through transmission
electron microscopy analysis, specifically the weak-beam method will allow for
observation of defects and their plane of origin. Professor John Drennan, and
his staff are experts in determining microstructure/physical property
relationships in a wide variety of ceramics using electron microscopy. This
research will allow an atomic level understanding of the relationship of
processing with microstructure properties from radiation damage.

This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Australian Academy of
Sciences.