* 1515734
* RAPID: Understanding and leveraging asymptomatic infections to control Ebola virus transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Juliet Pulliam, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2016
* USD 133,213.00

This research will develop a mathematical model to understand the role of
asymptomatic infections and protective immunity on the spread of Ebola virus.
Based on their previous research the investigators have shown that 20-60% of
people exposed to Ebola virus never develop clinical disease and remain
asymptomatic. It is unclear if a person who is asymptomatically infected gains
protective immunity against future exposure to the Ebola virus. If asymptomatic
infections do offer protection, this could be extremely important in
understanding and reducing the spread of Ebola virus. As part of the project,
the investigators will develop and share easy-to-use, open access modeling tools
that can be utilized by the public health policy and research community.

The research team proposes five specific aims in modeling and understanding
asymptomatic infections. They will design and study public health interventions
that could leverage the effects of this protective immunity. One such strategy
would include modeling a potential workforce comprised of caregivers who have
been asymptomatically infected to establish a viral barrier similar to a ring
vaccination strategy. They will characterize the implications of asymptomatic
infections for vaccine trial design. They will utilize latent process models to
determine if asymptomatic infections contributed to the scope and decline of
previous Ebola epidemics, looking to see if there is a signature of asymptomatic
immunity within an Ebola outbreak.