* 1515291
* EAPSI: Formal Verification of Autonomous Driving Scenarios
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Matthew O'Kelly, O'Kelly                 Matthew        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Reliable and provably safe autonomous systems remain a grand challenge of
engineering because of their potential ability to perform hazardous jobs,
increase task efficiency, and prevent accidents attributable to human error.
Despite these promises, such systems cannot be put into general service because,
there is a lack of plan verification and validation methods for safety and
performance that prevents all but relatively low levels of autonomy from being
certified for use (US Air Force Research Laboratory). Thus, ensuring the safety
of scenarios involving autonomous systems will require a decision control
framework for plan verification and execution that interfaces tightly with
sensing, online estimation, vehicle control and human intervention. Because
autonomous systems are primarily implemented as software, we approach this
problem through the development of rigorous software modeling and design
techniques. This research effort will afford an opportunity to test recent
theoretical advances in autonomous driving scenario verification on a state-of-
the-art autonomous vehicle. The work will be carried out in collaboration with
Dr. Shinpei Kato, an expert in parallel and distributed computing and autonomous
vehicles at Nagoya University, Japan.

Given this motivation, the work is centered on the development of the modeling
and verification foundations for plan execution of autonomous and semi-
autonomous systems, which operate in real-time and in conjunction with human
decision makers. A secondary goal is to make such formal modeling and
verification available and accessible by the larger engineering community
through the development of easy to use tools for describing scenarios,
establishing safety and translating verified properties models to verified code.
To address the above challenges a framework for Autonomous System Plan
verification and Execution (APEX) has been developed. Underlying this tool is a
domain specific language for describing autonomous driving scenarios (agents,
dynamics, topology, traffic rules, safety and efficacy properties). The tool is
built around a theory of scenario composition as well as an automated
abstraction chain, which together, map a graphical mission sketch to formal
descriptions such as timed automata, probabilistic automata and hybrid automata.
These descriptions may then be verified against safety, liveness, and efficacy
requirements. The work at Nagoya University will attempt to demonstrate such
formal modeling within urban driving (lane merging), highway maneuvers
(overtaking and lane switching) and intersection arbitration scenarios. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS).