* 1515998
* Control and Function of Chromatin-Mediated Gene Silencing in Fusarium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Freitag, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2019
* USD 570,000.00

Normal development relies on regulated gene expression, which in many organisms
is achieved by balanced activity of protein complexes that turn genes on or off
at the right time and in the right place. A major unsolved question is how
silencing proteins locate and turn off their target genes. The focus of this
research is to discover how genes are targeted and inactivated by the silencing
protein complex known as the "polycomb group" (PcG) complex. As a study system,
the project will use the fungus, Fusarium graminearum, which has economic
importance as a source of beneficial natural products and biofuels and agronomic
importance as a plant pathogen. Thus, the results of the research could
translate into better methods for manipulating the beneficial traits of the
fungus, while minimizing its negative impact on crop plants. The project will
have educational impacts by providing research training opportunities for
underserved students, laboratory and professional development workshops for high
school science teachers, and science presentations to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses chromatin-based gene
silencing by PcG proteins in a novel model organism, the filamentous fungus
Fusarium graminearum. The work will take advantage of the fact that Fusarium
uses one Polycomb Repressive Complex2 (PRC2) to deliver histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) to specific genes. Preliminary data suggest that the
gene recognition is mediated by PRC2 subunits or by interacting proteins and
that the subsequently modified genes are sequestered as transcriptionally silent
"PRC2 bodies" with clear boundaries to euchromatin. The main objectives of this
project are to uncover the mechanism for PRC2 targeting and to define the
composition of PRC2 complexes. The aims will be achieved by multi-faceted
approaches, including: forward and reverse genetics by undirected selections and
screens, gene deletions, and site-directed mutagenesis; biochemistry by
chromatin immunoprecipitation, genome-wide expression analyses and mass
spectrometry; and cytology by examination of PRC2 bodies in association with
DNA. In combination, these techniques will allow identification and
characterization of PRC2 signals and proteins involved in gene silencing. Novel
components of PRC2-mediated gene silencing in Fusarium will be characterized,
and distribution of H3K27me3 and PRC2 in normal and mutant strains will be
mapped. The research will provide key knowledge on PRC2-mediated silencing in
eukaryotes.