* 1515049
* EAPSI:Identification of Essential Protein Machinery of the Plant Disease-Signaling Pathway
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Alex Corrion, Corrion                 Alex
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Over the past few decades, advances in modern science have allowed researchers
to uncover new mechanisms that were previously undiscoverable. The knowledge
acquired from these advances has proven to be invaluable. The research proposed
herein investigates the underlying biological mechanisms that help to combat
plant disease outbreaks worldwide. At a basic understanding, plants are
generally resistant to most biotic organisms, however the small percentages of
organisms that obtain the ability to cause disease have caused many epidemics
over the years. Disease outbreaks can very in their severity and their economic
impact from instances such as, the Great Irish Potato Famine to fire blight
outbreaks in apple orchards across the U.S. on year-to-year basis. This research
aims to identify new components of the plant disease-signaling machinery that
have been previously undiscoverable due to the technologies available at the
time of the research. The principle investigator will work in collaboration with
Dr. Yasuomi Tada at Nagoya University to utilized rapid purification of many
plant proteins to determine novel protein-protein interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In detail, with the help of Dr. Tada, and his team at
Nagoya University, researchers will aim to identify novel interacting proteins
using the Arabidopsis protein NDR1 as a target. Non-Race Specific Disease
Resistance 1 (NDR1) has been previously shown to be involved in resistance to a
variety of plant virulence mechanisms at the molecular level. The loss of the
NDR1 protein creates plants that are susceptible to bacterial infection at high
levels. It is hypothesized that additional interacting proteins, specifically in
plant plasma membranes, are aiding in the cellular function of the protein NDR1,
and this action is more governed by ?protein complexes? to initiate the cellular
changes necessary for plant resistance to bacterial pathogens. This work will
allow better understanding of plant plasma membrane protein complexes and their
role in innate immunity, allowing this basic research to translate to more
applied applications of plant-microbe interactions. The NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.