* 1515405
* EAPSI: Exploring How Perceptions of Autonomy Influence Cross-Cultural Differences in Cognition
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jesse Harrington, Harrington              Jesse          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1.00

Americans and Chinese think about and perceive the world differently. Americans
often focus their attention on specific objects in their field of vision and
view them as independent from other objects in their environment. Chinese often
focus their attention on all objects in their field of vision and view them as
interdependent with their environment. Why does this happen? In collaboration
with Dr. Shihui Han of Peking University in Beijing, China, an expert in cross-
cultural psychology and social neuroscience, the EAPSI fellow will investigate
why these differences arise. Ultimately, this research will lead to greater
understanding about the causes of cultural differences in cognition and
perception thereby potentially contributing to enhancement of mutual
understanding between nations of distinctive cultures.

This project deals with the hypothesis that the differences in analytic and
holistic cognition between Americans and Chinese result from the social norms of
their respective societies. Chinese society is tighter than American society and
exhibits greater social and institutional punishment for norm deviance, which
should result in Chinese feeling more constraint across contexts. Consequently,
it would be adaptive for Chinese to pay attention to both focal and peripheral
events, cues, and objects and what they mean in relation to other environmental
features. The perceived constraint will be manipulated with a pictorial priming
task to examine the effect on four measures of analytic and holistic cognition.
Findings from these experiments are expected to contribute to the resolution of
an important theoretical debate in cross-cultural psychology that concerns the
basic motivational underpinnings of cultural behavior. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.