* 1515640
* EAPSI: Modeling of Radiation Effects for Advanced Silicon-Based Electronic Systems within Extreme Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Nelson Lourenco, Lourenco                Nelson         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The microelectronic revolution has helped diffuse technology throughout the
globe, leading to a radical shift in the way we share information, conduct
business, and educate ourselves. As applications such as global
telecommunications, weather radar, and satellite navigation (GPS) incorporate
advanced in-orbit electronics, it is pertinent to understand how these systems
operate within a dynamic environment. Wide ambient temperatures and exposure to
ionizing radiation can degrade electronics and generate errors, which if
unchecked, can lead to a catastrophic system failure. This research will serve
as an investigation into the primary reliability issues facing next-generation
electronics within radiation-intense environments. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Kazuyuki Hirose, an expert in advanced
semiconductor fabrication and radiation effects research at the Institute of
Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), a division of the Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA) in Sagamihara, Japan. Ultimately, this collaborative
investigation will help develop new models, which can accurately predict system-
level sensitivities, enabling engineers to envision new design strategies for
ensuring long-term, error-free operations.

This work aims to investigate the effects of semiconductor technology scaling on
the radiation tolerance of silicon-germanium heterojunction bipolar transistor
(SiGe HBT) platforms. Conventional design methodologies for radiation-hardened
electronics rely on multiple system redundancies and metallic shielding, which
come at severe weight and cost penalties. The need for flexible, low-cost
electronics in orbital and deep space applications has brought SiGe technologies
into the spotlight, but the viable long-term capabilities of these modern
platforms within radiation-intense environments remains largely unexplored.
Accurate device models coupled with radiation event simulation techniques are
necessary to provide an effective method to analyze device-level operational
sensitivities and predict the circuit-level and system-level response to these
random transient processes. By expanding these transient models across multiple
SiGe technology nodes and functional biases, a comprehensive, SiGe HBT radiation
model would provide unique simulation capabilities for the design and
fabrication of next-generation, radiation-hard electronics. This NSF EAPSI award
is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS).