* 1515349
* Evolution of Function of Bacterial PecS Family Transcription Factors
* BIO,EF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Anne Grove, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 250,000.00

This project concerns the mechanisms by which adaptation of bacterial plant
pathogens to the host environment contributes to control of gene expression. The
central hypothesis is that stress or nutrient limitation encountered by the
bacterial pathogen upon host infection results in metabolic changes that in turn
lead to expression of genes required for disease progression. Understanding the
steps that lead to virulence gene expression is important for eventual control
of disease progression in economically important plants. This program also
focuses on integrating research and teaching by offering the opportunity for
both graduate and undergraduate students to acquire research experience and
proficiency in techniques associated with bacterial genetics and quantitative
analysis of transcriptional regulation. Graduate students will be integral to
developing these research projects. Undergraduate students will also contribute
to this project, with special emphasis on increasing research access to members
of underrepresented groups. The training of undergraduate students will not only
prepare them for advanced studies, but contribute to the development of a
competitive STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial plant pathogens
encounter stress or nutrient limitation when they colonize host tissues. A
"stringent response" ensues in which global changes in gene activity occur,
favoring expression of genes that contribute to survival (for plant pathogens,
this includes virulence genes). The stringent response depends on production of
"alarmones", such as the phosphorylated guanosine nucleotides commonly referred-
to as (p)ppGpp. This project addresses the hypothesis that purine salvage
pathways are mobilized during the stringent response. The enzyme xanthine
dehydrogenase (Xdh) is critical for purine salvage, and it biases the pathway
towards formation of guanine nucleotides. The first aim of this project is to
address the hypothesis that (p)ppGpp is a ligand for a transcription factor that
represses the gene encoding Xdh in the soil bacterium Streptomyces coelicolor.
Using both S. coelicolor and the plant pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens, the
genes encoding (p)ppGpp synthetases will be inactivated to address the role of
(p)ppGpp in xdh gene activity. DNA binding by purified transcription factors and
the ability of (p)ppGpp to attenuate DNA binding will also be determined. Xdh is
also responsible for producing urate, and another aim of this project is to
address the hypothesis that urate produced during the stringent response in turn
functions as a diffusible messenger to induce expression of genes under control
of the transcription factor PecS, which was originally identified as a master
regulator of virulence gene expression. Expression of pecS and other confirmed
PecS target genes will be examined upon inactivation of Xdh enzyme activity as
well as in strains deleted for the xdh gene to determine the role of urate as a
ligand in vivo. Gene expression analyses in bacterial strains deleted for the
pecS gene will also be implemented to compare the PecS regulons in A.
tumefaciens and S. coelicolor. Thus, a fundamental hypothesis to be tested is
that urate produced during the stringent response functions as a diffusible
messenger and as a ligand for PecS, establishing a novel connection between the
stringent response and the regulation of virulence genes by plant pathogens.