* 1515263
* EAPSI:Evaluating the Performance of Energy By-Products in Cement-Based Waste Forms and Barriers Pertinent to China and the United States
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Janelle Branch, Branch                  Janelle        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

There are persistent challenges to properly managing waste in countries
throughout the world. This study aims to characterize a wide variety of energy
by-products contained in cement-based waste forms, waste barriers and concrete
products pertinent to China and the United States in order to predict material
durability, contaminant retention and environmental safety. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Professor Pin-Jing He, a leading expert in
waste management, and his research team at Tongji University in Shanghai, China.
By assimilating the knowledge of waste management from different countries and
experiences, more efficient experimental techniques and improved material
characterization can be developed for complex waste forms and barriers. Results
from this study will be implemented to support improved decision making tools
for waste management across both countries and to promote beneficial reuse of
these materials which can reduce the carbon dioxide footprint for material
production and the mining of raw materials while ensuring environmental safety.

Degraded and non-degraded waste forms, secondary materials used as supplemental
cementitious materials, and concretes containing these secondary materials will
be analyzed to improve understanding of the physical-chemical microstructure
using a variety of advanced microscopy techniques including scanning electron
microscopy with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS), synchrotron radiation
for micro x-ray fluorescence and micro-x-ray diffraction, and scanning
transmission electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy.
Specifically, the impact of the beam interaction volume in SEM-EDS will be
investigated to better understand the limitations of this type of analysis for
heterogeneous and complex waste forms and barriers. The effect of particle size
and phase composition will be investigated by first analyzing uniform pure
elements and then by analyzing more complex phases including oxides, minerals,
and the waste forms and barriers. Algorithms will be developed to account for
the effect of the beam interaction volume on material analysis. These results
will be used to help characterize the complexity of the waste forms and
barriers, improve material analysis utilizing SEM-EDS, and to better understand
the degradation mechanisms such as carbonation and oxidation which can impact
the long-term performance of these materials. This NSF EAPSI award was funded in
collaboration with the Ministry of Science and Technology of China.