* 1515705
* Mechanisms for Energy Conservation in Onsager Supercritical Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Roman Shvydkoy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2019
* USD 274,483.00

The complexity of turbulent motion of fluids like water presents many
theoretical as well as technological challenges. From the practical standpoint
laws of turbulence are crucial in many real-life applications. They stand behind
the modern design of a plane airfoil or development of weather and climate
forecast models. One of the features of turbulence is called anomalous energy
dissipation. This phenomenon arises when the motion of a fluid is so chaotic or
rough that the the classical laws of smooth dynamics no longer apply. Anomalous
energy dissipation is harnessed in many commonly used energy-dumping mechanisms,
such as automobile wheel struts. Common though it is, in some cases energy
dissipation does not occur even in what otherwise would be considered a flow
turbulent enough to facilitate such dissipation. It has been observed that in
various natural phenomena, such as vortex sheets that develop behind the wing of
a plane, energy dissipation does not occur until motion reaches a supercritical
state. The project goal is to isolate several mechanisms responsible for energy
preservation or dissipation in fluid motion that is turbulent or nearly so. A
main focus is on investigation of the role of symmetries in energy conservation.
Students are included in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator
studies weak solutions to the Euler equation and its viscous Navier-Stokes
counterpart in the vanishing viscosity limit regime, by considering the role of
energy conservation or dissipation in the fluid flows described by these
equations. The equations have been shown to describe turbulence rather
accurately from a numerical point of view, although theoretically they present
many challenges. Following Onsager, in terms of regularity a solution reaches
its turbulent state when smoothness of the flow is reduced to a third of one
full derivative, also known as Onsager regularity. In that regularity regime the
investigator examines four main mechanisms as candidates responsible for energy
conservation or dissipation: Hamiltonian structure of the underlying governing
equation, incompressibility condition, basic scaling symmetries and transport
nature of the motion, and the vanishing viscosity limit in the two-dimensional
setting. The last point connects energy dissipation to regularity of solutions
of the Euler equations. The project involves active participation of students.