* 1515140
* CRCNS: Collaborative Research: Probabilistic Representation of Dynamic Action and Superposition in Spinal Cord Neural Populations - Advancing Theory and Experiment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Simon Giszter, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 304,440.00

The operation of the brain is not 'clockwork', but rather probabilistic. The
project will provide proof of concept data for a new theoretical and
experimental framework that utilizes this feature, by using stochastic dynamic
operators (SDOs). These new methods have potential to significantly improve
predictions of dynamics from recordings of brain function, which in turn would
have significant technological and medical impacts in areas including disease
process diagnosis, disease control using stimulation, robot prostheses and brain
machine interface designs, neural prostheses, and neurally-driven augmentation
or replacement. The project brings together a collaboration between an applied
mathematician/neurologist and a comparative neurophysiologist, and will provide
interdisciplinary graduate and postdoctoral training at the cutting edge of
neuroscience, stochastic methods and control.

Increasing sophistication of brain recording technology is not fully matched by
an equally sophisticated mathematical approach that permits modeling and direct
prediction of the relation between behavior and the activity of neural
populations. For motor systems, the primary goal is control of dynamics in the
environment. The methods under investigation avoid the usual neural separation
into sensory and motor effects. They treat neural activity as representing
probabilistic alterations of unfolding dynamics. More specifically, the SDO
framework considers neural activity as causing a modification of the overall
system dynamics, so that the resulting dynamics (including movement, compliance,
and oscillatory behavior) achieve a desired result. This allows principled
engineering solutions and use of 'big' neural activity to predict dynamics. The
proof of concept proposal will test model prediction responses during trajectory
formation and perturbation in reflex behavior, prediction of real-time effect of
single spikes, and combined effect of multiple neurons/populations. On proof of
concept project completion: (1) The SDO framework will be compared with
classical techniques using novel data sets; (2) Basic feasibility of real-time
robot control from spinal neural activity in a model system will be assessed.
Together, these data will all add significantly to neural analysis,
neurotechnology and understanding of the novel methods in relation to others.