* 1515319
* EAPSI:Typhoon Impacts on Chemical Weathering in a Mountainous Island Watershed in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kevin Meyer, Meyer                   Kevin          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

High standing islands such as Taiwan represent a major source of sediment and
carbon transport to the oceans, but sparse data exist for chemical weathering
rates and weathering sources in these terrains. Almost no data exist on the
impact of typhoons and other extreme weather on chemical weathering rates. This
award supports research that will determine chemical weathering rates within the
Gaoping River watershed, and how they changed in response to Typhoon Mindulle
(2004). It will also use several geochemical tools to constrain the sources of
chemical weathering to the river, and how these sources may change in response
to a typhoon. This research will be conducted under the supervision of Dr. Chen-
Feng You at National Cheng Kung University, an expert in mass spectrometry
techniques necessary for analysis, and an ideal collaborator for this study.
Chemical weathering is a major control on atmospheric carbon dioxide levels over
geological time, and high standing islands have been shown to have some of the
highest weathering rates worldwide, yet the role of local weather in the global
carbon cycle is poorly understood. This study will add new insight into the long
term controls of earth?s climate and carbon cycle.

Determining typhoon impacts on chemical weathering will primarily be
accomplished through geochemical analysis of river waters collected during
Typhoon Mindulle. Different tributaries to the Gaoping River drain rocks with
distinct strontium (Sr) isotope and elemental compositions. Thermal Ionization
Mass Spectrometry will be used to determine Sr isotope ratios, and Ion
Chromatography will be used to determine major ion composition of the river
waters. These analyses will be used to determine the relative weathering inputs
of different lithologies of the watershed. Dissolved silica is commonly used as
a proxy for chemical weathering, and will be measured and used in conjunction
with historical stream gauge records to determine total chemical weathering
input into the river system over the course of the storm. These analyses will be
compared to similar analyses conducted by Dr. You during normal dry and wet
season flow in the Gaoping watershed to determine changes attributable to the
typhoon. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of
Science and Technology of Taiwan.