* 1515471
* EAPSI:  A Next-Generation of Wind Fence with Multi-Scale Fractal Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Sarah McClure, McClure                 Sarah
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Understanding and controlling atmospheric instabilities, such as abrupt air
movements resulting from a storm, is of great interest to those who study fluid
flow as alterations of atmospheric turbulence can be used to reduce strong
winds. It is important, therefore, to understand how engineered structures such
as porous wind fences or windbreaks affect various incoming flows. This research
will explore multi-scale fractal structure-induced turbulence to better control
air currents. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor
Sang Joon Lee of Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), an
expert in quantitative flow visualization, experimental fluid mechanics, bluff
body aerodynamics and bio-fluid flows. Because this study is concerned with
atmospheric turbulence for new-generation wind fences, it is imperative to have
the appropriate laboratory equipment to simulate real-life conditions. The host
laboratory has multiple wind tunnels, including an atmospheric boundary-layer
wind tunnel, and various flow measurement systems, providing an excellent
location to conduct this research. Insights from this research will contribute
to engineering more effective wind fences to limit snow/sand deposition on
critical infrastructure such as roads and bridges and to reduce the overall side
impact of wind on structures themselves.

Previous studies found that a regular mono-scale grid fence of 50% porosity and
a bottom gap of 10% of the fence height are considered to be optimal over a flat
surface. Since significant differences in turbulent structure have been noted
using fractal wind fences with this porosity criteria, the goal of this research
is to advance knowledge on the induced flow structure and the turbulence kinetic
energy transport of 1D and 2D multi-scale fractal fences in atmospheric
boundary-layer conditions. Specifically, whole velocity fields will be
systematically measured around the fractal fences by Particle Image Velocimetry
(PIV) techniques to uncover effects of key parameters of fractal fences on
turbulence for a wide range of Reynolds numbers. Ultimately, this research will
assist design of new-generation fractal wind fences which can extract sufficient
kinetic energy from the mean wind flow to promote snow/sand deposition and
prevent particle remobilization from excessive turbulent stresses. This award is
funded in collaboration with the National Research Foundation of Korea.