* 1515305
* EAPSI:Investigating the Origin and Evolution of Locomotion in the Microalgae Diatoms
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Jennifer Beals, Beals                   Jennifer       M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Diatoms are a diverse group of microalgae responsible for approximately one-
third of atmospheric oxygen and are an important source of essential fatty acids
for both aquatic organisms and for humans. They are abundant in oceans, lakes
and rivers and live either suspended in the water column or attached to other
aquatic substrates; some groups also have developed motility. Recent research
with diatoms has focused on their use for both food supplements and for biofuels
because of both the favorable fatty acid and lipid content, and their fast
growth rate. As this research is relatively new, attempts have been made to
identify commercially useful taxa based on their evolutionary relationship to
other useful species. This study aims to understand the origin and evolution of
the first group of motile diatoms and will be conducted with Dr. Shigeki Mayama
at Tokyo Gakugei University, Japan, who is the world?s expert in this group of
diatoms, and also an expert in diatom growth techniques that are essential to
the study. While significant effort has been made conducting DNA and
evolutionary studies of other diatom lineages, very little effort has been made
to sequence the DNA and understand the evolution of the first motile group.

The origin and evolution of the diatom raphe, which is responsible for motility,
will be investigated by constructing morphological and molecular phylogenies of
early raphid and pre-raphid diatoms. Diatoms within the subclass Eunotiophycidae
are accepted as the first raphid diatoms, however the first raphid genus is
still a point of contention. Lineages that led to the raphid diatoms have also
not yet been identified. The researcher will conduct field studies in Japan to
gather taxa to include in analyses. Collaboration with Dr. Mayama, who is the
world?s expert in Eunotia morphology and culturing techniques, will be an
essential component of the project. This expansion of molecular and
morphological knowledge will be essential to the study, as there is molecular
sequence data in GenBank for less than 1% of the described Eunotia species, and
no data at all for any other genera within the subclass. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.