* 1515358
* Integrating Cybersecurity with Undergraduate IT Programs
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Carolyn Seaman, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,753.00

Cybersecurity has become a matter of national and global importance because of
the economy's dependence on the Internet, and on cyber-infrastructure. Workforce
development through cyber education and training are key towards protecting the
ever-growing cyberspace and cyberinfrastructure. However, US universities are
not graduating nearly sufficient workforce in the IT areas, let alone
cybersecurity. Academic programs in STEM and IT fields are uniquely positioned
to address this need. Tailoring curricula in these areas to include cyber
education can bridge the gap existing between the demand and supply of trained
workforce. Existing certificate programs do not offer a data analytics
perspective along with a software security and network security perspective for
undergraduate curricula. In addition, the existing certificates are not
seamlessly integrated with the existing curriculum towards a bachelor?s degree.
This project is motivated to fill this gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
objective of this project is to increase the capacity in the cybersecurity
workforce by creating, delivering and assessing a new undergraduate certificate
program in cybersecurity. This will include developing a model curriculum and
material for undergraduate cyber education grounded on the pedagogical
literature. In addition, this project will design and develop intervention
strategies using peer mentoring between advanced cybersecurity courses and an
entry level Information Systems course. This will provide a framework for
learning and retention through peer mentoring, early intervention strategies,
group engagement, critical thinking through capstone projects, and
individualized learning of deeper issues in cybersecurity through one-on-one
interactions with faculty. A certificate program will be designed to increase
interest in cyber education as well as increase retention and completion of the
program by undergraduate students. The project will also include qualitative and
quantitative evaluations of the effectiveness of the certificate program. The
certificate program will (a) Develop skills in technical, analytical, software
security, and critical thinking, (b) Allow students to apply the knowledge
gained to projects that simulate real-life problems, (c) Nurture and support
innovative thinking in solving some of the key challenges facing the cyber
world, (d) Expose students to various career opportunities in the cyber industry
and connect them with relevant professional groups, and (e) Increase the
cybersecurity workforce capacity to support this pervasive area with a growing
importance in society. The certificate program will result in products and
outcomes that can be used as a model for adoption in other undergraduate
curricula in computing.