* 1515179
* EAPSI: Modeling the Directional Dependence of Seismic Waves at the Ryukyu Subduction Zone
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Scott Tarlow, Tarlow                  Scott          H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Observations have shown that the speed in which a seismic wave travels through
the Earth's upper mantle can depend on the wave's direction. By replicating
these observations using computational simulations we can learn a great deal
about the material properties of the Earth's interior. Understanding these
material properties is essential in helping scientists predict how the Earth
will change as a body and anticipate natural hazards. This award supports
research to collaborate with Dr. Eh Tan and other experts at Academia Sinica's
Earth Institute in Taipei, Taiwan to simulate the directional dependence of
seismic waves at the nearby Ryukyu Subduction Zone. This collaboration will
allow the PI to work with experts in modeling subduction zones and with scholars
familiar with the subduction zone itself. Subduction occurs when a tectonic
plate thrusts under another tectonic plate, deforming the upper mantle and
generating a lattice preferred orientation (LPO) in the mineral olivine within
the mantle. The mantle is mostly comprised of olivine, and olivine crystals have
different seismic velocities, dependent on their crystal axis. Therefore LPO
develops anisotropic fabrics causing the velocity of seismic waves to have a
directional dependence. The directional dependence of shear waves is used to
infer global mantle flow, which largely aligns with plate motion. However at
subduction zones, seismic anisotropy observations show a complex 3-D pattern,
suggesting that the flow field must also be 3-D. At the Ryukyu subduction zone,
observed lateral variations in the seismic anisotropy cannot be explained by the
development of anisotropic fabrics in 2-D mantle flow models. To constrain the
dependence of seismic anisotropy on slab geometry, we will develop a 3-D mantle
convection model with realistic Ryukyu geometry and calculate the development of
LPO over time. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a U.S. graduate
student and is funded in collaboration with the Ministry of Science and
Technology of Taiwan.