* 1515376
* EAPSI:Real-Time Imaging of the Degradation of Fuel Cell Catalysts
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Thao Ngo, Ngo                     Thao           H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 70.00

Fuel cells constitute a class of devices that generate electricity via chemical
reactions and are a promising source of renewable energy. As such, research on
fuel cells in general and fuel cell catalysts in particular have recently
attracted much interest from academia and industry. Currently, faceted
nanoparticles composed of platinum and another metal such as nickel is
considered to be best performing. However, these catalysts experience decrease
in performance over time due to loss of nickel. Hence recent attention has been
steered toward studying the degradation pathway to improve durability of the
catalysts. Unfortunately, most studies are unable to offer real-time information
of the degradation process. The awarded research will utilize a characterization
technique that offers direct observation at the nanometer scale in real time to
gain insight into the degradation process of fuel cell catalysts. The study will
be conducted collaboratively with Professor Jianbo Wu at Shanghai Jiao Tong
University (SJTU). Dr. Wu, along with his expert knowledge in the design and
synthesis of fuel cell catalysts, possesses the characterization technique
essential to the study. In addition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University houses
several instruments that will aid tremendously in the proposed research.

A liquid flow cell is made of two micron-sized electron transparent chips,
between which the catalyst sample is deposited. The bottom chip is called a
spacer and is of 150nm deep, which allows the passage of reactive solutions. The
top chip is equipped with electrodes, which can be connected to an external
potentiostat for current application. Coupled with the SJTU?s JEOL2100F
Transmission Electron Microscope, which offers resolution down to 0.1nm and
simultaneous rapid composition data acquisition, the liquid flow cell give
researchers an exciting opportunity to understand the behavior of nanostructures
in a dynamic environment in real time. This NSF EAPSI award supports the
research of a U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.