* 1515587
* CRCNS: Community Dynamic Imaging of Corticothalamic Projections
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Robert Kenyon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2019
* USD 750,000.00

Massive amounts of brain imaging data open an unprecedented window into the
structure and function of the brain, yet the tools to aid the understanding of
the data are lagging. The main goal of this research project is to understand
the dynamics of brain function, particularly in the auditory system, through
global yet very high spatial and temporal resolution imaging techniques and
using the state-of-the-art analytical tools developed for analysis of dynamic
social networks. The interdisciplinary neuroscience and computational team,
building on promising initial results, will work to adapt these tools developed
for understanding human and animal behavior to the context of brain networks and
the processes that happen over them. Using this innovative approach, the team
will study a particular brain pathway that connects two brain regions that are
critical for normal hearing. The project will not only lead to a greater
understanding of brain function, but will also bring a new technique to the
neuroscience toolbox which may help other investigators to study network
properties of the brain. Graduate students and postdocs in computer science and
neuroscience will collaborate across disciplinary boundaries, building new
scientific approaches and insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Top-down projections
are ubiquitous in sensory systems and are poorly understood. In the current
proposal, a model descending system, the auditory corticothalamic projection in
the mouse, will be examined. The research team will take advantage of recent
methodological developments in the study of this system and ask: What is the
impact of corticothalamic projections on network interactions across populations
of thalamic neurons? To answer this, a novel dynamic network analysis method
known as Community Dynamic Analysis, or CommDy, will be used to analyze imaging
data from a brain slice preparation that retains connectivity between the
auditory cortex, auditory thalamus, and other related structures in the mouse.
Both calcium imaging data and flavoprotein autofluoresence imaging data will be
used for this analysis. Since this study represents the first use of CommDy in
neuroscience, validation studies will be done in a simplified brain slice
preparation containing bilateral motor cortices and the corpus callosum.