* 1515196
* EAPSI:Reservoir Quality and Distribution of Low-Permeability Sandstones in the Triassic Yanchang Formation and Implications for Hydrocarbon Exploration
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Isaac Allred, Allred                  Isaac
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Low-permeability sandstones, or tight sandstones, can become unconventional
hydrocarbon reservoirs due to hydraulic fracturing. The Late Triassic (228-208
million years ago) Yanchang Formation in the Ordos Basin is the largest
discovered tight sandstone reservoir in China. This research will apply
principles of sedimentology and sequence stratigraphy to interpret a subsurface
data set to create a paleogeographic reconstruction and reservoir
characterization of the Yanchang Formation. This geologic framework will improve
the predictability of the distribution of sandstone reservoirs in the basin. The
continued evaluation of the Yanchang Formation has great significance for
understanding the geologic history of the Ordos Basin and hydrocarbon
exploration. This work will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Bingsong Yu,
a noted expert on the sedimentology and stratigraphy of the Ordos Basin, at
China University of Geosciences, Beijing.

The Yanchang Formation records a variety of terrestrial depositional
environments and the tectonic evolution of the Ordos Basin. Extensive semi-deep
and deep lacustrine (lake) sediments developed in the central and southern parts
of the basin, resulting in mudstone deposition. The sandstones of river mouth
sandbars in the north are composed of fine-grained (125-250 Âµm sand grains),
low-permeability (3-5 millidarcy), arkosic (feldspar-rich) sandstones. These
sandbar hydrocarbon reservoirs are located close in proximity to lacustrine
source rocks. The overlying mudstones formed a regionally extensive seal that
trapped hydrocarbons in the low-permeability sandstones. Modeling based on
seismic reflection and well log data will result in a sequence stratigraphic
framework which will identify time correlative surfaces, the distribution of
sand bodies and the interconnectivity of reservoirs. This NSF EAPSI award is
funded in collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.