* 1515677
* All-Optical Magnonic Spin Torque Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/13/2014,07/31/2017
* Casey Miller, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 137,032.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt; The research objectives of this proposal are to
engineer a series of spin-transfer devices whose torque originates from
thermally generated magnons. It has been predicted that such heat driven spin
torque can lead to quantum yield improvements nearly two orders of magnitude
greater than present state-of-the-art current-drive spin torque devices.
Increasing the usable spin torque with all else constant will have a major
impact on spin torque device technologies. Given the great potential, magnonic
spin torque devices will be fabricated using a combination of thin film
deposition and nanolithography techniques. Device structures will include
magnetic oxide-normal metal-metallic ferromagnet spin valves. The operation and
characterization of device performance will be entirely optical: ultrafast pump-
probe time-resolved Magneto-Optical Kerr Effect to first excite magnons in the
oxide, then observe the resulting magnetization dynamics in the metallic
ferromagnet. The underlying principle of these devices is the transfer of spin
momentum from magnons in a magnetic oxide to the magnetization of a free
ferromagnetic layer. Magnons will be generated in the magnetic oxide layer
(e.g., a spinel ferromagnet) by an femtosecond laser pulse. These magnons will
annihilate at the oxide-normal metal interface (which may contain an additional
layer of magnetic atoms), but their spin momentum will be transferred to
conduction electrons in the normal metal. Thus, a time dependent accumulation of
spin polarized electrons will be generated in the normal metal. The time
derivative of this spin accumulation results in a torque on the metallic
ferromagnet, which emphasizes the importance of using ultrafast optics. Device
performance will be optimized through materials selection, creating and
characterizing interfaces amenable to spin transfer, and investigating relevant
length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The experimental
realization of magnonic spin torque devices whose quantum yield is improved by
nearly two orders of magnitude beyond the present state-of-the-art will have
transformative impact by essentially creating a new class of spin torque
devices. Spin-transfer torque devices in general would benefit from replacing
the high current densities now necessary for operation, as this causes
appreciable heating, and vortex nucleation in the free layer via the unavoidable
Oersted field. Magnonic spin torque would address these issues, allowing
significant improvements in device performance, fabrication requirements, and
reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will integrate teaching and
training of students by unifying techniques and ideas from physics, electrical
engineering, and materials and optical sciences, thereby empowering them with
the multidisciplinary talents necessary to become the next generation of leaders
in academia and industry. An international collaboration will underscore the
importance of global collaborations for modern research. The PIs will continue
to build upon their established records of broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups through a variety of means, including: mentoring
students from USF?s Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation Bridge to the Doctorate Program; educating the community about the
disproportionate filtering of underrepresented groups by certain admissions
policies; organizing summer camps for minority-serving middle schools in
collaboration with the Florida Advanced Technological Education Center (FLATE),
a NSF-ATE Regional Technological Education Center of Excellence. In
collaboration with FLATE and the Hillsborough County School District, additional
effort will help develop a science, technology, engineering, and math proficient
workforce through training workshops for teachers.