* 1515526
* EAPSI:Investigating Timescales of Magma Injection, Storage and Eruption at Hyperactive Volcanoes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Madison Myers, Myers                   Madison        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Studying the products of volcanic eruptions, especially those of highly active
centers, is a crucial step to improving our ability to forecast the mechanisms
that trigger eruptions, and the timescales over which these processes occur.
Volcán Llaima, a hyperactive volcano (54 eruptions in the last 375 years) in the
Andean Southern Volcanic Zone, provides an excellent scientific playground to
test the timescales between increased magmatic activity and eruption. In this
study we will investigate the timescales between magmatic recharge, storage, and
eruption, the evidence of which is preserved as geochemical gradients in
magmatic minerals. By using eruptive products that have been well characterized,
this project will serve as a robust test of how effective diffusional modeling
of compositional profiles can be in understanding the behavior of complex
volcanic systems. These methods will also serve as tools for advancing
predictive monitoring techniques at Volcán Llaima, and be applied to similar
highly active volcanoes.

Research at Volcán Llaima over the last decade has illuminated the overall
complexity associated with its volcanic plumbing systems, resulting in
interpretations for the physical processes that are occurring at depth (e.g.
storage conditions, magma mixing, crystal remobilization). We now have the
capability to pair these extensive geochemical datasets with timescales
information allowing us to achieve interesting information regarding the timing
between magma recharge, mixing, and eventual eruption. In this research project,
we will model diffusion driven compositional profiles preserved in olivine
phenocrysts from the voluminous 1751 and 1780 eruptions of Volcán Llaima, Chile,
allowing for determination of timescales associated with the inferred magmatic
processes based on geochemical evidence. This NSF EAPSI award will be undertaken
using the analytical facilities at the Earth Observatory of Singapore (Nanyang
Technological University) in collaboration with Dr. Bouvet de Maisonneuve, who
has extensive experience with Volcán Llaima, and Dr. Costa, renowned in the
community for applying advanced diffusion-rate modeling techniques to determine
timescales of magmatic processes. This research is funded in collaboration with
the National Research Foundation of Singapore.