* 1515191
* Collaborative Research: Alteration of mantle peridotite: Geochemical fluxes and dynamics of far from equilibrium transport
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Craig Manning, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2019
* USD 239,719.00

This project involves an interdisciplinary study of hydration, carbonation and
oxidation of mantle peridotite interacting with aqueous fluids at temperatures
below ~ 300C. The PIs will combine observations of outcrops and boreholes,
geochemical analyses, structural measurements, geomechanical experiments and
numerical modeling to investigate feedback between alteration and fluid
transport, and to quantify the resulting geochemical fluxes. Field observations
and sampling will take place mainly in the Samail ophiolite of Oman, where
peridotite has undergone spreading-ridge-related hydrothermal alteration,
hydration and carbonation in the hanging-wall of the subduction zone that
emplaced the ophiolite over metasediments, and subaerial weathering. The PIs
project will provide matching funds and results that dovetail with the 2015-2018
International Continental Scientific Drilling Program (ICDP) Oman Drilling
Project, and the many other related efforts just getting underway. The PIs will
continue their independently supported research on subduction zone alteration of
mantle wedge peridotites at a range of pressures and temperatures, and work
closely with other groups investigating seafloor and subduction-related
peridotite alteration, in order to quantify the similarities and differences in
alteration processes in these different tectonic environments. They will
generalize their results to global alteration processes and geochemical cycles.

Alteration of peridotite is an essential process in Earth dynamics. Hydration of
oceanic crust and mantle, followed by subduction, supplies water to drive arc
volcanism, and modulates the hydrogen content of the mantle over time. Carbonate
formation during alteration of peridotite, near the surface and in the hanging
wall in subduction zones, is an important but poorly characterized link in the
carbon cycle. Oxidation of minerals and concomitant reduction of fluids produces
H2 and hydrocarbons, and a niche for chemosynthetic microbes. Chemical
weathering is as important as magmatism and plate tectonics in shaping the
Earths surface. The interplay of chemical and physical mechanisms of peridotite
alteration is not well understood, but will be transformed as a result of
emerging understanding of equilibria and kinetics in peridotite alteration, and
reaction-driven cracking that has left us poised on the brink of a breakthrough
at this little-studied frontier. The PIs will take advantage of low temperature,
near surface, active peridotite alteration in Oman to study inputs, outputs, and
the reaction zone in situ. Such a study is more difficult in smaller peridotite
exposures with limited outcrop and more rainfall, nearly impossible in submarine
hydrothermal systems, and completely impossible in studies of ancient systems.
Such a comprehensive approach via 250 to 600 meter boreholes is very rare, if
not unprecedented.