* 1515568
* Following the Chemical History of Stellar Ejecta through Molecular Observations and Laboratory Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2019
* USD 395,885.00

This project seeks to unravel how matter in our Galaxy is transferred from
stars, which create the majority of the chemical elements, to interstellar
space. The PI and her students and collaborators will examine the chemical
composition of material that eventually will create new solar systems. This will
provide insight into what becomes of the elements ejected from stars, including
elements that are essential for life. The research is highly interdisciplinary,
involving both observational and laboratory studies that interrelate astronomy,
chemistry, planetary science, and physics. This research will be almost entirely
conducted by graduate students, and this lab has been a fruitful training ground
for future scientists. The PI is also involved in the development of
interdisciplinary courses in the physical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass
loss from circumstellar envelopes of evolved stars and the more advanced,
planetary nebulae (PNe) stage, is a major avenue by which the interstellar
medium (ISM) is enriched in gas, dust, and the heavier elements. The chemical
and physical characteristics of circumstellar shells and subsequent PNe thus
have major impact on the overall life cycle of dense material in the ISM. The
goals of this project are (1) to probe the physical and chemical properties of
circumstellar envelopes and planetary nebulae to determine the extent of their
molecular composition, and (2) to examine their morphological structures through
radio/millimeter-wave astronomical observations. A further aim is to identify
new molecules in these objects, in particular refractory species possibly linked
to dust grains such as TiOH or FeC2, using laboratory spectroscopy followed by
additional observations. The O-rich circumstellar shells to be studied include
those of the supergiant S Persei and the Asymptotic Giant Branch (AGB) stars TX
Cam and R Cas, which will be investigated using the highly sensitive ALMA-type
receivers at the Sub-millimeter Telescope (SMT) of the Arizona Radio Observatory
(ARO), and the new ARO 12 meter ALMA-prototype antenna. Other molecules will be
sought with the ARO facilities, with the purpose of examining the revolutionary
concept that diffuse clouds are being populated with remnant molecular material
from PNe.