* 1515392
* Measuring the mass and time available to form planets
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Ilaria Pascucci, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 06/30/2020
* USD 293,576.00

Planets are ubiquitous in our Galaxy, in systems often different from our own
Solar System and far more diverse than originally predicted by theoretical
models. What is the origin of this diversity? Current data suggest that part of
this diversity arises from the properties of circumstellar disks around young
stars, the birth sites of planets. As part of this NSF investigation the team
will measure two fundamental properties of circumstellar disks by analyzing two
unique datasets, one of which comes from the Atacama Large Millimeter Array, an
international facility supported by NSF. This investigation goes beyond the
state-of-the-art both in the achieved sensitivity and in the methods the team
will apply to homogeneously compute stellar and disk properties. While
addressing key questions identified in the United States' 2010 Astronomy and
Planetary Science Decadal surveys, the work will advance education and training
by involving both graduate and undergraduate students in the proposed
activities. The team will further contribute to increasing access for currently
underrepresented groups to STEM education by developing a K-12 teacher workshop
that will reach out to Hispanic and Native American
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The masses of circumstellar disks and the rate
at which disk material is accreted onto the central star are the two most
fundamental parameters of disk evolution and planet formation models. As part of
this investigation we will establish the scaling laws between these two
quantities and the mass of the central star. To do that we will analyze a unique
dataset obtained with the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) and measure disk
masses and their intrinsic spread over a range of 40 in stellar mass. The team
will also analyze sensitive medium-resolution optical spectra for each of the
ALMA targets and employ newly developed techniques to determine accurate stellar
masses and accretion rates. The results will provide critical inputs to
theoretical models of planet formation and help understanding the diversity of
exoplanetary systems. Along with advancing research, the team will train
students and develop a K-12 teacher workshop and hand-on activities to
investigate habitability and methods for planet detection that teachers can use
in the classroom.