* 1515296
* EAPSI:Comparing geographic patterns of reproductive strategy in an invasive sea anemone between native (Japan) and invaded (US) ranges
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Will Ryan, Ryan                    Will
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

In the globalized modern world, marine organisms are often carried across oceans
by ships. Remarkably few of these creatures are able to make the leap from stow-
away to established colonist on a foreign shore. However, the ones that are
successful can have enormous ecological and economic consequences on the
communities they invade. This project will compare the reproductive behavior of
a globally successful sea anemone across its native range in Japan to that
observed across its invaded US range. This comparison is important for
predicting what traits help a species become an invader and for understanding
how natural variation contributes to the spread of a species. This work will be
done in collaboration with Dr. Matthew Dick of Hokkaido University, whose
expertise in the genetics of marine populations will be essential to the success
of the project.

The asexual fission rate of the anemome Diadumene lineata is positively
correlated with water temperature and negatively correlated with gamete
production. These features produce a latitudinal gradient in reproductive
strategy in the United States, with poleward populations skewed toward sexual
reproduction where equatorial populations are predominantly clonal. While there
is variation among populations in the degree of temperature sensitivity, all
individuals divide faster in warm water and produce more gametes in cold water.
These forms of life history plasticity are likely important in explaining the
global success of this species, however, these features have only been studied
in the invasive range thus far. This project will use a combination of common
garden growth studies and microsatellite genetic analysis on populations
spanning the species? native range in Japan to understand how well the globally
invasive lineages represent the genetic and life history variation present in
the native range, in hopes of better understanding the role of reproductive
plasticity in marine invasions. This NSF EAPSI award supports the research of a
U.S. graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science.