* 1515981
* Biophysical Studies of Metalloenzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brian Hoffman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 990,767.00

Title: Biophysical Studies of Metalloenzymes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
Systems Program and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Bioavailable
nitrogen derived from ammonia produced by the reduction of atmospheric nitrogen
is second only to water as the limiting nutrient in plant growth. From the
appearance of the enzyme nitrogenase approximately two billion years ago, until
the wide-spread use of the Haber-Bosch process in the 1950's for the chemical
production of ammonia fertilizers, all life obtained nitrogen from biological
nitrogen fixation using the nitrogenase enzyme. Currently, biological nitrogen
fixation using nitrogenase supplies approximately one-half of the world's
ammonia. The remaining half is produced by the Haber-Bosch industrial process, a
process that is responsible for approximately 2% of the world's total energy
consumption. The goal of this research is to reveal the mechanism of nitrogenase
function. Understanding of nitrogenase function will potentially enable the
effective utilization of nitrogenase activity for greater human benefit,
increasing food production and reducing energy consumption during the industrial
production of ammonia fertilizers. In addition, investigators are active in
science education and training at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
goal of this project is to further refine the nitrogenase reaction mechanism
elucidated by the investigators through the use of genetic/biochemical
approaches for the isolation of catalytic intermediates in combination with the
laboratory's use of electron-nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) and electron spin-
echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) spectroscopies to characterize the reaction
intermediates. A second goal of the project is to determine the structure and
electronic properties of enzymatic intermediates throughout the catalytic cycle,
by integrating hydrogen, deuterium, (14,15)nitrogen, (57)Fe and (95)Mo
ENDOR/ESEEM spectroscopic studies with quantum chemical calculations that for
the first time introduce QM/MM methods to the study of nitrogenase
intermediates. The third goal of the project is to study the biomimetic
molybdenum and iron complexes in order to advance the understanding of the
biocatalytic potential of these complexes. EPR/ENDOR characterizations of
biomimetic Mo and Fe complexes yield powerful constraints on the identification
of substrate-derived moieties in our nitrogenase intermediates. In addition,
these complexes have their own, fundamental importance to coordination chemistry
that include non-classical M-H(2) adducts that show novel H(2) rotational
dynamics and also are relevant for hydrogen catalysis and energy storage.