* 1515380
* EAPSI: Anuran Communication Networks: Behavioral Responses to Female Reciprocal Calling
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Henry Legett, Legett                  Henry
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Frog species worldwide are experiencing rapid declines and extinction. While
habitat loss and disease threaten many species, the processes that have led to
some declines are unknown or poorly understood. In order to identify the causes
of these declines, and develop effective conservation efforts, a deeper
understanding of frog ecology and behavior is necessary. This project will
investigate ecological tradeoffs of a unique mating behavior of the Asian grass
frog, Fejervarya sakishimensis. By analyzing the tradeoffs of natural selection
(from predators) and sexual selection (from mates), this behavior can be
understood in the context of the ecological community. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Shizuko Hiryu and Dr. Ikkyu Aihara at
Doshisha University in Kyoto City, Japan. The collaboration will allow for
access to natural F. sakishimensis populations, as well as recently implemented
technology essential for understanding frog behavior on a community level.

Understanding the tradeoffs between selective pressures imposed within
communication networks is key to understanding signal evolution. Animals
producing mating signals are faced with a compromise between increased
attractiveness to mates at the cost of increased detection by unwanted receivers
or ?eavesdroppers? such as predators and parasites. Male frogs produce
conspicuous mating signals at high intensities and the function of male
advertisement calls has received considerable focus in the scientific
literature. In contrast, females rarely vocalize, presumably to prevent the
exposure of females to eavesdroppers. In a handful of species, however, females
give calls in response to male vocalizations. It is likely that these calls
evolved independently of male vocalizations, but their function remains
relatively unknown. This project will investigate the response of different
receivers (predators and male frogs) to female reciprocal calls in order to
understand the ecological pressures constraining or reinforcing this rare
behavior. This EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science.