* 1515619
* EAPSI: Illuminating fundamental material properties to enable highly efficient and inexpensive solar cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* John Katahara, Katahara                John           K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

The price of electricity generated from solar cells remains too high to be
economically competitive with traditional fossil fuel sources in most regions of
the US. To effect widespread adoption of sustainable energy technologies, it is
imperative that new methods to fabricate inexpensive and high efficiency solar
cells be discovered. This project will explore an exciting family of materials
known as hybrid organic perovskites (HP), which have shown efficiencies as high
as 20% through solution processing. In spite of their superlative performance,
much of the fundamental optical and electronic properties of these materials
remains unclear, and additional studies are necessary to shed light on avenues
for further improvement in efficiency. Optical characterization of these
materials will be conducted in collaboration with Professor Yoshihiko Kanemitsu,
an expert in ultrafast spectroscopy, at Kyoto University in Kyoto, Japan.

By depositing a layer of the HP on another solar cell material like Silicon or
Copper Indium Selenide (CISe), one creates a tandem solar cell that can harness
more sunlight and reach even higher efficiencies (>30%). Much of the literature
on HP has focused on the lower bandgap (1.6 eV) Methylammonium Lead Iodide
composition. However, to maximize the efficiency of a tandem HP-CISe solar cell,
the bandgap of the HP must be higher. Previous research has shown that the
bandgap may be tuned by replacement of Iodine with Bromine. This research will
explore the fundamental optoelectronic properties and carrier dynamics of hybrid
perovskites as Bromine composition increases. Specifically, this project will
utilize the expertise and equipment of the Kanemitsu lab for femtosecond
transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) and photoluminescence lifetime
experiments. This NSF EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).