* 1515473
* EAPSI: New Method for Characterizing Mechanical Properties of Biological Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Joel Cooper, Cooper                  Joel           R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2016
* USD 5,070.00

Mechanical properties of cells are extremely important to both tissue
engineering and the study and detection of various diseases. In order to develop
new ways to repair or replace damaged tissues and organs, researchers in tissue
engineering must know the mechanical properties of both individual cells and
tissues. Additionally, diseases, like cancer, affect the mechanical properties
of native cells. Studying these changes in mechanical properties can lead to the
development of early detection devices and new drug delivery mechanisms. This
project will develop a new method to characterize the mechanical properties of
individual cells. The characterization technique developed will provide a
simple, fast, and flexible technique which can be performed using commercially
available equipment. Additionally, this new technique will be able to
characterize a cell?s natural frequency, a mechanical property which no current
measurement technique can determine. This research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Yasuhisa Hasegawa and his associates in the Micro-Nano
Control and Bio-Robotics Laboratory at Nagoya University. Dr. Hasegawa?s lab has
the unique expertise and one-of-a-kind equipment necessary for the success of
this project.

Using the unique nano-manipulation system inside Dr. Hasegawa?s environmental
scanning electron microscope (ESEM), a single cell will be adhered onto the end
of a functionalized tip-less atomic force microscope (AFM) beam. The ESEM can
visually verify, in real time, only a single cell adheres to the end of the
beam. The beam-cell combination is then transferred to an AFM where the cell is
sandwiched between a surface and the AFM beam. In this configuration, a
frequency sweep will generate a thermal spectrum consisting of both cell and
beam mechanics. Cellular mechanics can then be isolated by comparing the
convoluted data to data gathered previously for an isolated cantilever. This NSF
EAPSI award is funded in collaboration with the Japanese Society for the
Promotion of Science.