* 1516527
* US-German Data Sharing: Integrating Distributed Data Resources to Enable New Research Approaches in Neuroscience
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2019
* Friedrich Sommer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2019
* USD 522,884.00

This project seeks to develop new methods of describing and managing
neuroscience data in order to accelerate scientific progress in many fields of
neuroscience and deepen understanding of the brain. The project will produce
software tools to enable annotation and integration of distributed data and help
leverage the wealth of data emerging from current large-scale projects such as
the Human Brain Project in Europe and the BRAIN Initiative in the US. These
results will impact medical application areas such as brain machine interfaces,
devices for sensor prosthetics and also application areas such as computer
vision. Further, the methods developed might be generalizable to other domains
of biology and medicine where traditional rigid approaches for organizing data
are inapplicable. This could lead to the discovery of causes and treatments of
diseases that would not have been made otherwise.

Neurophysiology data, which contain recordings of brain activity, are becoming
more commonly shared on the web but they are still very hard to use. To improve
the usability of shared neurophysiology data sets, a standardized and expandable
system will be developed for annotating the data with metadata required for
their understanding. Furthermore, semantic web technology will be employed to
represent, index, and integrate data and metadata, across distributed locations
on the web. Improving the organization of metadata for shared neurophysiology
data will be key for enabling studies that integrate across data sets, such as
new types of meta-analyses or data mining methods. This project builds on
existing online resources for neurophysiology data created by the project
partners, CRCNS.org and G-NODE.org, and on pervious work by the INCF
neurophysiology data sharing task force. Training of international students and
researchers in annual summer courses at UC Berkeley and LMU Munich will improve
career opportunities that allow individuals across disciplines to make
discoveries and advancements in neuroscience.

A companion project is being funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research, Germany (BMBF).