* 1516881
* Theory of threshold-linear networks and combinatorial neural codes.
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Carina Curto, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

How do connections between neurons store memories and shape the dynamics of
neural activity in the brain? How do firing patterns of neurons represent our
sensory experiences? The advent of technologies that facilitate simultaneous
recordings of large populations of neurons present new opportunities to answer
these classical questions of neuroscience. There are mathematical models that
are frequently used in network simulations and data analyses that can be
employed, but whose mathematical properties are still poorly understood. To
guide these efforts, a better understanding of theoretical models of recurrent
networks and population codes is essential. This research will focus on two such
examples: threshold-linear networks and combinatorial neural codes. The goal is
to produce major advances in the mathematical theory of these models, with an
eye towards neuroscience applications. Part of the research will involve the
analyses of neural activity in the cortex and hippocampus, in collaboration with
experimentalists. Despite the focus on neuroscience, the mathematical results
have the potential to be sufficiently general so as to be useful in a variety of
broader contexts in the biological and social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
threshold-linear network is a common firing rate model for a recurrent network,
with a threshold nonlinearity. These networks generically exhibit multiple
stable fixed points, and multistability makes them attractive as models for
memory storage and retrieval. Preliminary results have shown that the equilibria
possess a rich combinatorial structure, and can be analyzed using ideas from
classical distance geometry. The first project will build on this understanding
in order to develop a more complete picture of the structure of fixed points and
higher-dimensional attractors of these networks. A combinatorial neural code is
a collection of binary patterns for a population of neurons. The second project
will develop an algebraic classification of combinatorial codes, using the
recently developed framework of the neural ring. The neural ring encodes
information about a neural code in a manner that makes properties such as
receptive field organization most transparent. The resulting methods will be
tested and refined using electrophysiological recordings of place cells in the
hippocampus. This research will also generate new and interesting problems at
the interface of neuroscience with applied algebra, combinatorics, and geometry.