* 1516255
* Understanding and Catalyzing Equity-Oriented Change in Museums and Science Centers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Cecilia Garibay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,228,882.00

This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. This study will contribute to these goals by providing
empirical evidence about how and under what circumstances science museums,
science centers, and other designed settings for informal science education
(ISE) can change so that they will reach more diverse audiences with the full
range of their educational activities. This study will deepen understanding of
equity norms and practices at ISE organizations, as well as the internal and
contextual factors that shape them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a
unique opportunity provided by the widely known and critically acclaimed
exhibition "RACE: Are We So Different?" After traveling to dozens of museums and
science centers, and being seen by over three million people, RACE is returning
home to the Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) where it was created. Strand 1 of
this study will examine the processes underlying organizational change at SMM as
it attempts to use RACE to leverage organization-wide change. In Strand 2, the
project team will compare the experiences of ISE organizations around the
country that hosted RACE, focusing on the conditions that influence reflection
and lead to (or prevent) lasting impact. These two studies will inform the
design of Strand 3: a national survey on equity norms and practices, and the
potential for equity-related change, in designed settings for ISE. Four research
questions guide all project activities: 1)How can such Informal Science
Education organizations leverage an unusual event, such as a traveling
exhibition, to catalyze and sustain change in their equity-related norms and
practices? 2) How and when does the deep reflection required to change
entrenched norms and practices manifest itself in ISE organizations that attempt
to change their equity norms and practices? 3) What contextual factors support
or oppose the achievement and maintenance of organization-wide changes in equity
norms and practices? 4) How common are these supportive and opposing conditions
in the institutional field of museums and science centers, and how prevalent are
different norms and practices related to equity?