* 1516763
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: surviving climate change - the role of acclimatization in reef-building corals
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Iliana Baums, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2016
* USD 138,816.00

August of 2014 was the warmest on record for the Florida Keys reef tract and by
early September numerous corals species were severely stressed and looked
bleached. This ongoing large-scale bleaching event provides an unprecedented
opportunity to understand if prior stress exposure hardens individual coral
colonies to future hot water events -- a process called acclimatization. This
study combines long-term monitoring data of individual coral colonies with a
stress experiment in the summer of 2015 to determine whether partially bleached
colonies have acclimatized, to what extent, and by what means. The answers may
fundamentally shape our understanding of how reefs might survive climate change.
This is important because tropical coral reefs harbor more species then tropical
rainforests and generate billions of dollars each year for local and national
economies. The focal species of this project is the endangered elkhorn coral,
Acropora palmata and results of the work can be used directly by managers when
choosing coral colonies for conservation. The project will educate and train the
public and public institutions on numerous levels. The scientists have partnered
with the Coral Restoration Foundation, a non-for profit organization that
delivers scientific knowledge and hands on experience in coral restoration to
over 300 high school students per year. Postdoctoral scholars, and students are
an integral part of this project and will receive training in field and
laboratory work and lecture courses.

Acclimatization is a non-genetic process by which an individual heightens its
tolerance after exposure to a stressor, such as temperature anomalies. Recent
work has shown that acclimatization may be an important process by which corals
may survive climate change. However, because reef-building corals harbor
endosymbiotic Symbiodinium, discerning the relative contribution of host and
symbiont to acclimatization can be difficult. The endangered Caribbean elkhorn
coral, Acropora palmata, has an uncomplicated symbiosis: it associates with just
one symbiont species (Symbiodinium fitti) and most colonies also harbor only one
strain of S. fitti over space and time. August of 2014 was the warmest on record
for the Florida Keys reef tract and by early September numerous corals species
were severely stressed and looked bleached. This event provides an unprecedented
opportunity to understand the role of acclimatization in reef corals. Initial
surveys of A. palmata documented a range of bleaching response. This response
varied between reefs but also within single, monoclonal stands of A. palmata.
Thus, coral clone mates were observed to exhibit different bleaching
susceptibilities despite indications that they share identical (clonal) symbiont
communities, begging the question as to what mechanisms account for such
differences. The answers may fundamentally shape our understanding of how reefs
might survive climate change. Immediate support is requested to sample coral
colonies while they are still bleached and for which long term performance
histories exist. Results from this initial assessment are essential to inform
the centerpiece of the proposal: a stress experiment to determine whether
partially bleached colonies have acclimatized, to what extent, and by what
means.