* 1516348
* Gatekeeper Chromatin and Meiotic Commitment In Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Edward Winter, Thomas Jefferson University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The commitment to differentiate into new cell types is a crucial step in the
development of animals, plants and many other eukaryotes. This project will
study how this important process is regulated using yeast as the model system,
and will uncover new mechanisms for controlling cell fate decisions. The project
will also expand the pool of talented students who will pursue careers in
science by exposing gifted students from a magnet high school to the process of
scientific discovery; providing college students between their junior and senior
year with hands-on research opportunities; and training graduate students in
hypothesis-driven molecular genetic research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similar to
differentiation programs in multicellular organisms, sporulation in yeast is
governed by a transcriptional cascade. The transcriptional cascade of
sporulation consists of early, middle and late sets of genes. Commitment to
sporulation is not acquired until middle genes are expressed. Ndt80 is the
transcription factor that activates middle promoters, and it is transcribed just
before middle genes are expressed. The NDT80 promoter can be viewed as a
platform where a switch-like output is generated that commits cells to
gametogenesis. Studies performed in this laboratory indicate that the NDT80
promoter is assembled into a state resembling silenced heterochromatin
specifically during meiotic development. This heterochromatic state (referred to
as "gatekeeper chromatin") requires a DNA-binding repressor protein named Sum1
that recruits a histone deacetylase named Hst1 (a close relative of Sir2). At
the end of meiotic G2 (just prior to the commitment point) Sum1 is
phosphorylated on multiple residues by a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK), and a
meiosis-specific CDK-like kinase named Ime2. A central hypothesis that will be
tested in this project is that the phosphorylation of Sum1 downregulates the
Hst1 sirtuin to trigger the transition of heterochromatic gatekeeper chromatin
to a state in which Sum1 is exchangeable with DNA. The resulting fractional
occupancy of the Sum1 repressor permits low-level NDT80 expression. Commitment
is acquired when newly translated Ndt80 protein competitively displaces Sum1
from DNA to initiate a positive autoregulatory loop (Sum1 and Ndt80
competitively bind to a single DNA element in the NDT80 promoter). In this
project, this "gatekeeper chromatin model" for commitment will be tested. The
specific goals of the project are 1) To establish an assay to monitor the
exchangeability of the Sum1 protein in chromatin and 2) to combine sum1
phosphosite mutants and analog-sensitive kinases to create a system that
synchronously undergoes the off/on gatekeeper chromatin transition at NDT80 in
response to specific phosphomodifications, and to use this system to define
biochemical steps controlling this transition.