* 1516912
* CNH-L: Science-Driven, Community-Based Approach to Reducing Glacier Lake Outburst Flood Risks
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Milan Shrestha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,491,539.00

Over the past several decades, hundreds of glaciers in mountainous regions have
been melting, leaving behind new glacier lakes holding millions of cubic meters
of water. Usually contained by dams of loose boulders and soil, these lakes
present a risk of glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs). As the number and extent
of these lakes grows, so does the flood risk for communities downstream of them,
potentially leading to extensive loss of lives and severe damage to transport
infrastructure, hydroelectric power facilities and agriculture. This project
will look at the factors that lead to GLOFs, and the measures that local
populations can take to adapt to this increasing threat.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will capture unique knowledge of glacial
lakes and the communities that live near them, sharing this with researchers and
decision makers challenged by these problems in the U.S. and elsewhere. The
interdisciplinary research approach will contribute to the development of a new
generation of scientists in the area of coupled natural and human systems of
glacier-dominated mountain systems. It will lead to improved understanding and
management of risks, and of designs that reduce flood risk related to these
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed research are to: (1)
Understand natural system dynamics through an analysis of the impacts of climate
change on glacial lakes, (2) Understand the human system dynamics through the
strengthening of community resiliency to glacial lake hazards by developing
community-driven glacial lake risk reduction systems, (3) Understand how the
natural system affects the human system through the assessment of local
ecological knowledge and understanding of hydrological resources and the
vulnerability of the social-ecological system to glacial lake outburst flood
hazard, and (4) Understand how the human system affects the natural system
through the design and modeling of community-driven solutions to analyze the
reduction of flood risk and the evolution of glacial lakes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate in situ physical and societal
observations with geospatial analyses, intensive glacial hydrology and outburst
flood modeling, key respondents interviews, and community level mappings and
focus groups. The project will assess outburst flood-related processes that
include glacier hydrology, river flow, hydraulics, and sediment/debris transport
models. These natural system impacts will be integrated with the human science
aspects to evaluate socio-economic impacts of potential outburst flood events on
communities, households, and ecotourism.