* 1516368
* RUI: The Function and Molecular Mechanisms of Novel RNAs in E. Coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Meghan Lybecker, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2019
* USD 575,933.00

When they enter new environments, for example the human body or the water
supply, bacteria quickly adapt by altering their gene expression patterns. This
project will analyze a poorly understood class of regulators that may be
important for such changes in gene expression in many if not most bacterial
species. The research in this study will be divided into discrete projects for
training undergraduate and Master's level students. The outcomes of the research
will be conveyed to the community through specific outreach programs associated
with the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs' Center for Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education. This Center is dedicated to
promoting science education and hands-on experiences for economically
disadvantaged and minority-serving Colorado public school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene transcription is a highly
regulated process, ensuring that only the genes necessary in a particular
situation are expressed. Transcription was thought to occur exclusively at genes
producing protein-coding mRNAs, ribosomal RNAs, and transfer RNAs. However, in
the past decade, non-coding regulatory RNAs have emerged as a new class of
transcribed genetic elements. More recently, large portions of the genome have
been observed to be transcribed; this genome-wide transcription was termed
pervasive transcription. Pervasive transcription was initially considered to be
non-functional noise; however, there is now evidence suggesting that pervasive
transcripts are functional. The objective of this project is to elucidate the
function and molecular mechanisms of gene regulation by pervasive transcripts in
the well-studied and genetically tractable model organism Escherichia coli.
Traditional loss-of-function reverse genetic assays are challenging to perform
on these RNAs because they overlap (or are complementary to) annotated genes.
Therefore innovative methods to construct deletions of pervasive transcripts
will be employed. These deletion strains will allow us to probe the role of
pervasive RNAs in gene regulation and to dissect the molecular mechanisms of
their regulation. Understanding the regulatory roles of pervasive transcripts,
and the mechanisms they employ, in gene expression in E. coli will also offer
insight into the gene regulation strategies of other bacteria, as well as
eukaryotes, due to the widespread nature of pervasive transcription across all
domains of life.