* 1516636
* Building Cybersecurity Workforce and Capacity through Enhancing Defending Skill Sets
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Akbar Siami Namin, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2019
* USD 348,732.00

The "Building Cybersecurity Workforce and Capacity through Enhancing Defending
Skill Sets" project at Texas Tech University (TTU), in partnership with the
Sandia National Lab (SNL), will investigate attacking/defending strategies
employed by security professionals and experts. The skillsets that will be
identified by this project will be incorporated into instructional modules and
materials that will provide students and professionals with the skills required
to defend against cyberattacks. This research project will introduce a simulated
cyber battlefield that will consist of authentic challenges, scenarios, and
strategies. This authentic and engaging learning platform will allow instructors
to teach the basic and advanced topics of cybersecurity to students using a
realistic scenario-based approach. The cybersecurity attack and defend scenarios
will be integrated into an undergraduate course curriculum that will support
student learning and will enhance the effectiveness of teaching security related
concepts and cyber defense techniques. TTU and SNL have a demonstrated
reputation of reaching underserved minority populations with innovative and
advanced educational programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consist of
four major activities: (1) Conduct a set of task analyses to determine the
skillsets the cybersecurity professionals employ, (2) Develop a set of
instructional modules and materials based on the task analysis, (3) Design and
offer scenario and competition-based workshops specifically tailored for
undergraduate students, (4) Offer a two-day summer workshop for teachers and
educators from colleges and universities with the aim of broadening the impacts.
The collaboration between three different departments with complementary
expertise will allow researchers to utilize and share resources and expertise
resulting in the development of curricular materials that will be based on best
practices in cybersecurity.