* 1516512
* Collaborative Research: Developing STEM self-efficacy and science identities through authentic astrophysics research in online and face-to-face environments (STEM-ID)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* John Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,269,272.00

Research shows that participation and interest in science starts to drop as
youth enter high school. This is also the point when science becomes more
complex and there is increased need for content knowledge, mathematics
capability, and computer or computational knowledge. Evidence suggests that
youth who participate in original scientific research are more likely to enter
and maintain a career in science as compared to students who do not have these
experiences. We know young people get excited by space science. This project
(STEM-ID) is informed by previous work in which high school students were
introduced to scientific research and contributed to the search for pulsars.
Students were able to develop the required science and math knowledge and
computer skills that enabled them to successfully participate. STEM-ID builds on
this previous work with two primary goals: the replication of the local program
into a distributed program model and an investigation of the degree to which
authentic research experiences build strong science identities and research
self-efficacies. More specifically the project will support (a) significant
geographic expansion to institutions situated in communities with diverse
populations allowing substantial inclusion of under-served groups, (b) an online
learning and discovery environment that will support the participation of youth
throughout the country via online activities, and (c) opportunities for deeper
participation in research and advancement within the research community. This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM-ID will serve 2000 high school youth and
200 high school teachers in afterschool clubs with support from 30 undergraduate
and graduate students and 10 college/university faculty. Exploratory educational
research will determine the broad mechanisms by which online activities and in-
person and online peer-mentor teacher-scientist interactions influence science
identity, self-efficacy, motivation, and career intentions, as well as a focused
understanding of the mechanisms that influence patterns of participation. Youth
will be monitored longitudinally through the first two years of college to
provide an understanding of the long-term effects of out-of-class science
enrichment programs on STEM career decisions. These studies will build an
understanding of the best practices for enhancing STEM persistence in college
through engagement in authentic STEM programs before youth get to college. In
addition to the benefits of the education research, this program may lead
participants to discover dozens of new pulsars. These pulsars will be used for
fundamental advances such as for testing of general relativity, constraining
neutron star masses, or detecting gravitational waves. The resulting survey will
also be sensitive to transient signals such as sporadic pulsars and
extragalactic bursts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a potential
model for youth from geographical disparate places to participate in authentic
research experiences. For providers, it will offer a model for program delivery
with lower costs. Findings will support greater understanding of the mechanisms
for participation in STEM. This work is being led by West Virginia University
and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. Participating sites include
California Institute of Technology, Cornell University, El Paso Community
College, Howard University, Montana State University, Penn State University,
Texas Tech University, University of Vermont, University of Washington, and
Vanderbilt University.