* 1516933
* The Core Metabolism of Rhodobacter sphaeroides
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Birgit Alber, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 06/30/2020
* USD 332,581.00

Carbon is an essential element for all known forms of life. Nearly all important
cellular constituents contain carbon compounds and in many organisms these
carbon-containing biomolecules are simultaneously used to obtain energy for
growth. Carbon-containing biomolecules are converted into smaller molecules
(precursor metabolites) that are key components for the major chemical reactions
(metabolism) of living organisms. These precursor metabolites can then serve
either as the building blocks for other cellular constituents or can be broken
down in chemical reactions that generate energy. These different uses of carbon-
containing biomolecules occur regardless of the carbon sources that are used by
microbes for their growth and energy requirements. Consequently, it is essential
to understand the processes by which the chemical reactions of precursor
metabolites are controlled so that carbon can flow towards the molecules that
will be used to build cells. This knowledge will enable the more efficient use
of microorganisms to generate useful products, including those (such as
biofuels) of biotechnological importance. This project will generate fundamental
new information on how carbon is used in living systems, and through classroom
and research experiences will provide interdisciplinary training to the next
generation of scientists, including undergraduate and graduate students, in
microbial physiology and genetics.

For every carbon substrate, the levels of the precursor metabolites pyruvate
(C3), phosphoenolpyruvate (C3), and oxaloacetate (C4) have to be controlled:
this is referred to as the C4/C3 node. Importantly, the pathways leading to
these metabolites, as well as their fate, differ depending on where a given
substrate has entered central carbon metabolism. In this project the regulation
and activity of enzymes involved in the partition of carbon at the C4/C3 node
will be examined and the question of why several enzymes apparently catalyzing
the same reaction are active at the same time will be addressed. Rhodobacter
sphaeroides will be used to expand our knowledge of assimilation of carbon since
it is possible to disconnect energy metabolism from carbon assimilation during
anoxygenic photoheterotrophic growth of this organism. R. sphaeroides is ideally
suited for this study given its versatility in utilizing a wide spectrum of
carbon substrates. This research will be used to determine the reactions
required for 1) the conversion of C4- to C3-precursor metabolites under
different growth conditions and 2) the inter-conversion of pyruvate and
phosphoenolpyruvate. By capitalizing on the genetic tractability of R.
sphaeroides mutants will be constructed for comparative experiments analyzing
which specific enzymes are required under particular growth conditions. In
addition, biochemical analyses of recombinant proteins will determine kinetic
parameters, potential heteromeric composition, cofactor specificity, and
posttranslational regulation of enzymes at the C4/C3 node.