* 1516347
* Experiments in Transmedia: Studying Techniques for Increasing STEM Content Acquisition by Young Adults
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Patti Parson, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2019
* USD 2,828,661.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This project will study why (or why not) young
career adults, aged 18-35 engage with the PBS NewsHour science content via
broadcast and/or online avenues to advance their STEM knowledge and skills. This
age group has shifted away from viewing traditional broadcast news media and
increasingly looks to social media channels for science content. Multiple layers
of STEM digital content delivered across multiple platforms (including social
media) will be used to identify the attributes that engage and motivate these
18-35 year olds. Deliverables include 12 broadcast segments each year with STEM
research coverage and a range of transmedia efforts (e.g. additional formats
distributed via Instagram, Vine, YouTube, etc.) for testing with the target
audience. A complementary component of the project will be an apprenticeship
program in which each year five college age students from journalism schools
join the professional reporters at the NewsHour to produce STEM content using
new and innovative strategies engage to 18-35 year olds. The PBS NewsHour
broadcast is currently viewed by 1.4 million adults each night and the website
has 2.6 million unique visitors each month. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will attempt to define the learning ecologies of 18-35 year olds using
psychographic profiles and case studies to illustrate the range of science
learners including those in underrepresented groups. The first research
component uses a quantitative approach to assess the reaction of the early
career adults to the 12 STEM broadcast segments in their original form and after
repackaging for social media. A control group audience will watch the original
broadcast of each STEM segment and respond to an online questionnaire that will
establish how viewers use and/or pass on STEM content and to whom. The test
audience will view the content that has been repackaged and presented on a
different media platform responding to the same online questionnaire and
allowing comparisons of the two groups. The second research component will focus
on the college-age journalism apprentices and use participatory action research.
The apprentices will collect data about their experiences and reflect on their
contributions to STEM reporting. The third research component will be an
ethnographic study of the post-production and editorial teams at the PBS
NewsHour using focus groups to elicit feedback and evaluate their metacognitive
thinking about how to produce stories for early career adults. Data will be
collected and analyzed from three groups: early career adults 18-35 years of
age; journalism apprentices; and the PBS NewsHour editorial teams. Overall the
research will provide new knowledge about producing and distributing digital
STEM media that engages and impacts early career adults.