* 1516939
* AAPA IDEAS Program:  Increasing Diversity in Biological Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Ripan Malhi, American Association of Physical Anthropologists
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 160,215.00

Increasing Diversity in Evolutionary Anthropological Sciences (IDEAS) is a major
new initiative that aims to increase minority participation in the field of
physical (biological) anthropology, a discipline that studies the variation and
evolution of living humans, non-human primates and their extinct ancestors, and
features researchers who provide insights on everything from forensic
identification to human ergonomics to understanding climate influences on human
systems. Although the discipline would seem to be in an ideal position to
attract scientists from a variety of backgrounds, it is remarkably non-diverse,
a lost opportunity in light of the scientific gains that are realized by groups
working from multiple perspectives. By bringing together multiple perspectives,
diverse teams lower their levels of confirmation bias and produce better
scientific outcomes. In addition, fields with ethnically diverse researchers are
more likely to have individuals who can successfully anticipate, recognize and
navigate potentially delicate social and political issues, including those that
are commonly encountered by our leading field investigators in countries across
the globe. This project will build infrastructure to train and retain minority
students currently in physical (biological) anthropology and create outreach
programs to raise the discipline's visibility in minority communities. The
program further provides for the enhancement of scientific education in K-12
classrooms through the development of teacher training, lesson plans and
visiting scientist programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main focus of the IDEAS
program is mentoring and outreach activities at the annual American Association
of Physical Anthropologists (AAPA) meeting, the main interchange of scientific
information in the discipline. The IDEAS Workshop will bring minority and first
generation college students to the AAPA meeting for a pre-meeting, science and
mentoring workshop and networking activities throughout the meeting. IDEAS
Faculty, matched with students based on scientific area, will serve as on-site
and year-long mentors. Social media and community outreach efforts will aim to
foster interest in human and primate biology and evolution. In conjunction with
the annual meeting, IDEAS Scholars will participate in AAPA K-12 teacher
training workshops and conduct classroom visits at local minority serving
schools. IDEAS Scholars will also present science talks at local minority
serving colleges. The IDEAS web portal links to social media, including a
YouTube channel that will host video interviews with minority scientists (some
in Spanish) about their scientific work and career path, and connect minority
students with targeted research and training opportunities. The IDEAS team will
partner with minority serving societies such as NESCent and SACNAS to bring
physical anthropology to minority college communities and will develop
promotional materials including a booklet entitled How I Became A Physical
Anthropologist (in English and Spanish) to engage school-age children. The
Broader Impacts infrastructure will offer a variety of means for partner
scientists to build and expand their own Broader Impacts program and develop
synergies between Broader Impact programs across the discipline. This
infrastructure includes the web portal for connecting their research
opportunities with minority students, satellite IDEAS Workshops, topical video
production for a YouTube channel, and class lesson plan development for our
visiting classroom library. The influence of our programs on the AAPA and
discipline will also be monitored via yearly demographic and climate surveys of
the membership and will be assessed by a professional evaluator for
effectiveness.