* 1516990
* Flavobacterium Gliding Motility:From protein secretion to cell surface movements
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Mark McBride, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 07/31/2021
* USD 619,966.00

Gliding motility is a form of movement by which certain bacteria commonly found
both inside and on the surface of the body are able to move themselves over
solid surfaces. Gliding motility relies on an apparatus composed of unique
proteins and this project will explore two fundamental cellular processes
(protein secretion and cell movement) and the interactions between them that
underlie gliding motility. Graduate and undergraduate students as well as
postdoctoral fellows will be actively engaged in the project, and will gain
experience in interdisciplinary research involving genetics, molecular biology,
and microscopic and mathematical modeling. They will also receive training in
scientific writing and presentation. Results of the project will be reported by
students at national meetings and published in the scientific literature, and
genetic tools that are developed will be made available to the scientific
community. Results of this research will be incorporated into undergraduate
laboratory exercises and public lectures will be presented to convey the
excitement of scientific discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
address 3 specific aims related to the functioning of the type IX secretion
system (T9SS) responsible for delivering surface adhesin SprB which is
responsible for the gliding motility apparatus. The goals are: (1) to
characterize using biochemical and genetic approaches the mechanism by which
secreted proteins are targeted to the T9SS; (2) to define the moving components
of the motility machinery by fusing fluorescent proteins to components of the
motility apparatus to identify those that move rapidly over long distances
(mathematical analyses of these movements will be used to construct models to
explain gliding); and (3) to distinguish between the T9SS and the gliding
motility apparatus to determine which proteins function primarily in secretion,
in motility, or in both processes. This will help determine if the T9SS and the
gliding motility apparatus are two independent machines or different aspects of
a single machine. Cells with mutations in T9SS genes will be examined to
determine if they retain gliding motor function. Mutations that result in
defects in either motility or secretion, but not both, will be isolated and
analyzed to determine which proteins function primarily in secretion and which
function in motility. Comparative analysis of the F. johnsoniae and Cellulophaga
algicola T9SSs and their respective gliding machines will identify conserved
features and highlight the roles of individual proteins in secretion or
motility. The bacteria studied belong to the understudied phylum, Bacteroidetes.
Bacteriodetes is one of the largest bacterial phyla where the proteins that make
up the T9SS and the gliding motility apparatus are common. However, these
proteins are not found in other groups of bacteria. A more complete
understanding of the T9SS and the gliding machinery will expand our
understanding of mechanisms of bacterial protein secretion, dynamic protein
movements within cells, and cell movements over surfaces.