* 1516695
* Big Data on Small Organisms: Petascale Simulations of Data-Driven, Whole-Cell Microbial Models
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Ilias Tagkopoulos, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2021
* USD 40,000.00

This project aims to develop the next-generation of genome-scale, data-driven
models for microbial organisms. The project will first focus on the most-studied
microbe, the gram-negative bacterium Escherichia coli, due to the availability
of high-throughput data, cellular organization, its significance to industry and
human health. The project will take advantage of the multi-omics datasets that
resulted from advances in parallel high-throughput molecular profiling over the
past fifteen years, the emergence of data-driven, integrative, multi-scale
models with substantial improvement of their predictive power and new techniques
in machine learning, especially those related to deep learning. Accurate
prediction of microbial fitness and cellular state can have profound
implications to the way we test hypotheses that are directly related to health,
social or economic benefits. This award will support the training of multiple
undergraduate and graduate students in computational modeling and high-
performance simulations of biological systems through undergraduate courses,
IGEM teams and other initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support
the generation of knowledge from the largest normalized omics compendia for the
most widely used microbe that will be a boon for the development and training of
the next generation of data-driven predictive methods in molecular and cellular
biology. It will provide the computational resources to evaluate a state-of-the-
art multi-scale model with the capacity to predict phenotypic characteristics
and environmental conditions from collective omics data. This will be the first
systems-level simulator that targets a specific microbe (E. coli) and will be
able to simulate populations of cells with a resolution ranging from individual
gene concentrations to population dynamics. To achieve that, process migration,
load-balancing and strong scaling techniques have to be adopted and applied in
this context, which are all novel features for the area of whole-cell modeling.
The proposed HPC simulations will be intimately related to hypothesis generation
and testing. The simulations will address questions related to what their
phenotype and expression profiles of microbial cultures are in complex
environments. In the context of systems biology, integration of these techniques
has the potential of being transformative, but only if the necessary
computational infrastructure able to handle these tasks is available. The Blue
Waters Supercomputer with its unique architecture, large-scale simulation
capabilities and professional support staff provides the ideal platform to
achieve this ambitious goal.