* 1516966
* Peroxisome dynamics - biogenesis and turnover
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Bonnie Bartel, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 07/31/2020
* USD 615,261.00

The cells that comprise multicellular organisms separate their metabolic
functions among various subcellular compartments known as organelles.
Peroxisomes are essential organelles that sequester metabolic reactions that are
likely to generate oxidative stress. Peroxisomal sequestration of oxidative
reactions protects other cellular components from oxidative damage. However, the
peroxisome is itself subject to damage from the oxidative reactions that it
harbors. The goals of this research are to uncover the mechanisms and triggers
that execute peroxisome turnover when peroxisomes are damaged by oxidative
stress. The research will be carried out in the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. The research activities will provide undergraduate and graduate
students with interdisciplinary training bridging molecular genetics, cell
biology, genomics, bioinformatics, and biochemistry. To extend research
experiences to students at institutions without extensive research capacity, the
lab will host visiting faculty and undergraduate researchers from nearby
primarily undergraduate institutions. To broaden research awareness and
participation beyond her own research group, the principal investigator will
organize seminar courses on local biology research to introduce freshmen to the
excitement of modern biological research using publications written at their
home institution coupled with lab tours and meetings with the authors and other
scientists. Together, these activities will train and educate graduate and
undergraduate students while elucidating how plant peroxisomes are turned over.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific project goals are to identify and
characterize pexophagy, the selective autophagy process by which peroxisomes are
degraded when they are damaged or no longer needed by the host cell. Selective
autophagy receptors bring the condemned organelle to the autophagy machinery;
the first goal of this project is to identify the plant pexophagy receptor(s).
Several candidate receptors will be directly tested for a role in pexophagy in
plants, and a genetic screen designed to recover mutants with pexophagy defects
will be conducted to uncover additional unanticipated components. The second
goal is to identify and characterize signals on the peroxisome that are
recognized by the pexophagy receptor(s) to promote plant pexophagy. These
experiments will determine if ubiquitin at the peroxisome surface is sufficient
for pexophagy and will exploit the wealth of mutants and tools developed in
prior studies of Arabidopsis peroxisome biogenesis and function. The results of
this research will provide a requisite knowledge base for future investigations
of organelle dynamics and are expected to facilitate future peroxisome-based
improvements in plant metabolism and stress adaptations.