* 1516197
* Simulating Core-collapse Supernovae: from the Central Engine to the Stellar Surface
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* William Hix, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 07/31/2019
* USD 254,990.00

Massive Stars, like Betelgeuse in the Constellation Orion, end their lives as a
core-collapse supernova. These powerful explosions mark the birth of a neutron
star and spread a wave of ejecta, including a wealth of newly-made chemical
elements, into the galaxy. Many of the elements that make up ourselves and our
planet were produced in past supernova explosions. The modern understanding of
the supernova explosion highlights highly turbulent ejecta heated by neutrinos
that are escaping from the newborn neutron star. This project will study these
explosions and their ejecta with a focus on i) how the nuclear physics aspects
that determine the structure of the newborn neutron star influences the
supernova explosion, and ii) how the developing highly turbulent, neutrino-
driven dynamics of the supernova influences the production of chemical elements
by the explosion. These tasks will provide excellent training grounds for
graduate students in theoretical nuclear physics and computational
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators and their students will use the
CHIMERA neutrino radiation hydrodynamic code to perform two and three
dimensional simulations of the supernova explosions for a number of star masses.
In order to investigate the impact of the nuclear physics of the neutron star on
the explosion, models using a series of nuclear equations of state will be
explored. This study will reveal the physical regimes where the nuclear equation
of state has the most influence on the supernova explosions. In order to
investigate the nucleosynthesis of core-collapse supernovae, the investigators
will utilize post-processing analysis (via tracer particles and a large nuclear
reaction network) to explore the full nucleosynthesis impact of a range of
models. This will be abetted by additional simulations that include larger, more
realistic nuclear reaction networks within the CHIMERA simulations. Together,
these models are expected to provide the most realistic simulation to date of
the elemental and isotopic production of core-collapse supernovae.