* 1516969
* X-ray Bursts, Superbursts, and Outbursts from Accreting Neutron Stars: What heats the Interior?
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Edward Brown, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2019
* USD 271,319.00

Neutron stars are the densest objects in the Universe and have fascinated
theorists and observers since they were first conjectured. Despite a wealth of
observations across the electromagnetic spectrum over the last four decades,
much of what happens in their deep interior remains inscrutable. Owing to X-ray
telescopes such as Chandra, laboratory nuclear experiments, and perhaps in the
near future gravitational wave detectors such as the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO), knowledge of neutron star physics is
growing rapidly. Indeed, the National Academy report, "Connecting Quarks with
the Cosmos: Eleven Science Questions for the New Century" identified the nature
of matter at exceedingly high density and temperature as one of the eleven
critical science questions for the twenty-first century. Moreover, the recent
2010 Decadal Survey "New Worlds, New Horizons" identifies as one of its Frontier
questions for Stars and Stellar Evolution, "What controls the mass, radius, and
spin of compact stellar remnants?" The models developed in this project will
enable existing and future observations to further our knowledge of the physics
of dense matter and stellar evolution.

This project includes activities to recruit the next generation of scientists
and to inform the public and provides support of a graduate student for three
years. The project supports an undergraduate to assist with running the codes
used in the project, and to assist with testing, maintaining, and posting
educational resources using the open-source MESA stellar evolution code. The PI
with assistance from the undergraduate will develop problem sets, plots, and
animations using MESA. Michigan State is a large public institution with a
diverse student population and will serve as a testbed for development of these
resources. In particular, the PI will develop problem "templates" so that
students can more readily use MESA to explore stellar physics. These tools will
be posted on the MESA web forum http://mesastar.org/. Posting these tools will
make it easier for other instructors to adopt MESA for classroom instruction and
is expected to motivate others to post their results as well. For public
outreach, the PI will incorporate discoveries made during the tenure of this
award into public talks at Michigan State's Abrams Planetarium.

More technically, for neutron stars in low-mass X-ray binaries, in which the
neutron star accretes hydrogen- or helium-rich material, there is a wealth of
time-dependent phenomena spanning a wide range of timescales. During accretion,
runaway thermonuclear burning of the accreted matter is observable as a Type I
X-ray burst. The thousands of observed X-ray bursts, the rarer and more
energetic superbursts, and the cooling transients all encode information about
the physics of dense matter, in particular the sub-nuclear-density "crust" of
the neutron star. For over a decade the model of the neutron star's crust has
been that the three layers influence each other: the short bursts produce the
fuel for superbursts, superburst ashes form the outer crust, and nuclear
reactions in the crust heat the envelope. In the last several years, however,
evidence has steadily mounted that this picture is at best incomplete, and that
additional, strong, shallow---and as yet unidentified---heat sources are
present. This project will generate global models of the neutron star crust with
the latest nuclear reaction physics, including a newly discovered neutrino
cooling mechanism, and use existing and future observations of cooling
transients, superbursts, and X-ray bursts to constrain the depth and strength of
additional heating in the crust. In addition, they will make predictions for the
uniqueness of the crust composition as a function of density, which is important
for determining the neutron star's thermal and magnetic evolution as well as its
ability to sustain a mass quadrupole.