* 1516896
* Controlled, Sequential Folding of Structured RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Craig Martin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2019
* USD 655,585.00

Ribonucleic acid polymers (RNA) are similar to proteins in that they can fold
into defined three-dimensional shapes that are important for their function.
RNAs have many functions in the cell in addition to coding for protein
synthesis, and some long non-coding RNAs are now known to fold into structures
that possess protein-like functions. This project will develop novel methods
that will allow researchers to understand the complex process of RNA folding in
biology, and to control this process to produce designed RNA molecules with
desired three-dimensional shapes for use in synthetic biology. The project has
the potential to revolutionize the study of RNA folding, providing a better
understanding of how RNAs fold in living cells. To bring an appreciation of such
biomolecular structures to the general public, the project will expand the
"Molecular Playground," a system that projects animated, architectural scale
molecular images in public spaces, with which the public can directly interact
through a simple wave of the hand (a passerby can, for example, "grab" and
rotate the molecule to see it from all sides). Specifically, the project will
facilitate installation of inexpensive exhibits in middle and high schools,
including those serving groups underrepresented in science, with an aim towards
exciting young people towards the exploration of STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sequential, cotranscriptional folding of long
noncoding RNAs (ncRNA), often accompanied by programmed RNA polymerase pausing,
is now appreciated to be critical to proper ncRNA function. Current in vitro RNA
folding studies do not mimic the resulting directed topological constraints.
Using toehold mediated strand displacement this proposal will develop a novel
system that allows controlled, sequential release of RNA from an unstructured
RNA-DNA duplex, modeling sequential, cotranscriptional folding. Breaking the
exogenous displacing DNA strand into two segments or introducing mismatches in
it allows the introduction of controlled pausing in folding. Initial
characterization of the system will follow folding of fluorescent aptamers, and
later studies will be directed at understanding folding of the coenzyme B12
riboswitch, a system known to require polymerase pausing. Critically,
perturbations will not be introduced into the RNA itself, but will be engineered
only into the displacing strand, providing a native fold in all cases. This
novel approach has the potential to revolutionize the study of RNA folding,
providing a better understanding of how ncRNAs fold in vivo, and providing new
tools for synthetic biology.