* 1516742
* Developing an informal environmental health education model for use in Tribal communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Diana Rohlman, Swinomish Indian Tribal Community
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 296,147.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants. The project
will develop an informal tribal community-based environmental health (EH)
education framework based on Indigenous knowledge, practices, and learning
styles using a First Foods paradigm. First Foods represent a unique, place-based
knowledge and practice, intimately tied to traditional ecological knowledge.
Most (if not all) tribal communities in the United States have knowledge and
practices centered around their local natural resources and First Foods. By
building, testing and evaluating an innovative EH education model based on a
culturally-meaningful local knowledge source, First Foods, this project seeks to
increase informal STEM learning in tribal communities. American Indians and
Alaska Natives account for 2% of the population but only 0.1% of STEM-related
degrees. By working specifically with this underserved and underrepresented
group, this project seeks to engage tribal community members in informal STEM
learning, increasing access to informal learning settings, particularly for
young people who are not currently engaged in formal STEM learning environments.
The EH framework will be disseminated locally, regionally and nationally through
Indian Health Boards, conferences, and with other tribal communities interested
in informal STEM education and environmental health
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will review established EH and First
Foods program curricula to develop a tribal-specific community-based EH
education framework. The project will use the contextual model of informal STEM
learning developed by Falk and Dierking, which is designed to integrate
personal, sociocultural and physical aspects of learning. The project will adapt
this model in order to create a space for community experience to enrich
learning, as well as expanding the view of the physical context beyond the
biophysical environment to encompass a holistic definition of the living
environment. This model and framework will be developed in an iterative manner,
with continuing formative evaluations both internally and externally. The
overarching hypothesis is that the proposed model will increase informal STEM
learning by providing a culturally meaningful education platform that resonates
with tribal community members. The model will focus heavily on the sociocultural
aspect of learning, striving to collaboratively design a CBEH education program
that is appropriate and adaptable for tribal communities and includes pertinent
EH themes and information. Metrics and evaluation techniques will be developed,
as relevant, for the iterative evaluation of specific program components. Year 1
development and evaluation will focus on the review of community-based EH
activities, design of the project EH model and prototype program components.
Critical review will be provided by project advisors, the Swinomish Health and
Human Services Committee, and tribal elders. Year 2 will focus on the
implementation of prototype program components. The project external evaluator
will use mixed methodologies, including observation, interviews, pre-and post-
surveys, participant ranking of activities/events, and quantitative analysis of
attendance at EH events. A tribal-university partnership has been established
that includes expertise in informal STEM learning, environmental health program
evaluation, cultural competency, and outreach and engagement.