* 1516357
* US-German Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Field Potentials in the Auditory System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Catherine Carr, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2019
* USD 224,480.00

The goal of the project is to provide a better understanding of what neural
processes make up extracellular potentials recorded from brain, like the
electroencephalogram (EEG). Although recorded in many settings, these potentials
are poorly understood. Yet, they are clinically important; for instance, they
are used for diagnosis of epilepsy and early detection of deafness. Development
of differential diagnostic tools depends on understanding what brain components
contribute to the recorded potentials. The investigators use a combination of
quantitative modeling and recordings from the auditory system of the Barn Owl to
gain insight into the connection between field potentials and their neuronal
generators. In addition to better understanding of a widely used diagnostic
tool, a further societally relevant outcome of the project lies in training
women in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. The U.S. and the
German laboratories in this international collaboration have a strong commitment
to science education and a well-established track record of training research
fellows, as well as high school students and undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extracellular field potentials are typically
generated by various neuronal sources, making their interpretation difficult.
They are, however, clinically important, with applications ranging from
diagnostics to brain-computer interfaces. In the auditory system, for example,
the auditory evoked potential, also called the auditory brainstem response (ABR)
is widely used for newborn hearing screening but little is known how specific
nuclei contribute to it structure. Motivated by clinical relevance and
theoretical importance of understanding extracellular field potentials, the
international team applies a combined computational and neurophysiological
investigation of the extracellular field potential in a bird model system. The
targeted neural structure, the Nucleus Laminaris in the Barn Owl, is homogeneous
and well organized, and allows direct access to a system with a large
extracellular field potential. The investigators' models and experiments
delineate the potential contributions of the three possible sources of the
extracellular field potentials. The approach tightly integrates theory and
experiments, to provide a fundamental understanding of the connection between
the extracellular field potentials and their neuronal generators. The results
from this collaborative cross-disciplinary effort will provide a basis for the
interpretation of the clinically relevant ABR. A companion project is being
funded by the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).