* 1516557
* A Multidisciplinary Network Analysis of Muskuloskeletal Complexity, Integration, Modularity, and Evolvability of the Primate Head and Limbs
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Rui Diogo, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2016
* USD 100,907.00

Primates are a diverse group of mammals in terms of their anatomy, and it is not
well understood how the various anatomical parts (modules) of the primate body
evolved into very different forms that still function properly. This question
extends to modern humans, whose anatomy has changed dramatically from our ape
ancestors, allowing complex functions to include breathing, speaking, chewing,
swallowing, walking, running, and using tools. New studies, methods and
techniques are thus needed to identify and compare patterns of organization,
integration, modularity, evolvability and complexity of the muscles and skeleton
of the head and limbs, to have a more comprehensive and integrative view of the
evolutionary history of the human body. This pilot project will investigate
these anatomical relationships and patterns through sophisticated anatomical
network analyses of existing data from a wide range of primate species. Broader
impacts of this project include student support and training in the life
sciences at universities that serve underrepresented minorities, K-12 and public
science outreach efforts, and open-access websites, databases, and repositories
for data that will be of interest across a range of disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of researchers have focused on how the various
structures of the primate body evolved into very different forms that still
function properly, but there are differing views about how to answer this
fundamental question for human evolution. Concepts like anatomical "modules" and
"integration" are mentioned, but there is a lack of agreement about what these
terms mean in the human body. This project uses anatomical network analysis to
identify and compare patterns of organization, integration, modularity,
evolvability and complexity of muscles and skeleton of the head and limbs. A
unique strength of this network approach is that it enables direct comparisons
among different tissues (e.g. bones, muscles) and body parts with vastly
different architectures (e.g. heads, limbs). This project will combine large and
complex amounts of data collected from numerous primate taxa and different
structures and tissues to detect muscle, skeletal and musculoskeletal head and
limb modules and morphological patterns that cannot be detected by using other
methods, and compare these modules and patterns to infer evolutionary trends in
primate and human body morphology in a more comprehensive way. Specific
hypotheses about the relative modularity and complexity of the head versus
limbs, and about increased and unique network complexity in the human head, will
be addressed.