* 1516105
* RUI: Hadron Structure and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Mary Alberg, Seattle University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 167,819.00

The proton is a particle that is central to our understanding of matter in the
universe. It is found in the nucleus of every atom and contributes to the fusion
reactions that fuel the stars. Protons are constructed from basic building
blocks of matter called quarks, antiquarks (the antimatter counterparts of the
quarks) and gluons, but the ways in which these constituents contribute to the
properties of the proton are not completely understood. For example, the proton
has a property called spin, which is used in medical applications such as MRI
scans, but detailed knowledge of how the spins of the quarks and gluons combine
to give the spin of the proton is still missing. In this project the
investigator will use theoretical models to study the contributions of strange
quarks and antiquarks to the properties of the proton and compare the results to
experimental measurements from facilities such as the Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory and the Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. Undergraduate
students will participate in the project, receive training in nuclear and
particle physics that is complementary to their undergraduate coursework and
gain experience in research methods and scientific communication. The students
will present their work at professional meetings and to the broader public.

The goal of this project is to determine the strangeness distributions of the
proton and the contribution of strangeness to the proton's electromagnetic
properties. Strangeness in the proton refers to its strange and anti-strange
quarks, which are created by fluctuations of the proton into meson-baryon states
or by quark and gluon interactions. Strangeness distributions describe the share
of the proton's momentum that is carried by the strange or anti-strange quarks,
which may differ from one another (strangeness asymmetry). Strangeness
distributions are important both for our understanding of the structure of the
proton, and because they affect the cross sections predicted for dark matter
searches. The PI and her students will develop a meson cloud model to represent
the fluctuations of the proton into pairs of strange mesons and strange baryons.
A statistical model will be used to describe the strange distributions that are
created in the mesons and baryons by quark and gluon interactions. Comparison
will be made with experimental results for total strangeness and strangeness
asymmetry. A light cone model of strangeness wave functions will be used to
calculate strangeness electric and magnetic form factors, from which limits on
strangeness in the nucleon can be determined from experimental measurements.