* 1516976
* Chromatin Structural Dynamics Studied with DNA Origami Nanotechnology
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Michael Poirier, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

Understanding the physical properties of the genome (which is composed of DNA)
is essential to determining how processes such as gene expression, DNA
replication, and DNA repair are controlled. A wide range of organisms organize
their genome by repeatedly wrapping the DNA into small spools called
nucleosomes. As a gene is expressed, replicated or repaired the organization of
the nucleosomes is rearranged, and this project will develop a new approach to
enable the study of chromatin structural dynamics over the length of a gene,
thereby enabling new physical insights into how genes are turned on and off.
Interdisciplinary training will be provided in a wide range of fields from
molecular biology and biochemistry to nanotechnology and single molecule
biophysics. The researchers will integrate this project into outreach programs
including a Minority Engineering Program, Women in Engineering, and the Masters
to PhD Bridge Program, all of which serve to increase the diversity of the next
generation of STEM researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromatin structural
dynamics control the accessibility of DNA to complexes that regulate
transcription, repair DNA damage and replicate DNA. Conversion between open
euchromatin that is accessible to DNA regulatory complexes and compact
heterochromatin that is inaccessible is essential for genome regulation and
processing. Currently, there is a lack of tools for probing critical events
during gene regulation at specific DNA sequences (i.e. promoter regions) that
span 10-100nm over multiple nucleosomes. To address this challenge, the
principal investigators will: (1) develop nanoscale hinge devices using DNA
origami nanotechnology to quantitatively measure mesoscale conformational
dynamics of chromatin; and (2) determine the 10-100nm structural dynamics of H1
compacted chromatin. The conformational changes in these nano-hinges will be
detected by transmission electron microscopy and single molecule fluorescence.
The development and application of these single molecule methods will provide
new tools and insight into the structural events that occur within chromatin as
it converts between distinct functional states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded jointly by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.