* 1516131
* Analysis of Multidimensional Problems for Nonclassical Shocks and Classical Shock Reflection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Allen Tesdall, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 140,000.00

A shock wave is a propagating disturbance in a liquid, gas, or plasma (a fluid
in physics terminology) that is characterized by an abrupt change in fluid
properties, such as density or pressure, across the wave front. Shock waves are
ubiquitous in nature, from quantum levels to cosmological scales. They occur in
a great variety of physically important phenomena, such as the air flow around
an airliner's wing, flows of dense granular materials, fluids undergoing liquid-
solid or vapor-liquid phase transitions, magneto-hydrodynamics, nonlinear
elasticity, and many other important situations. The mathematical theory
describing realistic multi-dimensional dynamics for these phenomena is under-
developed. This project will focus on several important problems whose solution
holds the promise of elucidating general phenomena. In particular, the project
will consider the glancing shock reflection problem (that originated from the
problem initially proposed by John von Neumann), formation of shocks in
supersonic regimes, and others. The project will bring high-performance
computing to bear on the understanding of these problems; the numerical
solutions obtained have the potential to lead to advances in the theory.

This project addresses the mathematical modeling and analysis of a number of
multi-dimensional Riemann problems whose solutions contain classical or
nonclassical shocks. A common theme of much of the work in this project is the
formulation of problems using asymptotic model equations that retain the
essential physics present in the underlying governing equations. These
asymptotic models can then be solved numerically, enabling vastly greater
numerical resolution to be achieved in regions where the solutions exhibit
small-scale features. The project addresses fundamental questions in
compressible fluid flow and nonlinear hyperbolic systems, including those
systems that admit small-scale dependent shocks (examples include models for
magneto-hydrodynamics, phase transitions, complex fluids, etc.). The
mathematical theory of the Euler equations of gas dynamics, and more generally
of hyperbolic conservation laws, is largely incomplete in more than one space
dimension, and the project will attack a number of multidimensional problems
that are likely to be amenable to solution. Numerical solutions of these
problems have the potential to lead to the development of the theory and resolve
various paradoxes in the existing theories.