* 1516466
* PLUM RX: Researching a new pathway for bringing active science exploration to urban families
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Marisa Wolsky, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,989,723.00

Capitalizing on the appeal of the PBS KIDS project PLUM LANDING, PLUM RX will
research and develop resources to help families and educators infuse
environmental science learning into outdoor prescription programs, while
ensuring they are appropriate for broad use in other informal settings. The
growing outdoor prescription movement is designed to increase the amount of time
children spend outside in nature. Programs are structured so that health care
providers write "prescriptions" for children to engage in outdoor activity, and
informal educators "fill" these prescriptions by facilitating youth and family
participation in outdoor activities. There is preliminary evidence that these
programs are getting kids outside, but best practices for transitioning "get
outside" programs to become "get outside and learn about the environment"
programs remain unidentified. PLUM RX is designed to build this knowledge and
create resources that are responsive to the needs of both English and Spanish-
speaking urban families. The project will work with informal educators and
families through multiple cycles of implementation and revision, testing and
refining PLUM LANDING resources (animations, videos, games, hands-on science
activities, and support materials for informal educators and families), with the
goal of designing an effective and accessible PLUM RX Toolkit for national
dissemination. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, Mathematics) learning in informal environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is designed to ensure that the PLUM
RX Toolkit--the resources and support materials--will meet the needs of
educators working in non-specialized urban settings. Education Development
Center (EDC) and WGBH developers will collaborate on design-based research at
three urban outdoor prescription programs serving low-income families:
Philadelphia Nature Rx in Philadelphia, PA; Outdoors Rx in Boston, MA; and
Portland Rx Play in Portland, OR. Moving through cycles of implementation,
observation, analysis, and revision, the research team will work closely with
educators, families, and developers to determine how the programmatic and
structural features of the learning environment, the actions of the educators,
and the intervention itself can most effectively support children and families'
outdoor exploration in urban contexts. Toolkit materials will include resources
for kids and families (including Spanish-speaking families) and informal
educators (including those who work with families and directly with children in
out-of-school settings). Directors from the three urban outdoor prescription
programs will contribute to every phase of the research process, including
recruiting families and youth who will participate in a weekly sequence of
activities. The overarching focus of the analysis process will be on
systematically describing the interaction between two dimensions of
implementation: What happened during pilot implementations, and the factors that
constrained or supported implementation as planned; and the quality of what
happened, which will be defined with reference to the intended impacts. EDC will
use a structured descriptive coding process to analyze the qualitative evidence
gathered through interviews and observations during design and testing periods.
Products of the research activities will include: a series of formative memos to
the development team; a report mapping changes made to PLUM RX Toolkit materials
in response to formative input and the intended impact of those changes; and
findings regarding commonalities and differences across sites in the interaction
of local contextual factors and the implementation success of the PLUM RX
Toolkit. Concord Evaluation Group (CEG) will provide independent, summative
evaluation of the project. Through this process, PLUM RX will build broader
knowledge about how to design educational resources, geared for both families
and informal educators, which respond to the unique challenges of exploring
environmental science in urban environments.