* 1516236
* Collaborative Research:  Multiscale Modeling and Experimental Study of Blood Cell Interactions with Application to Functionalized Leukocytes Killing Cancer Cells
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Yaling Liu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

More than 90% of cancer-related deaths are caused by cancer metastasis, the
spread of a cancer. In many cases, cancer cells escape from the primary tumor
and enter vasculature to form circulating tumor cells (CTCs). CTCs inside blood
vessels are able to adhere to vessel walls, and then migrate into tissues,
eventually forming micro-metastases. Recently, it was found that when nano-
particles coated with certain types of ligands and receptors on their surfaces
were injected into the blood, these particles can bind to CTCs and subsequently
trigger death of CTCs in the blood. The project concerns using integrated
mathematical/computational modeling and experiments to understand quantitatively
how this binding process occurs and to identify the roles that ligand-receptor
binding and cell-cell interactions play during this process. Results from the
project will shed light on designing new nano-particle medical processes for the
treatment of cancer metastasis and broadly extend the knowledge of blood cell
dynamics. The results are of practical importance in many applications in both
bio-engineering and medical communities. The research will also provide
interdisciplinary training for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining
modeling, simulation and experiments, this project addresses a key biological
question of importance to understanding cancer metastasis. What are the key
factors that contribute to improving the efficiency of coated nano particles for
triggering the death of circulating cancer cells within the vascular system? New
three-dimensional multi-scale models will be developed for this study. In this
context, a novel sub-model representing cell membrane mechanics, a fluid-
structure interaction simulation method and a stochastic ligand-receptor bond
bind/unbinding sub-model will be developed and coupled. Atomic force microscopy
and micro-fluidic experiments at three spatial scales will be designed for model
validation and verifying simulation predictions. The transformative strategy of
coupling calibrated multi-scale simulations with experiments will enable testing
of novel hypothesized mechanisms by which certain coatings of liposomes kill
flowing tumor cells. These goals will be achieved by using an iterative
procedure involving development of sub-models, running experiments to validate
the sub-models, and then running predictive simulations and designing new
experiments for verification of these predictions.