* 1516220
* Epigenetic Control and the Checkpoint-Exempt Status of Telomeres
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Kurt Runge, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2019
* USD 660,000.00

This project will address a key feature of an organism's response to DNA damage
that permits it to survive and divide. Cells as diverse as yeast and humans
package their DNA with proteins called histones. One particular chemical
modification of histone allows cells to recognize, respond to and repair damage
to DNA. However, this histone modification is present in some parts of the DNA
but absent in others, and the regions lacking this special modification have a
reduced response to damaged DNA. This project will determine how this particular
modification is excluded from some histones, and what role this exclusion has in
normal cell growth. The outcomes of this work will greatly improve our
understanding of how humans and other organisms respond to environmental insults
that damage DNA, and provide a vehicle for training graduate students in the
thinking and practice of science. This project will also provide undergraduate
students with their first experience in scientific research beyond the
classroom, and with real-world applications of their science, technology and
math skills before entering the work force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telomeres are
the regions at the ends of chromosomes, and the manner in which the stable
telomere ends are distinguished from the unstable ends generated by double-
strand breaks elsewhere in chromatin is a fundamental question in the fields of
genome integrity and chromosome biology. While double-strand breaks cause growth
arrest and promote genomic instability by DNA recombination, telomeres have
functions that allow continuous cell growth and the complete replication of the
chromosome end. Telomeres are composed of DNA repeat tracts bound by specific
proteins, and previous studies have focused on the role of telomere proteins in
suppressing recombination and cell cycle arrest. However, recent work in the
fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe has implicated an epigenetic
modification in this process. Specifically, a key feature that prevents damaged
telomeres with bound DNA damage response proteins from causing cell cycle arrest
is the lack of dimethylation of histone H4 lysine 20 (H4K20me2) in nucleosomes
near the telomere DNA. The H4K20me2 modification is conserved from S. pombe to
mammals, and its absence near telomeres is thought to allow them to incur damage
and still allow cell growth, making telomeres a DNA damage checkpoint-exempt
region of the genome. How telomeres exclude H4K20me2 is unknown. This project
will advance our understanding of H4K20me2 exclusion using a rapidly inducible
telomere formation system in S. pombe. This system will be used to determine how
the H4K20me2-free state is established. Defining how much of the chromosomal end
excludes H4K20me2 has important implications for the portions of the genome
exempt from DNA damage-induced arrest, and also for our understanding of how
cells regulate genome stability. Using a combination of chromatin
immunoprecipitation and genetic approaches, this project will determine if the
H4K20me2-free state is restricted to telomeres, or also spreads into the
adjacent chromatin.