* 1516156
* Structural Features of the Dynamic Interfaces in Fatty Acid Biosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Michael Burkart, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2019
* USD 684,072.00

Fatty acid biosynthesis has emerged as the central pathway for hydrocarbon
production of biofuel, and green algae have become an attractive host for
efficient biomass production. While scientists have understood the basic
mechanisms of de novo fatty acid synthase (FAS), recent studies have indicated
that our understanding of the molecular events that organize and regulate this
pathway are poorly understood; and engineering these pathways remains
challenging. This project aims to carefully study the molecular regulation of
the FAS pathway in bacteria and algae, with a goal toward enabling metabolic
engineering this pathway for biofuel applications. The investigators have
already demonstrated that the development of an alternative fuel source from
microalgal biomass has created many significant opportunities for education and
community outreach. With the potential to provide the requisite energy for
continued human progress and development, algal biofuels will almost certainly
play a major role in our energy future. As such, a significant aspect of this
research aims to augment student and public awareness of the need for
alternative energy sources and the positive impacts of the widespread adoption
of algal biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic pathway and mechanisms of FAS
are included in most introductory biochemistry textbooks, and much has been
known about the organization of this pathway for several decades. However,
attempts to engineer FAS in various organisms have been met with unpredictable
results that highlight many gaps in our understanding. Recent evidence has
demonstrated that protein-protein interactions of the acyl carrier protein (ACP)
and FAS enzymes play fundamental roles regulating the reactivity and timing of
FAS processing, and these interactions are key to the successful engineering of
these pathways. This proposal aims to systematically characterize the protein-
protein interactions within the FAS of the bacterium Escherichia coli. To study
these specific interactions, the investigators have developed a toolkit that
includes chemo-enzymatic ACP-substrate conjugation coupled with solution-phase
protein NMR to elucidate the specific amino acid residues involved in these
interactions. These tools will be applied to study heterologous combinations of
FAS enzymes for metabolic engineering of FAS from E. coli and the green alga
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. The proposed research will be accompanied by the
development of a new Masters of Science program targeted to train the future
biofuels scientists that builds upon a certificate program begun by the
investigators.