* 1516288
* CRCNS: Rhythm Generation and Propagation by a Pallidostrialtal Circuit of the Basal Ganglia
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Aryn Gittis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 799,996.00

In specialized brain areas called the basal ganglia, neurons generate certain
rhythmic activity patterns during particular stages of motor processing. This
rhythmicity becomes enhanced in disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD),
where pathological activity patterns include pronounced oscillations within
certain frequency bands, increased synchrony, and phasic bursting. These
patterns of amplified rhythmicity are thought to compromise functionality of
basal ganglia networks and to contribute to motor impairments. The overarching
goal of this work is to understand how cellular and synaptic changes that occur
in PD render neural circuits in the basal ganglia more susceptible to rhythmic
activity in disease. Specifically, this research will focus on an understudied
neural circuit that is well positioned to influence rhythmicity throughout the
basal ganglia and will help to identify potential cellular targets to disrupt
pathological network activity in disease. A combination of in vivo and in vitro
physiological approaches together with computational model development,
simulation, and analysis will be used to identify biological features of this
circuit that can generate and maintain rhythmicity and to explain how this
network contributes to runaway rhythmicity in PD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
external segment of the globus pallidus (GPe) is a central nucleus within the
basal ganglia that has been strongly implicated in the onset and maintenance of
rhythmic activity. Under normal conditions, neurons in the GPe fire tonically
and independently, at rates of 10-80 Hz; after dopamine depletion, GPe neurons
become highly synchronized and fire in rhythmic bursts. The GPe interacts with
other basal ganglia nuclei through multiple circuits, one of which, a
pallidostriatal circuit linking GPe with the striatum, has only recently been
identified as a natural contributor to basal ganglia rhythmicity. A major goal
of this work is the identification of features within the pallidostriatal
circuit that generate and maintain rhythmicity and may underlie runaway
rhythmicity in pathological conditions. Achievement of this aim will help in the
location of targets that can be modulated to disrupt the pathological
amplification or propagation of basal ganglia rhythmicity. These results will be
achieved through an approach that integrates in vivo and in vitro physiological
experiments with computational model development, simulation, and analysis.