* 1516003
* Realistic Simulations of the Intergalactic Medium: The Search for Missing Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 03/31/2018
* USD 10,464.00

In the past decade new, more precise observations of the intergalactic medium
(IGM)--the hydrogen and helium gas between the galaxies produced in the Big Bang
--have revealed a discrepancy with the well-established predictions of our
computational models. In particular, precision observations of the IGM using the
Keck telescopes in Hawaii show that the temperature and ionization state of the
IGM is not what our standard cosmological simulations predict: the IGM is either
somewhat hotter than ultraviolet radiation from stars in galaxies can make it,
or the IGM is distributed differently in space than the simulations predict, or
both. There could be missing sources of heat in our models, such as energy
injection by decaying dark matter particles. The discrepancy is perplexing since
the standard model predicts the galaxy distribution exceedingly well. The
discrepancy suggests that the standard model lacks some essential ingredient
which we refer to simply as "missing physics". The significance of this project
to the nation is that it promotes the progress of science in the fundamental
field of cosmology where the US is a world leader. The project is addressing the
issue of whether we are overlooking a key component of the mass-energy content
of the universe. Precise answers require powerful tools, and the Blue Waters
supercomputer is the tool for the job. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the
investigators will systematically explore how the discrepancy between models and
observations can be removed. They will carry out on the Blue Waters
supercomputer simulations of unprecedented size and physical realism to hunt
down what the missing physics is. Since the IGM comprises most of the volume and
matter in the universe, a small discrepancy may translate into a big discovery.
Very large 3D simulations are required because the range of scales in each
dimension exceeds 4000:1. They will examine whether additional heating sources
such as X-rays and ultraviolet light from early galaxies and quasars can make up
the heat deficit. Alternatively, they will also examine whether the limited
spatial resolution in current simulations explains the discrepancy by carrying
out the first large-scale simulations of the IGM that also simulates the gas
near to galaxies in detail.