* 1516967
* Physics and Phenomenology of Galactic Winds
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Todd Thompson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2022
* USD 363,014.00

The stars, like our Sun, generate winds of very hot particles that fill the
space between stars. Particle winds are also created in clouds of gas where
stars form, and especially strong winds occur during supernovae explosions. The
investigators will study the physics, evolution, dynamics, and implications of
the different sources of galactic winds in several types of galaxies, from star-
forming dwarf galaxies to ultra-luminous starburst
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant part of the proposed work will be
carried out by graduate students, providing training in cutting-edge research.
Results will be broadly disseminated by publication in peer-reviewed journals,
conference proceedings, and by the press. In addition, the investigators propose
an education and outreach component that targets senior citizens, an important
and growing, yet traditionally significantly under-served
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will provide deliverables that
will broadly impact the scientific community. They will directly evaluate the
importance of new physics for the structure of galactic winds, an important
guide to the essential physics for current and future multi-dimensional
simulations. They will isolate important physical effects in time-dependent
simulations that may provide the key pieces to allow modelers to understand
their calculations. Finally, they will provide a tool for connecting the
underlying theory to observations and vice versa. Overall, this proposal serves
to community in two ways --- first, by exploring newly opened up discovery
spaces and second, by mapping these spaces for those who can use the results
immediately. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators' goal is to simultaneously
address the physics and phenomenology of galactic winds, connecting theory and
observation. They will do both broad sweeps through parameter space, and focused
studies of individual systems. Among the projects they will pursue, they will
(1) calculate the ram pressure acceleration of cool clouds by hot outflows, (2)
understand the ability of hot metal-rich winds to cool radiatively, producing
cool clouds in situ, (3) assess the interaction of a hot flow, potentially
loaded with cool clouds, with the surrounding circumgalactic medium in an effort
to explain recent observations, (4) calculate the acceleration of clouds by
momentum deposition, including a comparison of theory and data for individual
galaxies and large surveys, (5) understand the interaction of momentum
deposition in turbulence, and (6) calculate the dynamics of two-fluid dust+gas
radiation hydrodynamical flows.