* 1516680
* Collaborative Research: Tectonic and climatic forcing of hydrological systems in the southern Great Basin: Implications for ancient and future aquatic system resilience
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* John Wilson, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,526,181.00

The southern Great Basin is among the most arid regions in North America. It has
almost no&lt;br/&gt;perennial streams, but does have &gt;1,000 springs. These
springs are islands of aquatic habitat&lt;br/&gt;in an ocean of desert.
Remarkably, many of these isolated springs contain diverse
aquatic&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems and even endemic species of fish, spring snails,
and other aquatic organisms. The&lt;br/&gt;presence of many aquatic species that
can only survive in water is evidence that the springs&lt;br/&gt;are remnants of
a perennial drainage system, and the presence of endemic species
requiring&lt;br/&gt;intervals in the million-year range for genetic divergence
are evidence that at least some&lt;br/&gt;of these springs have never desiccated
over the geological time scale. Aquatic biogeographical&lt;br/&gt;patterns thus
inform the geological and hydrological history of the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to expand the already-large
regional biogeographical database and to use the combined&lt;br/&gt;new and
preexisting data to test models of tectonic and paleohydrological evolution of
the&lt;br/&gt;southern Great Basin. The PIs will focus on two timescales: that
of the extensional breakup of&lt;br/&gt;the region from the late Miocene to the
present and that of glacial/interglacial climate cycles.&lt;br/&gt;Extensive
work has been done to understand the extensional history of the region, which
started&lt;br/&gt;in the eastern portion of the study area at ~14 Ma and
migrated westward to the Sierra Nevada&lt;br/&gt;front, driven by plate-boundary
dynamics. They will simulate this evolution using a regional&lt;br/&gt;quasi-3D
kinematic/tectonic-geomorphic-hydrologic coupled model that fully couples
movement&lt;br/&gt;along faults, mass distribution, magmatism, isostatic
compensation and flexural deformation&lt;br/&gt;with hydrology and surface
geomorphic processes, including erosion and deposition. The
extensional&lt;br/&gt;fragmentation of the hydrological system will be studied
and groundwater flow, necessary to&lt;br/&gt;simulate the resulting development
of springs, will be an integral part of the regional tectonic-geomorphic-
hydrologic model.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;Modeled paleohydrologic histories will
be tested against biotic data (aquatic biota inventories,&lt;br/&gt;microbial
and macrofaunal DNA, and genetic divergence times) with island biogeography
theory.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will test for relations of hydrologic fragmentation
chronology with endemic species and&lt;br/&gt;for ecosystem diversity with
spring resilience, as inferred from groundwater ages and
climatically&lt;br/&gt;driven modeling. They will use these results to assess
and improve their tectonic/paleohydrologic models.