* 1516918
* Computational Modeling of Protein Degradation by Biological Nanomachines
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* George Stan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2020
* USD 591,529.00

Cell survival is critically dependent on tightly regulated protein degradation
mechanisms. Biological nanomachines that mediate protein degradation use
repetitive mechanical forces to unfold, translocate (move), and destroy excess
or defective proteins. Understanding these mechanisms is of central importance
for deciphering the details of essential cellular processes. This project will
use computer simulations at multiple scales to elucidate 1) the dependence of
protein unfolding and translocation actions on force directionality and 2) the
nature of collaboration between components of the biological machines involved
in the degradation process. The knowledge gained through this project will
advance understanding of the relationship between structure and function in
these biological nanomachines and will reveal fundamental principles of protein
unfolding and translocation. This project integrates the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in computational biophysical chemistry
through addressing advanced scientific problems. Increased participation of
underrepresented minorities in computational sciences will be promoted through
educational and mentoring efforts. This goal will be achieved through the
collaboration between the University of Cincinnati and Central State University
(CSU), a Historically Black College and University, and will combine outreach
activities at CSU with research experience opportunities for underrepresented
minorities in the PI's laboratory. The results of this project will be
disseminated widely to the general public by the PI, graduate and undergraduate
students through publications, conference presentations, the web, and seminars
at CSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate the effect of
mechanical anisotropy on unfolding and translocation of multidomain substrate
proteins by bacterial Clp ATPases, which are members of the AAA+ superfamily of
biological nanomachines. Multiscale models will be developed to probe
nanomachine-mediated threading of multidomain constructs of substrate proteins
with diverse topology and mechanical stability along specific directions.
Computer simulations using these models will be complemented by experiments
conducted by collaborators to pinpoint remodeling pathways in restricted and
unrestricted geometries. The project will also elucidate the collaboration
between Clp ATPase and peptidase components for protein threading. Computer
simulations of atomistic and coarse-grained models will be performed to obtain a
detailed understanding of allosteric conformational transitions of the peptidase
and their role in substrate translocation. These simulations, in conjunction
with experimental studies conducted by collaborators, will establish the
residue-level interactions that underlie component specialization in these
biological machines.