* 1516074
* IUCRC RAPID: Collaborative Research: Rapid Detection & Systems Modeling for Containment and  Casualty Mitigation in Ebola Outbreak
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Eva Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 105,427.00

Emergency response and medical preparedness are primary missions of the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). SARs, bird flu, H1N1, and the recent
Ebola crisis in W. Africa underscore the critical importance of preparedness and
response. Such needs are wide-spread as globalization and air transportation
facilitate rapid disease spread across the world. The on-the-ground response
operation in W. Africa is volatile and time-critical. Every policy made, and
every resource made available must be done intelligently to facilitate rapid
containment and effective treatment of the ill to save lives. This proposal
involves advances and development of a real-time decision support system along
with a real-time detection sensor that can be used by regional and local public
health responders to prepare for and deal with pandemic emergency situations.
The work is critical for our national medical preparedness, emergency response
and population health security; and is urgent to the current W. African Ebola
combat. It allows emergency planners to: (i) determine efficient resource
allocation and operations for medical response and rapid detection,
accommodating on-the-fly changes as the situation evolves; (ii) monitor within-
facility cross contamination and disease propagation and provide guidance on
effective protection of caretakers; (iii) train regional public health agents
for emergency preparedness and familiarize them with procedural steps for
screening, handling patients, medical services, and decontamination; (iv)
analyze and assess the adequacy of existing resources (locally and from
international aid organizations), and identify budget, labor, and training needs
to facilitate rapid containment of Ebola; and to optimize treatment of the ill
under resource-stressed environments; (v) estimate costs and resources needed
for the protection of the general population, including regions outside W.
Africa; and (vi) perform large-scale virtual exercises to prepare public health
workers for pandemic scenarios.

Computational modeling and technology that facilitate rapid detection of
infected individuals, containment strategy development, tradeoff analysis,
optimal resource allocation, and look-ahead vision of results are of paramount
importance for combating infectious disease outbreaks. Such capabilities are
fundamental to the public health emergency response infrastructure, and are
critical to our national public health population protection mission. The goal
of this project is to support the current mission of World Health Organization,
the US Military Operation United Assistance, and CDC in the combat against
Ebola. The containment of Ebola in W. Africa is fundamental to preventing a
global epidemic. Specifically, two aims will be carried out. First, a
computational decision support framework to optimize scarce resources for rapid
disease containment will be designed and implemented. Our approach will couple a
disease propagation model with both a treatment queuing model and optimization
engine to determine the optimal resources needed for disease containment. The
resulting system will empower on-the-ground policy makers with strategies for
effective casualty mitigation, risk monitoring and tracing, and population
protection during a pandemic, under strained time and limited medical/labor
supplies. The proposed system has real-time capability for live data-feeds and
allows re-configuration on the fly as the event unfolds. It will be tailored for
the current Ebola response effort in W. Africa, and for CDC public health
preparedness within the United States. High-risk populations identified by our
system will be fed into the second aim for rapid and early detection.
Specifically, a handheld device that integrates real-time sensors for Ebola
virus detection in saliva will be prototyped and tested using the state-of-the-
art nanotechnology. Assisted by infectious disease experts, experiments will be
carried out to study the technical performance of sensor sensitivity and
selectivity and to develop a handheld meter along with a sensor test strip for
on-site testing. The resulting nanosensor will be reliable and cost-effective
with real-time capability for Ebola virus detection in saliva. The work
addresses an urgent need to support the W. African Ebola response and to advance
our national emergency preparedness capabilities. The real-time disease-
containment resource-optimization decision-support system offers a powerful
modeling environment that can be used and tailored for investigating and
responding to emergencies involving Ebola and other biological agents, as well
as all types of man-made or natural disasters, in resource-stressed
environments. The handheld sensor offers easy-to-use cost-effective real-time
capability that does not require special training. Optimal resource allocation
to minimize disease spread and early detection are crucial elements to
successful containment.