* 1516686
* RAPID: Ebola virus population structure, genetic diversity and evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Raul Andino, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This NSF RAPID project supports the development of an experimental and
computational platform that allows researchers to examine how the Ebola virus
genome evolves or changes with time and as it moves from bat to human hosts. The
Ebola virus is an RNA virus. Like other RNA viruses, it exists as a diverse
collection of related, but distinct individual viruses. It is thought that this
diversity allows the virus to adapt to environmental changes. The deep
sequencing of a virus population as it evolves in human and bat cells will allow
for a better understanding viral evolution and identify factors that facilitate
adaptation and lead to spread and disease. Understanding virus evolution will
better enable researchers to control future Ebola virus outbreaks and develop
better vaccines for its prevention.

The extreme capacity of RNA viruses for rapid evolution is emerging as one of
the key determinants of pathogenicity and virulence, as well as the driving
force underlying the rapid emergence of new viral strains and the development of
resistance to antivirals. Despite its importance, few conceptual and
experimental tools are currently available to study viral evolution and its
relationship to pathogenesis. In this RAPID award, the PI proposes to examine
Ebola virus evolution and its relationship to replication in human and bat
cells. The approach will combine virological experiments, novel genome analysis
approaches and computational modeling to uncover basic principles of Ebola virus
evolution. The investigators will address fundamental questions about the rules
that govern Ebola cycling between human and bats including: 1) what determines
the diversity of the virus population: the rate of generation of mutations or
the selective pressures on the virus population? 2) what are the potential
genetic structures adapted by a given virus population under different
environments and how dynamic are these structures under diverse environmental
conditions? 3) What is the relationship between viral quasispecies diversity,
fitness and adaptability? The results from these experiments will open the way
to understand how the evolution of Ebola virus populations determines the
outcome of infection. These approaches will have a major impact in vaccine
development, on the ability to anticipate and control Ebola virus outbreaks, and
on the understanding of rapid evolution of RNA genomes.