* 1516077
* Electroweak reactions in Low-energy Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Lucas Platter, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2016
* USD 70,000.00

Many important reactions in nuclear physics cannot be measured with currently
available experimental techniques. For example, the reaction probability of the
process in which two protons fuse to form a Deuteron (a bound state of a neutron
and a proton) is an important process in the sun, but cannot be measured
experimentally; only theoretical calculations can provide this rate. In the
absence of guidance from experiment, it becomes important to quantify
theoretical uncertainties. This project will address these issues for specific
reactions. Analytical and numerical calculations will be used to determine
reaction rates for astrophysically-relevant reaction rates, and new
parametrizations of the internuclear interaction will be provided. Specifically,
the PI and his students will use interactions that have been constructed using a
theoretical tool known as effective field theory. This tool is an expansion that
can be systematically improved by introducing, in a controlled manner,
additional parameters to increase the accuracy of the interaction model.
Numerical techniques will be used to determine the intrinsic error of this
approach, parametrize the interaction, and calculate the reaction rates for
selected processes. A quantification of resulting uncertainties will improve our
understanding of the internuclear interaction. This project will also provide an
excellent training ground for graduate and undergraduate students and will
contribute to a needed workforce in those technologies that rely on nuclear
physics, which are relevant to security, energy and the health care sector.
Graduate students will become familiarized with numerical methods that can be
useful when working in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project follows a
two-prong strategy that aims at improving our understanding of weak processes
using effective field theory. Firstly, a number of weak processes in few-nucleon
systems will be calculated within the unified framework of the so-called
pionless effective field theory. Specifically, the well-measured decay half-life
time of tritium will be treated and used to fix a parameter that within this
framework is required for a high-accuracy of proton-proton fusion and weak
proton capture on Helium-3. The second prong will focus on understanding the
intrinsic error of Hamiltonians and associated electroweak currents generated
with the so-called pionfull effective field theory. The PI will use novel
numerical optimization/fitting techniques to establish an ordering scheme for
the chiral potential and the associated electroweak currents that reflects the
intrinsic error of the Hamiltonian order-by-order. Together with his
collaborators, the PI will then use these results to calculate observables such
as half-life times or total decay rates to new accuracy and with correct error
estimates. The resulting interactions and currents will be made available to the
nuclear theory community.