* 1516509
* Research in Theoretical Hadronic Physics and Related Topics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Carl Carlson, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This theoretical project will support current searches for physics beyond the
Standard Model of particle physics. Although the Standard Model has been
successful in describing the elementary particles that make up most of known
matter in the Universe, many questions still remain unanswered. The theoretical
calculations by the investigator and his collaborators will support and suggest
new avenues for low-energy experiments sensitive for signatures of new physics.
A prominent such example is the proton radius puzzle, where measuring the proton
radius using electrons gives different results than using muons. The PI will
calculate corrections needed for the interpretation of the data and will study
beyond the Standard Model hypotheses to explain the proton radius puzzle, along
with suggesting new experiments for future testing of these ideas. Another
example is the case of precision electron-proton scattering experiments with
polarized electrons, where the PI will do calculations relevant to extensions of
the initial experiments that may allow measuring properties of short-lived
excited states of the proton and the possibility of comparing them to
predictions based on the current theoretical understanding of the physics
involved. Postdoctoral fellows and undergraduates will be trained and supported
by this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One thrust of the project is to find
corrections to the energy levels of muonic helium and deuterium due to the
polarization of the nuclear cores by the near-by orbiting muons. Precise results
are needed to evaluate the measured energy level data and interpret it in terms
of radius discrepancies relative to corresponding measurements using electrons.
Another thrust is to calculate two photon corrections to polarized electron
scattering in the region where the Delta resonance, one of the short-lived
proton excitations, exists. To study the Delta as an entity in itself, one
produces it using one photon and then measures it almost immediately by a
further scattering with a second photon. In this project, the PI will calculate
the precision requirements needed to obtain reliably the size and magnetic
parameters of the Delta meson.