* 1516866
* Collaborative Research: Deterministic and Statistical Relations Between the Navier-Stokes Equations and Its Determining Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Ciprian Foias, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2018
* USD 180,764.00

In this project, the principal investigators study key open problems concerning
the fundamental equations governing the atmosphere and ocean with a view towards
applications in meteorology and weather forecasting. These equations describe
fluid motions for gases and liquids under quite general conditions, from laminar
to turbulent flows, on scales ranging from below a millimeter to astronomical
lengths. Consequently, their study has wide-ranging applications in aeronautical
sciences, in meteorology, in the petroleum industry, in plasma physics, and more
recently, in biophysical fluid dynamics. The inherent nonlinear and multi-scale
nature of these equations make the problem of weather forecasting and
understanding climate evolution challenging. The investigators develop
analytical and computational tools to study the long-term behavior of the
fundamental governing equations of the atmosphere and climate. A main focus is
to connect recently developed techniques of data assimilation with the theory of
statistical solutions of these equations. This in turn facilitates the
incorporation of vast amounts of weather/climate data, collected over a long
period of time, into mathematical models of weather and climate, potentially
leading to improved statistical prediction. Graduate students are engaged in the
work of the project.

The investigators study several aspects of turbulent flows, including the time
of existence of smooth solutions, statistical properties, and the long-term
dynamics on the strong or weak global attractor, in a new class of functional
spaces that is contained in all Sobolev classes. A key feature of this class is
that the nonlinear evolution equation satisfies a differential inequality that
is almost linear. This functional class has the property that it can absorb
derivatives, which has the effect of making the nonlinear term milder, with
potential applications to a wide class of nonlinear evolution equations. For
certain types of initial data, this yields a better existence time for the
Navier-Stokes equations than some well-known Sobolev functional classes. This
new class of functional spaces is employed to study the finite-dimensional
properties of statistical solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations, via the
determining modes, nodes, and determining forms. Furthermore, the investigators
develop data assimilation techniques for statistical solutions of hydrodynamic
equations. Statistical solutions are directly related to the average physical
quantities with which engineers are concerned. They provide a bridge from the
time average of physical observables such as energy, enstrophy, and heat
transfer to ensemble measures on the phase space. The techniques developed in
this project should have immediate engineering and scientific applications.