* 1516337
* RUI: Collaborative Research: The Role of Microscopic Molecular Structure in Confined Bose-Einstein Condensates of Diatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Seth Rittenhouse, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 132,000.00

Diatomic molecules, consisting of only two atoms, are the simplest molecules
that can exist. Yet, although the structure of diatomic molecules is
comparatively simple, the molecule, with the two atoms bound together through
the overlapping structure of the electrons surrounding the atoms, demonstrates a
rich internal structure that can influence the behavior of a system in which the
diatomic molecule interacts with other molecules surrounding it. This
collaborative theoretical research program is aimed at understanding how the
microscopic structure of diatomic molecules influences the bulk behavior of
ultracold molecular gases. The goals of the program are to understand how the
details of the molecular interactions and internal molecular structure play a
role in emergent bulk phenomena in molecular Bose-Einstein condensates, and to
provide guidance and motivation for ongoing experiments. Additionally, this
research is designed to foster collaborations between scientists with
specializations in few-body and many-body quantum physics, and integrate
undergraduate student researchers in the entirety of the research process. In
particular, students are involved in developing theoretical tools and
implementing numerical calculations, and are presenting at scientific meetings
and preparing manuscripts for submission to peer reviewed journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is quantum degenerate gases of
bosonic molecules in which the spatial and microscopic degrees of freedom of the
molecules influence the bulk system behavior. Unlike many conventional condensed
matter or solid state systems, quantum degenerate gases of ultracold molecule
provide us with a great deal of control over both their microscopic and bulk
properties, and they permit the investigation of collective, emergent quantum
phenomena in unique contexts. Recent experimental progress towards the
realization of quantum degeneracy in samples of diatomic molecules promises to
significantly enhance the utility of ultracold quantum systems. This research is
motivated by the idea that the interplay of spatial and microscopic degrees of
freedom can lead to a variety of rich behaviors in quantum many-body systems,
such as an interaction driven spin-orbit coupling at the two-body level and
state-dependent dipolar interactions that exhibit strong dependence on
confinement geometry. Using mean-field and perturbative quantum field theory
methods, this research (1) generalizes a two-state model of a molecular Bose gas
to account for realistic experimental scenarios, including finite trapping
geometries, arbitrary polarization fields, and short-range interactions; (2)
extends the model to incorporate more microscopic states and apply it to
describe Bose gases of rigid rotor molecules with large effective spin degrees
of freedom; and (3) incorporates beyond-dipolar interactions, such as
quadrupolar interactions and lossy collisions, into the model. The long term
goals of this work are to develop a rigorous theoretical understanding of how
the microscopic structure of diatomic molecules influence intermolecular
interactions, and thereby play a role in emergent quantum many-body phenomena,
and to provide guidance and motivation for experiments with quantum degenerate
molecules that will be available in the near future.