* 1516446
* Peg + Cat: Developing Preschoolers' Early Math Skills
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Junlei Li, The Fred Rogers Company
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 10/31/2018
* USD 2,999,775.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This project will develop and research an
integrated children's media and early childhood educator professional
development strategy to prepare preschoolers with social-emotional skills that
provide a foundation for later math learning success. The social-emotional
skills include persistence, risk-taking, regulating anxieties, and collaborating
to solve problems. Media components include Peg+Cat television episodes, videos,
games and apps distributed through PBS broadcast and online. The integrated
professional development model is designed to impact these educators'
understanding of math and develop their skills for fostering in children a
positive math mindset. Additional resources include a new Peg+Cat summer day
camp at the Carnegie Science Center in Pittsburgh. The project partners include
a media company, The Fred Rogers Company; researchers at the University of
Pittsburgh and St. Vincent College; and the evaluator, Rockman et al. This
project is unique in its focus on integrating social-emotional skills with early
math learning and educator skill development. It will fill an important niche in
the research literature and has the potential to impact media practice which is
undergoing significant change as new digital tools and technologies become
available for learning.

Both standardized and researcher-developed measures will be used to assess
learning outcomes, including early childhood educators' attitudes and quality of
instruction, as well as children's interest and engagement in math. The research
design includes iterative data collection to inform the development and
refinement of the professional learning for teachers. The mixed methods approach
will include classroom observations, interviews and focus groups with educators,
and parent questionnaires. Key questions include: does exposure to Peg+Cat
positively relate to children's use of social-emotional skills during math
learning activities? Does educators' exposure to the professional development
training improve their attitudes and abilities to infuse math instruction with
social-emotional skills? Does having an educator who received Peg+Cat training
impact children's engagement and interest in math?