* 1516684
* Increasing Learning and Efficacy about Emerging Technologies through Transmedia Engagement by the Public in Science-in-Society Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Steve Gano, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,999,999.00

The range of contemporary "emerging" technologies with far-reaching implications
for society (economic, social, ethical, etc.) is vast, encompassing such areas
as bioengineering, robotics and artificial intelligence, genetics, neuro and
cognitive sciences, and synthetic biology. The pace of development of these
technologies is in full gear, where the need for public understanding,
engagement and active participation in decision-making is great. The primary
goal of this four-year project is to create, distribute and study a set of three
integrated activities that involve current and enduring science-in-society
themes, building on these themes as first presented in Mary Shelley's novel,
Frankenstein, which will be celebrating in 2018 the 200th anniversary of its
publication in 1818. The three public deliverables are: 1) an online digital
museum with active co-creation and curation of its content by the public; 2)
activities kits for table-top programming; and 3) a set of Making activities.
The project will also produce professional development deliverables: workshops
and associated materials to increase practitioners' capacity to engage multiple
and diverse publics in science-in-society issues. The initiative is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project by Arizona State University and
their museum and library collaborators around the country will examine the
hypothesis that exposing publics to opportunities for interactive, creative, and
extensive engagement within an integrated transmedia environment will foster
their interest in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM),
develop their 21st century skills with digital tools, and increase their
understanding, ability, and feelings of efficacy around issues in science-in-
society. These three distinct yet interlocking modes of interaction provide
opportunities for qualitative and quantitative, mixed-methods research on the
potential of transmedia environments to increase the ability of publics to work
individually and collectively to become interested in and involved with science-
in-society issues.