* 1516176
* Collaborative Research: Cortical Spreading Depression and Ionic Electrodiffusion in the Brain
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jorge Riera Diaz, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 165,000.00

A major goal of this project is to gain a better understanding of cortical
spreading depression. This is a disorder of the brain that is the basis of
migraine aura and many other diseases of the brain including stroke and
epilepsy. In this disorder the ionic environment of the brain is completely
disrupted and the nerve cells turn silent, with a disturbance that spreads at
speeds of two to five millimeters per minute across the brain. When this happens
in the visual cortex, the brain area that processes visual information, the
patient will perceive an aura, a temporary visual defect that slowly travels
over the field of view. Migraine sufferers often perceive an aura (migraine
aura) prior to a migraine attack. Better understanding the mechanisms of
cortical spreading depression will thus help in management of migraine headache
and many other pathological brain conditions. This research collaboration will
train graduate students who will work on various aspects of the project. Summer
schools will be held at Florida International University, which is a minority
serving institution. Thus this project, accompanied with existing institutional
efforts, has the potential to further the goal of increasing minority
representation in the sciences. Further, this collaborative effort brings
together experimentalists and theorists of diverse interests and strength, and
therefore provides students with an ideal opportunity for professional growth.

Cortical spreading depression is a massive redistribution of ionic
concentrations in the brain that results in a localized temporary loss of
neuronal function. This disturbance spreads through the brain at speeds of two
to five millimeters per minute and is the physiological substrate of migraine
aura. Although cortical spreading depression was first described over seventy
years ago, the physiological mechanisms leading to the disturbance remains
elusive, most likely due to the fact that it involves many biophysical
processes. In this project, a comprehensive mathematical model and computational
apparatus to simulate the phenomena will be constructed and validated with
experimental data obtained at high spatial resolution. An important aspect of
the mathematical model is that it takes into account ionic electro-diffusion, an
effect that has not been properly considered in previous studies, and may also
be relevant for illucidating mechanisms in many other neurophysiological
settings. In particular, the effects of electro-diffusion on extracellular
recordings, electroencephalography and magneto-encephalography signals will be
studied, thereby improving analysis of these measurement modalities. Overall
this research may have an impact in many other brain pathologies which are
linked to these underlying biophysical processes.