* 1516178
* Addressing the Need for Women and Minorities in Cybersecurity:  A High School Early Admit Study
* EHR,DGE
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Debra Nakama, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,873.00

The "Addressing the Need for Women and Minorities in Cybersecurity: A High
School Early Admit Study" at the University of Hawaii Maui Community College
will investigate ways to increase the number of women and minority high school
students in cybersecurity. The project will create an early-admit afterschool
career pathway for students in grades 11 and 12 that leads to a Cybersecurity
Certificate of Completion. The goal will be to motivate students to pursue jobs
from basic Computer Support Specialist through advanced level positions in
Information Assurance. The project will be implemented in a rural setting where
high schools often lack the institutional capital to offer information,
technology and computer science programs. This project will investigate what
high school women and minority students need to succeed in information security
professions. Moreover, the project will identify factors that affect high school
students' cybersecurity career interests. The project specifically targets young
women and minorities, who live in rural areas in Maui County Hawaii, without
ready access to technology. The project will be unique in that it focuses on
cybersecurity issues that are critical for small businesses, an often-overlooked
segment of the national economy.

This project will be based on an economic model in which early-admit afterschool
programs present a viable option for high school students to signal their
college/career preferences. The project will engage more than 70
underrepresented high school students with core topics in cybersecurity: (1)
participation in a combined problem-based learning (PLB) and game-based learning
environment; (2) involvement in hands-on cybersecurity competitions; (3)
connection to appropriate college academic and financial aid advising; (4)
engagement with community mentors. The project aims to have at least 80% of the
targeted participants complete all stages of the career pathway. At least 30% of
the participants will be women and Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders. The
goal of this project is to develop a model that can be replicated in other rural
communities to broaden participation for historically underrepresented students
by extracting and addressing key factors as important determinants for high
school women and minority students' cybersecurity career/job interest. The
project will also develop and train faculty and community mentors as part of
faculty-industry teams who will be in positions to disseminate cybersecurity
technician education.