* 1516330
* Determinants of Hybrid Fitness and Genome Plasticity
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2023
* Maitreya Dunham, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 08/31/2023
* USD 680,000.00

This project will advance understanding of hybrid organisms, which combine
genomes from two different species. Hybrids can demonstrate new and desirable
traits, performing better in some environments than either of the parent
species. Because of this so-called 'hybrid vigor,' hybrids are very important in
agriculture, and hybrid yeast specifically carry out many industrially important
fermentation processes. Better understanding of hybrids will allow more
effective breeding and engineering of improved crops and fermentation
microorganisms. Despite this importance, hybrid genomes are not well understood,
so this project has the potential to have high impact. In addition to its
scientific impact, the project presents numerous training opportunities. A
diverse team of undergraduate researchers will perform a significant portion of
the experiments, and a postdoctoral fellow and graduate student will be trained
in cutting edge genomics techniques. Outreach to the public will include
education on yeast biology, fermentation and genome evolution, and the project
will engage hobbyist and professional brewers in yeast genetics by enlisting
their help to discover new hybrid yeasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore a number of open questions in hybrid genomics. It will discover how
hybrids are able to adapt to new environments and develop new traits via three
potential mechanisms: eliminating genetic conflicts, leveraging genetic
variation, and taking advantage of transposon invasion. Studying these
hypotheses using naturally derived hybrids can be difficult because their
history of growth environments is largely unknown. This project will apply a
yeast experimental evolution approach to explore and understand these questions.
Hybrids will be created in the lab and evolved under new environments. By
sequencing the 'evolved' genomes, new mutations will be identified that have
arisen in the population and achieved high frequency. Experiments will determine
the relative contribution of genome rearrangements, point mutations, and
transpositions to hybrid adaptation. Comparison will then be undertaken with
hybrids isolated from industrial and natural fermentations, some of which will
be collected by brewers as part of this project. All together, the project will
lead to better understanding of the molecular mechanisms important for hybrid
vigor and adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by
the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and by the Environmental Sustainability program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems.