* 1516338
* Collaborative Research: Innovative ab initio symmetry-adapted no-core shell model for advancing fundamental physics and astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Jerry Draayer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2017
* USD 14,978.00

A team of researchers at Louisiana State University will address the significant
computational challenges inherent to modeling the intricate dynamics of atomic
nuclei, which are fundamental to a vast array of astrophysical phenomena. They
will do so by employing the petascale resources of the Blue Waters
Supercomputer. More specifically, the investigators will carry out large-scale
computations of intermediate-mass nuclei from oxygen to argon, including exotic
unstable isotopes that are the focus of current and next-generation rare isotope
experimental facilities. Such nuclei are often found key to understanding
processes in extreme environments, from stellar explosions to the interior of
nuclear reactors. Reliable nuclear structure information provided by this
research project will have impacts on basic research questions in astrophysics
and neutrino physics, and will also have potential applications in areas like
nuclear energy, thus contributing to the nation's energy infrastructure.
Training in utilizing large-scale computational resources will be provided to,
the next generation of physicists, and the team will expand the impact of their
research by providing nuclear structure information of unprecedented accuracy
and scope as a publicly available database for use by other scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSU team's approach is to solve the Schrodinger
equation for a many-body quantum system composed of protons and neutrons
interacting via realistic interactions that are tied to the underlying
quark/gluon considerations. The solution to this problem is achieved by finding
eigenstates and eigenvalues of the nuclear Hamiltonian, which is computed in a
physically relevant basis that capitalizes on exact and approximate symmetries
of nuclei. The use of such symmetries is a unique feature of our model, one that
coupled with the Blue Waters capabilities makes solutions feasible. Namely, the
team will employ the symmetry-adapted no-core shell model approach implemented
by a highly scalable computer code, dubbed "LSU3shell", that has already
demonstrated good scalability and performance on the Blue Waters system.
Calculations will provide nuclear properties of short-lived neutron-deficient
and neutron-rich isotopes with little to no available experimental data that are
expected to have a considerable impact on modeling X-ray burst observables, on
triggering processes responsible for the synthesis of many of the heavy elements
present in the universe, and on providing a stringent test of fundamental
symmetries in nature and physics beyond the Standard model.