* 1516100
* EDURange:  Supporting cyber security education with hands-on exercises, a student-staffed help-desk, and webinars
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jens Mache, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 166,526.00

The EDURange project, a collaboration between Evergreen State College and Lewis
and Clark College, will support faculty teaching cyber security by providing
hands-on exercises, a student-staffed help-desk, and webinars. These resources
will be designed to be easy to deploy and will be interactive, competitive and
collaborative to ensure student engagement. The availability of these resources
will make it easier for computer science faculty with little prior background to
teach security across, and will increase the number of schools teaching cyber
security concepts. As a result this project will produce more students with the
analytical skills required to secure computing assets in the Pacific Northwest
and in turn will help to ensure American technical competitiveness in the
future. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The resources will be linked to the concepts and
learning outcomes defined in the IEEE/ACM CS Curricula 2013 report. Support for
these resources will be provided by a student-run help desk and a user interface
that will allow faculty to modify exercises to fit the content and level of
difficulty of their classes. Background material will be provided for students
to make the exercises applicable to a variety of computer science classes. These
resources will fulfill four important needs: (1) expanding and disseminating
technology ? improving exercises using EDURange, a flexible, cloud-based
teaching infrastructure, (2) faculty development ? helping them use hands-on
security exercises in their classrooms and providing curricular resources, (3)
student engagement ? developing their skills, leveraging their talent and
knowledge, and mentoring them to become the next generation of teachers and
researchers, and (4) education research --investigating the acquisition of
analytical skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment of the resources will focus
on four activities: (1) a quantitative evaluation and summary of how often and
how widely the resources are used, (2) a qualitative assessment of how well
exercises map or express the cyber security knowledge units of CS2013, (3) an
assessment of faculty experience using the resources in their courses, and (4)
an evaluation of the experience using the resources by security faculty,
professionals, and students.