* 1516106
* Imaging the Radio Photospheres of Long-Period Variable Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Lynn Matthews, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 62,987.00

The PI will carry out a series of radio observations to study the atmospheres of
old stars with cool, dusty winds. The process that drives the winds is unknown,
but understanding it is important, and the new observations obtained in this
program will help. The amount of mass lost in dusty winds can determine the
star's fate, and the material shed from the star eventually spreads into the
interstellar medium. It is now possible to measure the size, shape, and gas
motions in the atmospheres of these stars using the Jansky Very Large Array
(JVLA) radio telescope in New Mexico. The PI and her collaborators will make
such measurements and use them to understand how the cool, dusty winds are
launched. An educational podcast centered on the theme "Radio Stars" (the fourth
in an ongoing series) will share results from this program with the general
public. The PI will mentor an undergraduate student from Haystack Observatory's
Research Experience for Undergraduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using recent
observations obtained with the JVLA, this program will produce the most
sensitive (by an order of magnitude) images to date of the radio photospheres of
a sample of five of the nearest, best-studied AGB stars. A special calibration
technique will be employed to "freeze" atmospheric phase variations, providing
near perfect, diffraction-limited radio seeing, and yielding images with an
angular resolution of ~40 mas (~4 AU at a distance of 100 pc). The extraordinary
sensitivity will allow accurate measurements of fundamental stellar parameters,
including the radius and brightness temperature, which will be compared with
model predictions and other multi-wavelength observations. Four of the sample
stars have been imaged previously at centimeter wavelengths, and two show clear
evidence for deviation from spherical symmetry. The new observations (taken at
different phases of the stellar pulsation cycle) will reveal whether the
photospheric shape is time-variable and will be used to distinguish between
possible causes of non-spherical shapes. For the stars exhibiting SiO maser
emission, simultaneous observations will provide complementary information on
the atmospheric dynamics. These will provide insight into the maser pumping and
excitation processes and radial variations in density and temperature.