* 1516975
* RUI: Atomistic Modeling of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Scott Feller, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2020
* USD 511,546.00

Title: RUI: Atomistic Modeling of Membrane Proteins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
proteins carry out their function within the environment of the cellular
membrane. In this project, the investigator will use computer modeling to
examine the effect of lipids on the structure and interactions of proteins
contained within the cellular membrane. The membrane protein that will be the
focus of this work is Rhodopsin, the protein involved in the first steps of the
vision process and one that serves as a model for an important class of membrane
proteins. Undergraduate students will be trained in this project. In addition to
learning computer simulation methods, students will present their results to the
campus community and at national and regional scientific meetings. These
presentations will prepare them for careers as scientific researchers and will
demonstrate exciting opportunities available to prospective science majors. All
science majors at the institution will be impacted during undergraduate
instruction through the transfer of molecular modeling techniques from the
research laboratory to the chemistry curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary research tool for this investigation is molecular dynamics (MD) computer
simulation. Specific projects include: (1) studies of lipid mediated protein-
protein interaction as a function of lipid type with a focus on
polyunsaturation, (2) characterization of the annulus of lipids associated with
transmembrane proteins in terms of structural, dynamic, and thermodynamic
parameters, (3) investigation of retinal-opsin interactions as a function of the
Rhodopsin photocycle to understand the extent of reciprocal control between
protein and ligand, and (4) refinement of the CHARMM force field for modified
retinal ligands to support investigations of their role as agonists. This
project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.