* 1516753
* Dynamics, singularities and asymptotics of higher order PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Alan Lindsay, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 164,986.00

This award supports the research program of the Principal Investigator (PI)
related to the applied science field of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS),
an important technology for microscopic sensors and actuators (with applications
in the automotive industry, consumer electronics, medical and health
technologies, and a number of other areas). The ability to manipulate and
predict the behavior of dynamic processes on microscopic scales is a necessity
for the design of modern nanotechnology. This can be challenging because
intuition of processes on the macro scale does not necessarily translate to very
small spatial scales. Mathematical modeling is an essential tool for bridging
this gap; however, the relevant equations are highly complex. In this project,
the PI and his students will develop analytical and computational tools for
studying these complex mathematical models. The goal is to establish a set of
mathematical methodologies for practitioners that can inform the engineering of
these important technologies. These methodologies will also be useful to many
mathematical researchers studying problems from a variety of related fields,
such as Fluid Mechanics, Pattern Formation, and Mathematical
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical modeling of nanotechnology requires a
coupling of multiple physical theories, in particular those of elasticity and
electrostatics. This gives rise to models that feature coupled systems of non-
linear and higher order (greater than two) partial differential equations. The
complex nature of these equations means that many existing tools, in particular
those based on maximum and comparison principles, are not applicable. Without
such constraining principles, these systems can exhibit rich and unexpected
patterning behaviors. To study these behaviors and their implications for the
engineering of micro-devices, the PI will develop novel singular perturbation
methods and computational techniques. The particular focus of this project is
studying singular solutions of these systems, mainly in the form of finite-time
singularities and sharp interfaces. The PI will focus on obtaining both formal
and rigorous results regarding the location, multiplicity, and local dynamics of
these singular solution structures. The analytical arm of this project will be
coupled to highly accurate and adaptive numerical simulations developed by the
PI and his students.