* 1516371
* Zinc Finger Transcription Factors: Regulators of Growth, Development, and Alkaloid Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Erin Cram, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 779,681.00

In response to cues from their environment, plants strategically redirect their
energy and resources from growth, development, and reproduction towards
processes that enable adaptation, defense, and survival. Plants need to regulate
these processes to minimize wasteful expenditures of resources. This project
will investigate how plants respond quickly and precisely to attack by using the
production of a class of defense-related compounds (called alkaloids) from the
Catharanthus roseus plant (commonly known as the Madagascar periwinkle) as an
example. Under normal conditions, growth is promoted while the production of
alkaloids is low. But in the presence of pathogens or attackers the plant
responds by producing chemical signals (such as the plant hormone jasmonic acid)
which rapidly activates the communication system that leads to the production of
these defense-related alkaloids. This project seeks to determine how the plant
coordinately regulates growth, development, and defense through a class of
regulatory switches, known as the zinc finger transcription factors. This
research will involve the interdisciplinary mentoring and advising of graduate
students and undergraduates, and the outreach to K-12 and under-represented
groups through a Research Experience for Teachers and Young Scholars Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Catharanthus roseus, the mechanism for controlling the
rapid defense response is partially mediated through activation of the zinc
finger Catharanthus transcription (ZCT) factors leading to the production of
terpenoid indole alkaloids. In addition to terpenoid indole alkaloid
biosynthesis, zinc finger transcription factors appear to be involved in other
defense and stress-related responses. In plants, Cys2-His2-type (C2H2) zinc
fingers are an important class of transcription factors involved in controlling
growth, development, and stress-responsive genes (cold, drought, salt, and
oxidative stress) that contain a unique motif involved in gene repression.
However, only a limited number of plant C2H2 zinc finger proteins have been
studied in detail. Of these, ZCT is unique in that it is the only one involved
in regulating growth and development and defense-related alkaloid biosynthesis.
The goal of this project is to better understand how plants coordinately
regulate growth, development, and defense to improve fitness and adaptation.
This project seeks to elucidate the regulatory network by which hormone inputs
coordinate the outputs of growth, development, and alkaloid biosynthesis through
ZCT. This fundamental knowledge and insight regarding plant control mechanisms
is anticipated to lead to improved resistance of crops towards stress and
pathogens, to improved production of defense-related compounds that have
medicinal value, and to artificial genetic circuits for enabling rapid
regulation of a desired output. The aims for this project are to 1) elucidate
the regulatory circuit by which ZCT's role in defense is activated through the
hormone jasmonic acid; 2) elucidate the regulatory circuit by which ZCT's role
in growth and development is activated through the hormone gibberellic acid; and
3) characterize how ZCT mediates growth, development, and defense-related
alkaloid biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported jointly by
programs in Systems and Synthetic Biology (Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences) and Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering (Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems).