* 1516476
* RAPID: The Psychology of Fear: Cultural Orientation and Response to Ebola Threat
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* Heejung Kim, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 11/30/2016
* USD 128,202.00

Ebola is one of the deadliest contagious diseases to emerge into the public
consciousness in recent years. Accompanied by truly gruesome and deadly images,
it has been a source of much fear, xenophobia, and social division across the
world. While it makes obvious sense to increase some vigilance and engage in
self-protective health behaviors, most health experts maintain that the actual
risk of contracting Ebola is extremely low, at least outside of the directly
affected regions in West Africa. Yet, the degree to which people respond to the
potential risk is vastly disproportionate to the actual risk. Thus, in many
parts of the world, the actual costs of Ebola are not the disease itself, but
the negative psychological and behavioral effects - both individual and social -
that are motivated by fear. Fear and social division are not only consequences
of Ebola, but they have the potential to transform and perpetuate negative
social consequences. Although the US is currently at low risk for Ebola
contagion, the potential costs of individual distress as well as restrictive
group protection behaviors are real. The present research proposes a
theoretically-based intervention to attenuate these negative effects. Moreover,
beyond the current Ebola concern, the knowledge gained from this research will
be relevant to other, continually occurring, international threats of contagious
diseases by potentially mitigating their psychological and social costs. This
project was submitted in response to NSF 15-006 Dear Colleague Letter on the
Ebola Virus.

This research aims to understand the psychological mechanism of fear-driven
individual and social consequences. Drawing from the knowledge-base of social,
cultural, and health psychology, two studies using large nationally
representative samples will focus on two distinct responses to disease-related
fear: 1) anxiety and stress that are detrimental to individual well-being; and
2) manifestations of group-protection to minimize risk. The project will
investigate whether cultural orientation (individualism vs. collectivism within
the US) will influence which psychological response set is most likely. The
prediction is that individualists will be more concerned with self-protection,
and thus, are more likely to experience disproportionate anxiety and stress,
whereas collectivists will be more concerned with group protection. Based on
this model, the proposed research will also test the effectiveness of
psychological interventions (self- and group-affirmation) to address the threat
and reduce the psychological and social costs of the specter of Ebola.