* 1516113
* Cyber4All: An Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity Minor for all Undergraduates
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Blair Taylor, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 336,421.00

Cybersecurity has critical political, military, economic, social,
infrastructure, and information implications for our nation. Effective
cybersecurity solutions require initiatives that not only prepare computer
scientists to be cybersecurity professionals, but extend security education to
all majors to produce a cybersecurity prepared workforce. As cyberspace has
become ubiquitous, cybersecurity has become everyone's business. A comprehensive
cybersecurity education model needs to reach all students and disciplines
impacted by cybersecurity issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber4All presents a
scalable model for Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity education that includes: (1)
An interdisciplinary cybersecurity minor--A multidisciplinary team of industry
and academic experts will design an interdisciplinary cybersecurity minor that
will include foundational security knowledge based on guidelines in
cybersecurity education. The minor will also include tracks in critical
application areas within the disciplines of health care, e-business, criminal
justice, and information technology. This minor will be designed using courses
common at most institutions and implemented so all students across all majors
can complement their undergraduate degrees with cybersecurity knowledge. (2) A
library of interdisciplinary cybersecurity modules? The multidisciplinary team
of industry and academic experts will design modules that target core
cybersecurity issues that are pertinent to that discipline. Modules will be
designed using the Security Injections@Towson framework, which has demonstrated
success introducing secure coding in computer science classes. (3) An
interdisciplinary cybersecurity ecosystem to build and sustain the curriculum?
An ecosystem will be created to include a Cybersecurity Ambassador working with
faculty fellows to champion cybersecurity education across the disciplines -
health care, e-business, criminal justice, and information technology. Cyber-
seminars and workshops will be held to increase faculty interest in
cybersecurity, foster diverse perspectives, and promote the minor.