* 1516428
* RAPID: Designing Ebola Interventions for Large Urban Areas through Agent-Based Modeling and Network Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Charles Macal, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2016
* USD 199,162.00

This research will construct a mathematical model of the spread of the Ebola
virus. The model will include parameters based on the characteristics of the
pathogen as well as the behavior of people during outbreak situations. The
results from this model will help public health officials to design and execute
efficient intervention strategies for the current outbreak based on realistic
pathogen features and human behaviors and help them prepare for future
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stemming from existing models, the investigators
will develop contact networks utilizing explicit agent mobility based on human
behaviors. The model will generate two types of networks: a mobility and contact
network as well as a disease transmission network. The model will incorporate
behaviors based on evolving self-knowledge, e.g. the set of behaviors that
people employ once they are aware or suspect they are infected; as well as
behaviors that are in response to interventions and messaging, e.g. complying
with recommendations for quarantine or not. This modeling effort contrasts with
previous work on disease transmission modeling, because the contact networks
will be generated by this model based on representative behaviors as opposed to
being applied to the model based on theoretical network structures or previous
outbreak data.