* 1516778
* Models for Social, Ecological, and Biological Systems: Narrowing the Gap Between Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Nancy Rodriguez, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 04/30/2019
* USD 169,999.00

This research is aimed at development of mathematical tools for understanding
and predicting behavior of a variety of important and apparently dissimilar
biological phenomena and sociological processes, such as the spread of diseases,
ecological changes, or the distribution and prevention of crime. Some salient
features of these diverse phenomena can be described by mathematical models
based on reaction-advection-diffusion equations that have been used extensively
to investigate fundamental and ubiquitous phenomena in several areas of biology,
and more recently in the social sciences. While these models are simplified
versions of reality, their mathematical analysis has contributed to the
understanding of many important phenomena. At the same time, the underlying
equations can be extremely interesting and challenging from the mathematical
point of view as their solutions can exhibit rich behaviors, e.g., pattern
formation and traveling wave structures. The behavior of solutions reflects
critical features of the system that mathematics models and have clear and
convincing parallels with the evolution of real-world systems. However, there is
still a large gap between real world systems and their more tractable
mathematical models. One of the goals of this project is bridging this gap
through the use of accumulated concrete data and the corresponding calibration
and modification of mathematical models. Of particular importance is the
analysis of systems which include heterogeneous environments, the understanding
of the effects that non-local dispersal has on the behavior of the solutions,
and the validation of these models with real-world data. Efforts will be focused
on four reaction-advection-diffusion systems where the heterogeneities are due
to: climate change in an ecological context, non-local and asymmetrical spread
of information in the context of riots, income heterogeneities in the context of
social segregation, and environment heterogeneities due to specific concentrated
inputs. The primary goal of the project is to understand how heterogeneous
environments and non-local dispersal impact solution patterns in both a general
class of nonlinear reaction-diffusion equations as well in specific ecological
and social contexts. Throughout this project the investigators will maintain and
foster contacts with social scientists in order to conduct the much needed
discourse between the mathematical theory and the applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the development of an extensive
theory for reaction-advection-diffusion systems in heterogeneous environments
with applications in ecology and sociology. In particular, the objective of this
research is three-fold: to expand the current mathematical theory for local and
non-local reaction-advection-diffusion systems in heterogeneous environments, to
gain insight into various (ecological, sociological, and biological) complex
systems by modeling them using these types of systems, and to take an initial
step toward bridging the gap between basic mathematical models and the complex
real-world systems they aim to describe by incorporating the use of data. From
the qualitative perspective, this work will be mainly concerned with exploring
the effects that various dispersal mechanism have on the propagation (and lack
thereof) of a solution in a heterogeneous environment: for example, determining
the spreading speed, the existence of traveling wave solutions, pulsating
fronts, traveling pulses, or generalized fronts in heterogeneous systems.
Additionally, the fundamental issues of the global well-posedness of solutions
to these systems, intermediate and long-term asymptotics, and existence and
uniqueness of non-trivial steady-state solutions will be rigorously analyzed.