* 1516624
* High Resolution Earth System Modeling for International Climate Assessment Using Blue Waters Capabilities
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Robert Rauber, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This project will use state-of-the-art computational resources, namely Blue
Waters, and cutting-edge modeling software in advancing the study of climate
change and its potential impacts on our planet over this century. It is expected
that results from our studies will be an integral part of the scientific
analysis of climate change for the next major international climate assessment
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the next U.S.
National Climate Assessment. These assessments are an important input to the
national and international policy development process. These analyses will be a
significant contribution to the coordinated international special computational
studies and model intercomparison to analyze past and projected future changes
in the Earth?s climate system. In addition, the results of these studies will be
fully available to the scientific community for further analyses and resulting
insights into the processes, mechanisms, and consequences of climate variability
and climate change. On top of this, these studies will be a major input to
studies of the potential impacts of climate change on human society across many
different sectors (e.g., health, food, water, energy, transportation) and on
ecosystems. No previous global modeling study has provided such high resolution
information at the regional scales over the time periods needed to fully analyze
these issues. The simulations and analyses are designed to use the Blue Waters
petascale computing resources and could not be completed without a computational
facility like Blue Waters.

This project has two purposes. The first is aimed at better quantifying future
regional climate change by running a high-resolution (0.25 degree atmosphere, 1
degree ocean) global coupled climate model, namely an advanced version of the
Community Earth System Model (CESM), in the framework of CMIP6 (Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project, phase 6) to meet the needs for the next generation
assessments of climate change. CMIP6 will be the next phase in the international
coordination of special computational studies to analyze the past and projected
future changes in the Earth?s climate system. CESM, one of the world?s best
models of the Earth?s climate system, has been developed by the National Center
for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) in coordination with a community of scientists
at universities and national laboratories. The second purpose will be specific
studies that grow upon our existing NSF PRAC project to further clarify the
understanding the effects of small-scale regional features and interactions
across spatial scales in climate through even higher-resolution CESM modeling
studies on Blue Waters that will push the state-of-the-art for such analyses.
For this project, we have assembled a team from the University of Illinois and
the National Center for Atmospheric Research comprised of both highly recognized
experts in global climate modeling and analysis and experts in computer science
and information technology. This team already has extensive experience with Blue
Waters (as well as with other high performance computers) based on the existing
PRAC project.