* 1516469
* Collaborative Research: The Power of Many: Scalable Compute and Data-Intensive Science on Blue Waters
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,998.00

There is a critical need to solve problems of societal and technical importance
faster and at larger scales than is currently possible. This project will
support several new applications to utilize the Blue Waters Supercomputer at
scales that are scientifically needed but simply not possible otherwise or
elsewhere. These include applications ranging from protein conformations to
polar sciences. If successful, this research will engender a significant step up
in capabilities towards extreme scale computing and data-intensive
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational resources made available as part
of this project will enable the design, development and testing of multiple new
algorithms, middleware and methods. In the first track, the researchers propose
a new approach to characterize the conformational landscape of the NMDAr LBD in
its different forms, by using novel sampling methodologies and workload
management tools. Leveraging sophisticated sampling methods, simulations will
provide an unprecedented atomically detailed picture of the different states the
protein can adopt as a function of the ligands it interacts with, and will also
provide predictions of the kinetic pathways that link these states together. The
result will be a conceptual framework to understand the sometimes perplexing
experimental results and a springboard for the rational design of further
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will open the way to a conceptually
different approach to studying large conformational changes in complex
macromolecules, as the same methodology and computational infrastructure can in
principle be applied to a large number of biomedically relevant systems. The
second track of this project is concerned with development, scaling and
optimization of SPIDAL (Scalable Parallel Interoperable Data Intensive
Libraries) and MIDAS (Middleware for Data-intensive Analysis and Science) that
will be used to enhance the scalability of a range of data-intensive
applications.