* 1516826
* RUI: Multiscale Models for ABC Transporter Molecular Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ronald Hills, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2019
* USD 374,885.00

Understanding the dynamics of biomolecules at the cell surface, including how
molecules move across the cell membrane, is crucial to the basic understanding
of life processes. The cell membrane normally acts as a barrier that selectively
limits what enters the cell. This project explores the mechanisms by which
transporters, or large proteins that reside in the cell membrane, actively
export substances across the cell membrane. Multiscale simulations are developed
to predict molecular behavior of these transporters. The project provides
undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented groups in rural
Maine with training in the scientific method, computational analysis, and
molecular science--approaches vital to further advances in knowledge and
society. A weeklong summer workshop has been established to introduce Maine
students to Unix programming and protein modeling. Student researchers are
involved in carrying out all aspects of the research and receive advanced
training in the theoretical foundations of statistical thermodynamics. Returning
students acquire teaching experience by co-facilitating summer workshops,
interactive biochemistry classes, and molecular visualization
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental collaborators trapped the E. coli ABC
transporter, MsbA, in distinct states of its conformational cycle, including
open and closed inward-facing conformers and an outward-facing post-hydrolysis
conformation. Paramagnetic spin label measurements subsequently confirmed the
ATP-dependent alternating accessibility of the transmembrane protein chamber to
the intra- and extracellular bilayer leaflets. This project connects these
existing structural data with a functional picture of the dynamic molecular
interactions that accompany protein conformational cycling and couple ATP
hydrolysis to substrate translocation. Consistent with the Integrating Across
Scales priority of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, a
multiscale description is developed from atomistic simulations to simulate the
dynamics of a large molecular machine residing in its lipid bilayer environment.
The role of annular phospholipid solvation on translocation of the flippase's
lipid substrate is specifically explored. The force field lipid and protein
parameter set created by the project is not limited to transporters and is of
general utility for simulations of membrane protein systems, their diffusive
dynamics, and molecular interactions. Undergraduate and high school students
from underrepresented groups are incorporated and trained in the foundations of
computational science.