* 1516962
* Collaborative Research: Halo Modeling Strikes Back: New Techniques to infer the Galaxy-Dark Matter Connection in the Presence of Environmental Effects
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Frank vandenBosch, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 07/31/2019
* USD 359,461.00

In the next decade, a number of innovative telescopic surveys will provide
scientists with a wealth of precise data regarding galaxies and cosmology. This
project aims to remove recently identified deficiencies in models of the
relationship between galaxies and dark matter, necessary to interpret galaxy
survey data. The researchers will develop, and make publicly available, an open-
source software package that could be used to minimize systematic errors in
interpreting galaxy data sets, leading to a better understanding of galaxy
formation and evolution, and also paving the way for unbiased use of galaxy
surveys in precision cosmology. Complementing this novel research program, this
proposal includes contributions to K-12 science education, addressing the
critical need for students to engage in STEM-related disciplines. At Yale, PI
van den Bosch will develop a custom planetarium show for the Leitner Family
Observatory and Planetarium on the topic of gravity, and tailored to 8th
graders. At the University of Pittsburgh, PI Zentner will serve as an instructor
in the Buhl Academy, a new program at the Carnegie Science Center Buhl
Planetarium that pairs scientists with Pittsburgh area K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halo occupation modeling models the probabilistic
relation between galaxies and dark matter halos and is the premier tool for
interpreting the clustering of galaxies. A standard assumption made in all halo
occupation studies is that the mass of a dark matter halo completely determines
the properties of its resident galaxy population. Mounting observational
evidence indicates that galaxy properties, in particular star formation rates,
are correlated with halo properties other than mass, such as halo age or
concentration. This "galaxy assembly bias" (GAB) is a significant source of
systematic error, both in efforts to understand galaxy evolution and in the
precision cosmology program. In order to ensure the unbiased interpretation of
forthcoming data, this proposal aims to develop the next generation halo
occupation models that properly account for GAB. The researchers will identify
the optimal set of observational diagnostics that can be used to infer the
presence and strength of GAB, develop open-source software that properly
accounts for GAB, and explore methods to mitigate the impacts of GAB by using
alternative definitions of halo mass. They will apply these newly developed
techniques to extant galaxy survey data, and make predictions for forthcoming
surveys such as DES, eBOSS, DESI, LSST, EUCLID, and WFIRST.