* 1516615
* RAPID: Creating and Analyzing Hybrid Multiscale Models for Forecasting and Mitigating an Outbreak of the Ebola Virus Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* James Hyman, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2016
* USD 192,577.00

This research will create and analyze mathematical models for predicting and
mitigating the spread of Ebola Virus Disease. The investigators propose to
combine the strengths of three common modeling approaches by developing a new,
integrative model. The result will be a more robust model that can be used to
provide valuable and timely information to help control the current epidemic and
inform future decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard modeling approaches
such as ordinary differential equation models, network models and individual
based models, have common limitations. Alone, none of these models are
sufficient to capture the complexity of the 2014 Ebola epidemic. The
investigators will build on existing mathematical analysis, data, and software
to combine these approaches on data from the World Health Organization (WHO) as
well as the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). This agent-based model will be
integrated in a city and county-based network model for the migration, health
care, response, and migration efforts. Specific aims for the model include
forecasting the incidence of Ebola virus disease, quantifying the uncertainty in
the early stages of the epidemic, estimating the spread to new regions,
quantifying the impact of interventions and behavior changes, utilizing
statistical analysis to estimate the degree of underreporting, quantifying the
model?s uncertainty, and determining how uncertainty will impact the different
mitigation approaches.