* 1516562
* Robotics and E-Textiles Backpacks for Family Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Megan Bang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,641,180.00

Libraries serve vital roles in communities not only for access to print media
but also family programming and access to the internet. Because of their
widespread local presence in communities and the diverse communities served,
libraries are well-positioned to address inequalities in access to technology,
family programming, and spaces for collaboration. Science centers, universities,
and community centers represent resources that can partner with libraries to
create science and technology-related content for delivery to diverse
communities. Research has firmly established the link between parent engagement
and a broad range of student academic outcomes, including higher student
attendance, achievement and graduation rates. A growing body of research in out-
of-school science learning is focusing on the rich and varied ways in which
families learn science outside of school, including habits of mind, motivation,
and identities as scientists. Pilot work showed that backpacks have the
potential for youth and parents to take on new roles relative to STEM work, with
parents or older siblings taking on roles of lab partners, translators, and even
teachers. The Robotics and E-Textiles project will support increased capacity
within libraries and community centers to hold robotics workshops for families
in their own communities. Libraries and community centers will serve as vehicles
through which families engage with robotics and e-textiles, resulting in wider
access to Next Generation Science Standards' engineering practices to more
people. This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Librarians and community
engagement leaders will participate in professional experiences to develop
science and technology content and facilitation skills. University researchers
in collaboration with project partners will use a design-based research
methodology to iteratively design the professional development and backpack
programs and to investigate learning processes and outcomes. The Cultural
Learning Pathways theoretical model will guide the study of how engagement with
robotics/e-textiles experiences can lead to changes in practice, identity, and
deeper participation in communities of practice on the part of librarians,
youth, and families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although collaborations between
public libraries and informal science providers are becoming increasingly
common, this project will document the process of developing such collaborations
and draw insights that may be applied to other contexts. By bringing together
traditional and non-traditional community organizations to develop and
facilitate STEM learning experiences, this project has the potential for
resulting in a new model for a decentralized system of informal STEM education
and broadening participation in STEM. Over the life of the project, the number
of partner libraries will expand from one to four, and it is anticipated to
reach more than 550 families. It is being conducted through a partnership
between the University of Washington, the Pacific Science Center, the Seattle
Public Libraries, and Red Eagle Soaring, a Native American community youth
program.