* 1516299
* Collaborative Research: Accretion Dynamics of Black Hole Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Julian Krolik, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2018
* USD 242,483.00

It is estimated that somewhere in the universe a few pairs of supermassive black
holes merge every single year, leaving behind a still more massive single black
hole at the centers of the galaxies where this occurs. The energy released is
enormous, and the effect on galactic evolution profound, but no such event has
ever been identified because the overwhelming majority of the energy is released
in gravitational waves, which are as yet undetectable. This project will
characterize the visible light signals that should be given off by nearby gas
under the influence of the event, using complex numerical simulations. Training
in these techniques will be of great value for the future activities of the
junior researchers on the team.

Although there should be sufficient gas close enough to the merger events to
give off visible radiation, the character of any emitted signals is unknown.
Particular questions include in which band most of the light will emerge, what
is its spectrum, and how does the radiated power vary in time? This work will
start to answer these questions. The extremely complex interaction between the
surrounding gas and a pair of black holes bound to one another involves strongly
nonlinear physics, including magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence, shocks, and
dynamical spacetimes, which can only be tackled numerically. This requires
carefully structured simulations using radiation transfer post-processing to
predict key observable features, using the team's new infrastructure that
supports consistent MHD calculations on separate grids and across qualitatively
different spacetimes. Calculations with astrophysically plausible parameters
should identify unique photon signals for observers to locate black holes on
their way to merger.

This computational system should also be useful to many other astrophysical
simulations. The work will train a number of graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows in the techniques of large-scale numerical simulation, skills that are
valuable far beyond the confines of astrophysical research. The team is active
in outreach both to non-science students and to the general public, including
work to engage deaf and hard-of-hearing students in the sciences.