* 1516677
* Variational Problems on Random Structures: Analysis and Applications to Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dejan Slepcev, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 181,107.00

This research project is concerned with applying modern tools from mathematical
analysis to the study of currently important topics in data science, including
massive data analysis (data clouds) and machine learning. Modern data-
acquisition techniques produce a wealth of data about the world we live in.
Extracting the information from the data leads to machine learning/statistics
tasks such as clustering, classification, low-dimensional embedding, and others.
This project introduces new mathematical tools for understanding of some of the
state-of-art approaches to important data analysis tasks. The conclusions gained
will improve their reliability, robustness, speed, and scalability. The insights
of the analysis are expected to lay the foundation to create new models for data
analysis and new approaches to the pertinent tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate variational problems that arise in data analysis and
machine learning. It will do so by considering variational descriptions of these
problems in which the answer is obtained by minimizing an objective functional.
The project will develop a mathematical framework suitable for studies of
asymptotic properties of variational problems posed on random samples and
related random geometries. In particular, it will investigate the relationship
between variational problems on random discrete structures, such as a
neighborhood graph of a data cloud, and continuum variational problems. It
combines the techniques of calculus of variations, applied analysis, optimal
transportation, probability, and statistics to gain insights about discrete
variational problems in a random setting.