* 1516346
* Travel Grant for the 24th International Symposium for Chemical Reaction Engineering (ISCRE-24)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Raul Caretta, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 12/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

1516346 - Caretta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to provide travel support
for students and faculty for the 24th International Symposium for Chemical
Reaction Engineering (ISCRE-24) that will be held in Minneapolis, MN, on June
12-15, 2016. This international symposium aims to provide a biannual focus on
the frontiers of reaction engineering and an opportunity for international
networking in the reaction engineering community. The organizing committee,
which consists of members with a broad range of skills in chemical reaction
engineering will provide for a vibrant and diverse international symposium.
Funds will be utilized in concert with privately raised funds to support the
travel of junior faculty and post-docs students to attend the symposium. It is
anticipated that approximately 300 attendees will participate based on previous
conferences held in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific theme for ISCRE 24 is "Foundations and
Vistas in Chemical Reaction Engineering". Meeting the world's demands for
energy, food, water and medicine in a sustainable way, while protecting the
environment requires development of new technologies and advanced materials. The
theme of this symposium is to capture the essential role that chemical reaction
engineering plays in addressing these challenges with both a focus on the
fundamentals (foundations) and future directions (vistas). The symposium will
feature communications of recent research on CRE fundamentals, enabling
technologies, and advanced materials such as catalysts, membranes and solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting
participants will benefit from state-of-the-art reviews and presentations by
leading experts, by exchanging the latest advances on frontier research
subjects, and by debating controversial points with their peers in the CRE
discipline. The meeting will also provide an opportunity for interaction and
cooperation among industrial and academic researchers. This will be especially
beneficial to the young industrial and academic researchers who attend. The
award of travel funds and registration subsidy are expected to attract many
graduate students, including women and minority, to the meeting that they may
otherwise be unable to attend. These students will have an opportunity to
interact with each other and with experienced researchers in the field, which
could positively influence their professional development. In order to further
attract to the meeting and develop our young colleagues, the PIs plan to
increase the number of junior session chairs and have a number of junior keynote
speakers.