* 1516235
* CRCNS: Functional Imaging and Computational Models of Place Field Integration in Pyramidal Cell Dendrites
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Dombeck, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2019
* USD 800,000.00

A fundamental question in neuroscience is to understand how different sets of
neurons in a network combine or integrate their various inputs, and how both the
pattern of inputs and the resulting outputs are related to behavior. Novel, even
unprecedented, experimental methods have been and are being developed with which
to image or record from large numbers of distributed neurons but understanding
the integration step can be difficult since inputs and outputs are generally
distributed over many millimeters, and it is very difficult to record from both
simultaneously, especially so in a behaving animal. This project will combine
experimental and computational methods to elucidate such synaptic integration in
pyramidal neurons associated with mammalian spatial navigation in awake,
behaving animals. The imaging data acquired from awake behaving mice will be
made available to other groups and the full results will serve as a model for
other research concerned with the integration of inputs in networks of neurons.
The computational models will be made available on the ModelDB database and will
be a resource to others working to understand other aspects of functionality in
this brain region. Furthermore, the work will involve a close collaboration
between experimental and computational research groups, thus giving postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students cross-disciplinary research
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In pyramidal neurons of the hippocampus, the
large dendritic tree constitutes an elaborate network of branching processes
involving tens of thousands of excitatory synapses containing a variety of
voltage-gated ion channels. The pattern of synaptic inputs impinging upon the
dendritic arbor and the degree to which these inputs are processed by it to
drive place field firing (i.e., firing correlated with spatial location) during
behavior are currently unknown. The goals of the project are first to 1) develop
improved computational models of dendritic place cell firing constrained by
current imaging data and 2) establish new experimental techniques to image the
inputs to pyramidal cells in the dendritic tree, at single spine resolution,
during place field firing. Together the experiments and models will be used to
3) determine the degree to which local dendritic processing is involved in place
cell firing. The proposed experiments will allow for the construction of
significantly improved models of hippocampal function and the models will
provide a framework within which to understand activity recorded at a local
level in the dendritic tree and assemble a comprehensive picture of dendritic
processing across the whole arbor.