* 1516415
* Large and Multi-Dimensional Solutions to Hyperbolic Balance Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ronghua Pan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 210,001.00

Motion of many disturbances in the air, from ordinary noise to shock waves about
an airfoil (that cause the familiar sonic boom), is described by equations of
compressible fluids. Even liquids at high enough speeds (close to the sound
speed) are compressible. This project is devoted to the mathematical study of
the different versions of the Navier-Stokes equations that describe dynamics of
compressible fluids. Similar equations provide mathematical models for phenomena
in related scientific areas, including elastic material mechanics, porous medium
flows, and geophysical dynamics. To determine the validity of a particular
equation as a model for a given phenomenon, it can be helpful to determine
whether the equation has a solution, and if it does, how this solution depends
upon the physical parameters. If in particular regimes these equations either
lack solutions, or have solutions which depend in a discontinuous way upon the
data, this will indicate that these mathematical descriptions of the phenomena
have only limited validity for the particular applications. The current project
will focus on challenging problems for large solutions modeling strong waves,
which often appear in realistic situations. The research will bring fresh
insights and develop new tools to characterize complicated large solutions
driven by nonlinearity and resonances. The progress in this project will
facilitate the design of high-performance computational methods. This project
also involves international collaborations and training of graduate students and
junior researchers in this challenging field.

This research project is devoted to the analytical study of dynamics of
compressible fluids. The project will produce further developments in four
inter-related research areas. The first objective is to investigate the global
existence and finite time blowup for compressible Euler equations in one
dimension with large initial data, and to find sharp density lower-bound
estimate for generic large solutions. Second, the research on compressible
Navier-Stokes-Fourier system with temperature-dependent transport coefficients
that is aimed at a systematic theory including the global existence of weak
solutions, uniform lower bound on absolute temperature, and large time behavior
of the solutions. The third objective is to study the local theory for
isentropic Navier-Stokes equations with density-dependent viscosity allowing
vacuum in initial data, with applications to various shallow water models such
as Saint-Venant equations for shallow water. The last objective is to study the
large time asymptotic behavior of compressible full Euler equations in three
dimensions to justify the Darcy's law in this very complicated case, and to
study the modeling and analysis for interactions between short waves and long
waves in compressible fluids under the influence of magnetic field.