* 1516487
* Collaborative research: Turbulent cascades and dissipation in the 3D Navier-Stokes model
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Radu Dascaliuc, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2019
* USD 79,000.00

Grujic DMS-1515805 Dascaliuc DMS-1516487

Turbulence is everywhere, both disruptive and helpful in technological
applications, such as safety and efficiency of transportation, biomedical
research, climate studies, or infrastructure design. On one hand, suppressing
turbulent drag is key in designing and engineering energy efficient vehicles.
Understanding the genesis and dynamics of a turbulent wake behind a large plane
is key in maintaining safety of the airspace in the proximity of an airport. On
the other hand, turbulent mixing may be desirable -- an example being designing
more efficient drug delivery systems. The main theme of the project is a
rigorous study of various manifestations of turbulence in three-dimensional
fluid flows modeled by the Navier-Stokes equations. This is considered both from
the perspective of the mathematical theory of turbulence, and as a physical
mechanism underlying possible blow-ups (singularities) of the solutions of the
system. Ruling out the possibility of singularity formation in any physical
model is a fundamental question, even more so when the model should be
applicable to such an omnipresent class of physical phenomena as are 3D fluid
flows. Graduate students are included in the work of the project.

The project branches into three directions: (1) vortex stretching and local
anisotropic diffusion, (2) isotropic diffusion of the velocity field and induced
scaling laws, and (3) turbulent transport in non-homogeneous Navier-Stokes
model. The first two directions follow from the recent work of the investigators
and their collaborators in presenting a numerically and analytically motivated
geometric scenario of vortex filaments formation that exhibits logarithmic sub-
criticality in the context of the 3D Navier-Stokes regularity problem. In this
scenario, the transversal scale of the filaments -- a natural, anisotropic
micro-scale of the flow -- triggers the mechanism of local, anisotropic
diffusion, preventing the possible formation of singularities. The motivation
for the third direction of the study comes from the realm of building and
reinforcing mathematical support for Kolmogorov phenomenology in physical scales
of the flow. The investigators have recently managed to adopt their physical
scales methodology to the study of forced turbulence. This opens up an avenue
for studying the influence of the spatial distribution of the force on formation
of turbulent cascades, as well as for the study of boundary effects via the
masking feedback/volume penalization approach. Graduate students are included in
the work of the project.