* 1516228
* Many-Body Dynamics and Nonlinear Evolution Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Natasa Pavlovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2019
* USD 275,525.00

Understanding behavior of large systems of interacting particles is essential
for predicting and understanding phenomena arising in various contexts, from
stellar structure in physics to dynamics of social networks. Since the number of
particles in such models is very large, one would like to understand qualitative
and quantitative properties of such systems through macroscopic, averaged
characteristics. This is similar to the description of the huge number of gas
atoms in a volume of gas through temperature and pressure. In order to identify
macroscopic behavior of multi-particle systems, it is helpful to study the
asymptotic behavior when the number of particles approaches infinity, with the
hope that the limit will approximate properties observed in the systems with a
large, but finite, number of particles. An example of an important phenomenon
described by such macroscopic behavior is the Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC)
of a large system of particles, which is a state of the matter of a dilute Bose
gas at very low temperatures. Mathematical models developed to understand the
phenomenon connect large quantum systems of interacting particles and nonlinear
partial differential equations (PDE) that are derived from such systems in the
limit of the number of particles going to infinity. The theory of nonlinear PDE
is becoming an important mathematical mechanism in understanding such limits.
This research project focuses on establishing further connections between
complex systems of interacting particles and nonlinear PDE, including wave and
dispersive equations that have been proposed as models for many basic wave
phenomena, from Bose-Einstein condensation to formation of freak waves in an
ocean, and kinetic equations that describe dynamics of a dilute gas and are at
the core of applied analysis, probability, and statistical physics. The research
activity contains an interdisciplinary approach with potential to bring ideas
and techniques that turned out to be useful at the level of a nonlinear PDE to
the analysis of many body systems, while incorporating diverse tools from
mathematical analysis, probability, and statistical physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With fundamental work on derivation of effective equations
from quantum many body systems (e.g. nonlinear Schrodinger equation) and
effective equations from classical many particle systems (e.g. Vlasov equation)
a new channel of communication between mathematical physics and nonlinear PDE
communities has opened, contributing to advances in both areas. The Principal
Investigator will continue collaborative work on understanding emerging
connections between dynamics of many body systems and nonlinear PDE. The PI
further plans to expand this line of work to explore some aspects of a
derivation of the homogeneous Boltzmann equation from many body particle
systems. The PI will study analytical properties of the Boltzmann equation, a
probabilistic model for a statistical flow of interacting particle systems with
a nonlinear term involving a collision kernel that accounts for the rate of
collisions or interactions. Given that the solutions of the Boltzmann equation
are probability distributions, the study of the behavior of its polynomial and
exponential moments is a fundamental analytical tool. In particular, since the
equilibrium state for the Boltzmann equation is a Gaussian distribution, one
expects that the solution would be controlled by bounds of exponential decay.
Thus, bounds for exponential moments of the solution will be studied as well.