* 1516586
* 4-D Geodynamic Modeling With Data Assimilation: Origin Of Intra-Plate Volcanism In The Pacific Northwest
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Lijun Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 38,064.00

Continental volcanism represents a major natural hazard on Earth. Understanding
the formation mechanism of volcanism is of high interest to the scientific
community. The proposed work aims to clear out the existing confusions on the
interpretation of surface volcanic features, mantle seismic images, and the
systems overall evolution with time. This proposed research will be broadly
transformative due to its multidisciplinary nature. For example, understanding
past mantle evolution will help identify the tectonic origin of various mantle
seismic structures, an important goal of geophysics; a better constrained mantle
thermal structure will provide a new context for explaining geochemistry data
associated with volcanism; linking plate motion history and mantle dynamics will
lead to new insights of surface tectonic deformation, which may provide a new
perspective for interpreting geological records. Most importantly, long-term
Earth evolution models like the one proposed here will provide a framework for
establishing physical connections among different fields of geoscience research
and linking dynamic processes occurring at different spatial and temporal
scales. Additionally, the proposed research will produce excellent lecture
materials for general education. The PI plans to participate in outreach
activities such as the iRISE program to deliver K-12 lectures through online
teaching.

Origin of the Pacific Northwest intra-plate volcanic province, including the
mid-Miocene Steens-Columbia River flood basalt and subsequent Yellowstone and
Newberry hotspot tracks, still remains heavily debated after decades of
research. One popular hypothesis is that this volcanic province formed from a
mantle plume originating from the core-mantle boundary region. Alternatively,
many models argued for a shallow origin, without involving a mantle plume.
However, most of these earlier conceptual models did not consider observational
constraints from the mantle, which only became available recently with the help
of USArray. The tomography inversions generated from these data reveal
unprecedented details on the mantle structure of western U.S., which in turn
provide important information on the corresponding mantle dynamics and its
temporal evolution over time. These seismic images also present a new
perspective on the origin of Pacific Northwest volcanic history. The proposed
project will use the Blue Waters supercomputer to quantitatively evaluate the
origin of the Pacific Northwest volcanic province by simulating the sub-
lithosphere dynamic evolution of western United States in the context of
Mesozoic-Cenozoic subduction history of the Farallon plate below North America.
The PI proposes to, first, calculate the detailed mantle flow since the Miocene
using forward and adjoint methods based on recent seismic tomography and then to
explore three hypotheses on the generation of observed slow seismic anomalies
and surface volcanism including: 1) a mantle plume in a subduction environment,
2) slab-generated mantle upwelling, and 3) entrainment and intrusion of hot
oceanic asthenosphere. High-resolution geodynamic models with realistic initial
and boundary conditions will be used to calculate mantle flow and test
hypotheses.