* 1516660
* Collaborative Research:  Causes of Parallel Molecular Evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Christopher Witt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 37,247.00

Molecular evolution starts from random changes in DNA, but then natural
selection eliminates some of the changes and retains the others. An important
question concerns the adaptation of different species to a similar environmental
challenge; would they do it through similar or different changes to the DNA?
This project will address the causes of evolution, and the possibility to
predict evolutionary change by studying birds living at high altitude in the
Andes, and their close relatives living at low altitudes. The project will
explore the ways in which the hemoglobins (the oxygen carrying proteins of the
blood) have changed to enable the uptake and release of oxygen under different
atmospheric conditions (high and low altitude). This project will provide
interdisciplinary training for postdoctoral and graduate students and includes a
public outreach component that will focus on 'adaptation to extreme
environments' to teach elementary school students how evolution by natural
selection works. All data and samples will be linked to specimen-vouchers at the
Museum of Southwestern Biology (U. New Mexico) and will be accessible through an
open-access data repository.

This project is designed to assess the pervasiveness of parallel molecular
evolution and to test hypotheses about its causes by examining mechanisms of
hemoglobin (Hb) adaptation in multiple species that have independently colonized
high-altitude environments. Experimental analyses of Hb function will be used to
identify and characterize the molecular basis of evolved changes in Hb-O2
affinity in multiple bird species that have contrasting altitudinal range limits
in the Andes. The comparisons will involve multiple phylogenetically replicated
'taxon pairs' (pairs of conspecific populations or closely related species that
are native to high- or low-altitude). In cases where functionally distinct Hbs
of high- and low-altitude taxa are distinguished by multiple amino acid
substitutions, a combination of site-directed mutagenesis and ancestral protein
resurrection will be used to examine the functional effects of sequential
mutational steps in all possible pathways that connect the ancestral (low-
affinity) Hb and the derived (high-affinity) Hb. In addition to measuring
oxygenation properties of each engineered Hb mutant, additional functional and
structural properties that can potentially trade-off with Hb-O2 affinity will
also be measured. By relating the results of the site-directed mutagenesis
experiments to phylogenetically replicated changes in Hb function, this protein-
engineering analysis will illuminate the role of pleiotropic constraints in
promoting parallel molecular evolution.