* 1516648
* Interagency BRAIN Intitiave Awardees Meeting in Bethesda, MD, November 20-21, 2014
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2014,06/30/2019
* Fidel Santamaria, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2019
* USD 41,490.00

Understanding how behavior emerges from the dynamic patterns of electrical and
chemical activity of brain circuits is universally recognized as a fundamental
mystery in science. Modern neuroscience has made great strides towards this goal
by utilizing advances in multiple scientific disciplines. These developments
have brought the field to a unique moment, where a revolution in understanding
the brain appears to be within our grasp. Capitalizing on this unique moment,
the BRAIN Initiative was created to catalyze national efforts toward
understanding the brain. As part of the BRAIN Initiative, NSF will enable the
development of an array of physical and conceptual tools needed to determine how
healthy brains function. In Fiscal Year 2014, NSF made 36 Early Concept Grants
for Exploratory Research (EAGER) awards aimed at catching neural circuits in
action. This award will support a workshop to convene awardees from the NSF
BRAIN EAGER competition and awardees from other federal BRAIN Initiative
efforts. The objectives of this workshop are to identify conceptual foundations
and challenges in data management and technology implementation. The
participants will discuss these issues in small thematic groups, and will use
their insights to generate a coherent set of strategies and expectations towards
the goals of the BRAIN Initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organizers are
making a strong effort to invite women and members of underrepresented groups as
participants. Further, the meeting entails extensive cross-disciplinary
interactions, which will be aided greatly by the face-to-face nature of this
meeting. Importantly, this workshop is part of a concerted effort to coordinate
and align interagency priorities to accomplish the goals of the BRAIN
Initiative. To maximize the workshop's impact, video recordings of introductory
sessions will be disseminated through a publicly accessible web-site.