* 1516590
* Comprehensive Studies of Extreme Phases of Nuclear Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Rainer Fries, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 224,975.00

Physical reality is described in modern physics using four fundamental forces:
the strong nuclear force, the weak nuclear force, the electromagnetic force, and
gravity. The strong nuclear force is responsible for a long list of phenomena
that are crucial to the existence of the universe. For example, the strong force
holds together atomic nuclei, it fuels the burning of the sun and all other
stars, and it governed the fate of the very early universe. Although the
fundamental equations describing the strong force (or quantum chromodynamics,
QCD) were written down four decades ago, an in-depth understanding of its
properties is still lacking. This project will help advance the understanding of
key features of the strong force at very high temperatures and densities. At
temperatures of about 1,000,000,000,000 degrees all matter subject to the strong
nuclear force forms a state of matter called quark gluon plasma. Quark gluon
plasma was prevalent in the early universe milliseconds after the Big Bang. The
quark gluon plasma can be recreated in the laboratory in collisions of very
large nuclei in the highest energy collider facilities in the world, such as the
Large Hadron Collider in Europe and the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider in the
US. The PI, working with his graduate students, will carry out research to
improve the understanding of the formation and development of quark gluon plasma
in nuclear collisions.

This project will develop a comprehensive computational simulation of nuclear
collisions. The initial phase of those collisions at high energy is dominated by
strong, nonlinear gluon fields. Because nuclei collide in random configurations
and with random impact parameters an event-by-event Monte Carlo simulation of
gluon fields will be provided. The system eventually reaches approximate local
kinetic equilibrium and the further time evolution can be followed up by
relativistic dissipative fluid dynamics. Comparison to data from LHC and RHIC
can determine the equation of state and important transport coefficients of
quark gluon plasma. The project will also shed light on the coupling of quark
gluon plasma to electromagnetic probes (photons). In addition, the PI and his
students will study the effect of the initial strong gluon fields on very fast
quarks and gluons (jets), and on heavy quarks. Both of those are important
probes for properties of quark gluon plasma. The project will also provide tools
for the next generation collider experiments planned at an electron ion
collider. The latter will allow for a systematic study of strong gluon fields
and the creation of quark and gluon jets in a nuclear environment.