* 1516138
* Continuum QCD Modeling of Hadron Properties
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Peter Tandy, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

A complete understanding of the internal structure of protons, neutrons and
other strongly interacting subatomic particles remains elusive. Although Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD), the relevant part of the Standard Model of particle
physics, is an established theoretical framework, it is extremely difficult to
perform calculations for phenomena that extend over large distances such as the
size of the proton. Lattice-QCD, a numerical first-principles technique that
relies heavily on high-performance computational resources, is able to calculate
accurately only certain properties of particles such as protons and neutrons.
For other properties, researchers rely on physically well-motived
phenomenological models. In this broader context, the investigator and his
students will develop and apply improved QCD models to study the distribution of
constituent quarks and gluons in subatomic particles, such as pions, kaons, and
protons. These efforts provide theoretical support to ongoing experimental
efforts at the Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. Graduate students
involved in this research will be trained in theoretical nuclear physics and
will have the opportunity to work on research problems at the forefront of
nuclear science, thereby receiving training that prepares them for entering the
much-needed workforce in the nuclear science arena.

The Dyson-Schwinger equations approach to nonperturbative model building in QCD
preserves the short distance renormalization group behavior of QCD, while
modeling in the infrared domain is guided by an empirical approach that
preserves the dynamical chiral symmetry breaking known to generate at least 98%
of the mass of visible stable matter in the universe. This approach is checked
against established results of Lattice-QCD and is used to extend and complement
Lattice-QCD for domains where lattice results are not presently available. This
work will analyze and interpret experimental results about the quark and gluon
structure of sub-atomic particles and elastic and transition form factors. This
project will also develop an improved practical method for solving the QCD bound
state equation for excited state mesons and will explore the limitations of a
recently proposed approximate approach to parton distributions for Lattice-QCD.