* 1516165
* Stochastic Equilibria and Related Topics in Financial Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Gordan Zitkovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 346,996.00

The investigator studies two problems related to behavior of financial markets.
In the first he studies equilibrium in incomplete markets. The theory of market
equilibrium is important because it provides a framework for understanding how
prices develop in a market. Roughly speaking, a market is complete if every
agent can trade with every other agent about every possible future state. The
theory for complete markets has been worked out reasonably well, but the
equilibrium of incomplete markets is open. In the second, he examines stochastic
control problems that arise in considering how to make optimal investments with
a random endowment. Formation of financial markets is a complex process, but
ultimately reliant on fundamental economic principles. This reliance is what
makes it amenable to mathematical analysis and quantitative study. The benefits
of better understanding of how real financial markets come to exist, and how
their salient features emerge from the basic building blocks, are multiple. They
range from enhancing our ability to regulate both existing and nascent markets
to building tools for prevention of future financial instabilities and crises in
the US and worldwide. Graduate students are included in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his students study two
separate, but related, clusters of problems in mathematical finance and
stochastic-control theory. The first one aims to elucidate the rational agents'
optimal response to diverse market structures and the formation of incomplete
financial markets. In addition to the classical, convex- and functional-analytic
tools, the investigator's approach rests on stochastic analysis and the theory
of backward stochastic differential equations, as well as their relationship
with systems of partial differential equations, touching upon topics in
Riemannian geometry and non-cooperative game theory. The second research focus
-- centered around a novel class of stochastic control problems termed "weakly
constrained" -- is modeled after one of the fundamental questions in
mathematical finance, namely the optimal investment problem with a random
endowment. These weakly constrained problems occur naturally and possess
intriguing mathematical features, but resist analysis using standard approaches.