* 1516932
* Studying Stellar Nurseries in the Near Part of the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Nadejda Kaltcheva, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2021
* USD 160,721.00

Half a century ago, scientists did not think that stars were continually forming
in the Universe. We now know that the Universe consists of billions of galaxies,
and many of them harbor regions of star formation. In the Milky Way galaxy we
can study this process in unprecedented detail. According to the current
theories, stars form in both turbulent and quiescent clouds of interstellar gas
and dust. However, the details are still unknown. How exactly one generation of
stars leads to the next remains to be determined through a combination of
observation and theory. This project is focused on a detailed mapping of the
structure of relatively nearby regions where stars form. This will allow us to
spatially correlate the coherent groups of stars to the complex net of
interstellar medium features and, therefore, further study their interactions.
The project has been chosen specifically to introduce students to the nature of
scientific investigation. Mapping the Milky Way and investigating how stars are
born are ideas that students find interesting and accessible. Small parts of
this project can be isolated as independent research tasks, which creates an
inclusive learning environment for undergraduate students with different skills,
aptitudes, and preferences. This first encounter with research opens the door to
richer research experiences and could lead toward careers in science- and
engineering-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal
is to reassess the structure and star-formation history of the major Galactic
star-forming fields. Precise photometric parallaxes will be employed to
correlate the spatial distribution of young massive stars to the surrounding
structures of interstellar matter. The subsequent star-formation history
analysis seeks to reach specific conclusions on still controversial issues, such
as star formation hierarchy (clustered or triggered star formation) and multiple
stellar generations across star-forming complexes. Interpreting the star-
formation scenario within the Galactic disk is always problematic because of the
many choices of tracer objects, varied observational approaches, and issues
regarding the quantity, quality, and completeness of the observational data. To
overcome this, new and existing data will be combined to produce a catalog of
Galactic young clusters, OB-associations, and early-type field stars for which
photometric parallaxes can be calculated. The catalog will be an excellent
source of homogeneous distances and color excesses, and thus a reliable starting
point in the study of the Galactic spiral structure to 5-6 kpc. The project is
chosen not only for its contribution to the field of astronomy, but also because
of its feasibility for faculty and students in a primarily undergraduate
institution.