* 1516182
* Accurate Atomic Transition Probabilities for Optical Lines of Fe-group Ions
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* James Lawler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 330,977.00

The early Universe was almost completely made up of hydrogen and helium. Stars
build up the heavier chemical elements needed for planets and eventually for
life through a series of processes known as "nucleosynthesis". The earliest
stars were likely quite different than stars today. These old stars, called
"metal-poor" stars because of their low abundance of heavier elements, were
formed from the remnants of the earliest stars. Elemental abundances in metal-
poor stars serve as a "fossil record" of our Galaxy and can help us understand
the beginnings of nucleosynthesis. Testing theories of the early Universe
requires very accurate measurements of elemental abundances in metal-poor stars.
An accurate and precise abundance determination for a given element requires,
first and foremost, accurate measurements in our laboratories of the atomic
transition properties for that element. The goal of this project is to improve
the available atomic data for elements and to use these data to determine highly
accurate abundances in metal-poor stars. This work could also lead to
improvements that benefit other fields of applied science, such as lighting and
analytical chemistry. Training and mentoring of graduate students and of
undergraduates has been, and will continue to be, an important part of this
program.

The University of Wisconsin (UW) program uses techniques involving lasers,
powerful spectrometers, synchrotron radiation, and other modern approaches to
measure critically needed atomic data. In recent years, a 3-meter echelle
spectrometer was developed at UW to measure very weak lines of Fe-group species
in the ultraviolet. Unlike Fourier transform spectrometers, which are often used
for such measurements, the 3m echelle spectrometer is free from an important
(multiplex) noise source. These weak lines are needed for abundance studies in
stellar photospheres, because stronger lines of the abundant Fe-group elements
are partially to deeply saturated and are therefore not good abundance
indicators. The proposed research will extend the range of the 3m echelle
spectrometer into the optical for applications in ground-based astronomy. The
first phase of the project will involve developing and implementing a
radiometric calibration for the instrument out to the Si detector limit near
10000 Angstroms. The instrument will then be used for the measurement of weak
optical lines of astrophysical interest in the spectra of ions of Fe, Co, and
Ni. These new transition probabilities will be applied to determine accurate and
precise abundances in the Sun and in metal-poor stars.