* 1516959
* Research Coordination Network:  Protein Folding and Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* C Robert Matthews, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Title: Research Coordination Network: Protein Folding and
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Research Coordination
Network: Protein Folding Consortium (RCN:PFC) is to provide a novel platform for
establishing and nurturing collaborations and training between experimentalists,
theorists and computational biologists who are focused on obtaining a molecular-
level understanding of the folding and other dynamical processes of proteins.
Proteins are ubiquitous in nature, executing biological functions as diverse as
populating the immune system with defense agents against viral infections,
digesting food, serving as materials to create skin, muscle and hair, converting
signals from the environment into cellular responses and replicating DNA. The
RCN:PFC will probe the molecular mechanisms by which proteins adopt their unique
shapes and the dynamic processes by which those shapes enable their plethora of
functions that maintain life. These phenomena are sufficiently complex that a
consortium of experts in both experimental and computational methods is required
to understand their properties. The consortium also aims to provide a novel and
interactive training and mentoring platform for younger scientists in the field.
To achieve these objectives, the PFC will support two annual meetings, one with
the principal investigators and another with the investigators and their
students, and a website. In many ways, the consortium acts as a virtual
institute focused on a studying one of the most important and fascinating
problems in biology. It is anticipated that accelerated progress towards a
deeper understanding of the fundamental principles that govern protein folding
reactions and protein dynamics will have a major impact on biochemistry,
medicine and the biotechnology industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
Protein Folding Consortium (PFC) is to transform the way that scientists think
about the protein folding problem and protein dynamics by creating a consortium
of experimentalists, theorists and computational biologists whose collective
efforts exceed the progress attainable by individual labs. Advances in high
performance computing combined with novel sampling methods and the application
of sophisticated experiments now make it possible for simulations and
experiments to study protein folding and dynamics on similar time scales.
Simulations generate testable predictions for experiments. Results from
experiments can be used to refine simulation methodologies and force fields.
This iterative synergistic approach between simulation and experiment, when
deployed across proteins of different folds, sizes, complexity and evolutionary
profiles, will allow for a coherent and convergent description of the folding
process. The expanding ambitions of the PFC encompass folding in vivo, the
evolution of biophysical properties, the coupled folding and binding of
intrinsically disordered proteins, macromolecular machines and functional
dynamics. These new ventures are related, in one way or another, to the folding
free energy surface of a protein and its modulation by sequence, history and the
environment. This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences; the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of
Physics, and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.