* 1516842
* The Mass Function and Galactic Distribution of Cool Planets from Microlensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Bernard Gaudi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2019
* USD 269,504.00

Searches for planets orbiting other stars (exoplanets) have discovered thousands
of planetary systems orbiting a wide variety of stars. Most of these surveys are
only able to detect planets on relatively small orbits similar to that of
Jupiter or smaller. Furthermore, the vast majority of the stars so far known to
host planets are relatively close to the Sun. Therefore, little is known about
the outer regions of planetary systems, and almost nothing is known about the
distribution of planets farther away in the galaxy. Microlensing, which occurs
when a distant star gets sufficiently aligned with a massive compact foreground
object to bend its light due to its gravitational field, resulting in an
observable magnification, can address this. Microlensing surveys for exoplanets,
on the other hand, are sensitive to cool, low-mass planets in the outer parts of
solar systems. Furthermore, microlensing is sensitive to planets in a range of
environments in our Milky Way galaxy. It is perhaps the only way to detect
whether free-floating planets exist. This team will develop microlensing methods
and use them to determine the properties and Galactic distribution of planets
that do not orbit close to a host star. This work relies on observations from
the amateur astronomy community, and this team will organize an international
workshop to bring the amateur and professional communities together.

This program is a combination of theoretical and observational work to develop
methods to measure the mass and distance to a large and broad sample of
microlens planets. The CoPIs and their students will: 1) Develop methods to
measure the microlens parallax effect, which provides the most robust way to
measure the mass of and distance to microlenses. Using the results from two
Spitzer campaigns totalling over 900 hours, they will study the phenomenology of
all types of microlens parallaxes measurement methods. (2) Develop a unified,
comprehensive understanding of the microlens parallax effect. This synthesis of
various methods will enable parallax measurements, and thus mass and distance
estimates, for a large and broad sample of planetary systems. (3) Continue to
lead the Microlensing Follow Up Network effort to find extra-solar planets by
monitoring high-magnification microlensing events.