* 1516471
* Collaborative Research: Capacity building in Cybersecurity-literacy: An inter-disciplinary approach
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Bill Doherty, Truckee Meadows Community College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 37,317.00

The demand for cybersecurity research and a trained cybersecurity workforce is
significant and increasing daily. The goal of this collaborative project between
the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) and the Truckee Meadows Community College
(TMCC) is to develop an interdisciplinary cybersecurity research and education
platform. This effort is aimed towards the development of the next generation of
cybersecurity scientists and professionals and to equip them with a solid grasp
of different academic viewpoints, including Computer Science, Political Science,
Social Psychology, Information Systems, Business, Public Policy, and Justice.
The research team will have a significant impact on students through engaging
interdisciplinary training and learning mechanisms. The project has both a
direct and indirect impact on hands-on research, STEM education, training and
career development of the graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students and
ultimately, the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, students
will (1) learn the theory and application of cybersecurity from an
interdisciplinary perspective; (2) use interactive learning materials and tools;
and (3) engage in hands-on transformative experiences through cyber-games and
state-of-the-art testbeds. The main contribution of the project is to develop
instructional modules that can be incorporated in a variety of courses by
fostering a holistic approach towards cybersecurity through collaboration across
disciplines. The project brings faculty from different disciplines together to
develop modular library packages while keeping each major's background in mind
and also adopt them seamlessly into the learning environment of each discipline.
The modular nature of the developed library packages and replicable teaching
materials and activities will help in wide dissemination and usage throughout
the nation. This project will assist in sustaining long-term research/education
partnerships and will nurture a workforce of cybersecurity professionals who
will be able to integrate technical, legal, psychological, political and
financial aspects of cybersecurity into a practical, secure and dependable
cyberspace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Advanced Technological Education program is
providing co-funding for this project in recognition of the project's
contribution to technician education in community colleges