* 1516701
* Using the Plant Heat Stress Response to Probe Genome-wide Regulatory Landscapes for Functional Relevance
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Christine Queitsch, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2018
* USD 667,235.00

This project will investigate the molecular mechanisms that allow all organisms
to respond appropriately to stressful high temperature. Understanding the
mechanistic underpinnings of the so-called heat stress response has become a
particularly pressing issue for agriculture given rising global temperatures and
droughts. Therefore, this research will focus on plants. In addition to
providing important scientific insights and enabling future crop applications,
this project offers training opportunities for graduate and postdoctoral fellows
in plant research. It also provides educational opportunities for undergraduate
students who belong to underrepresented groups to study and conduct experiments
within the vibrant environment of a major research university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heat stress response has been a model for gene
regulation for almost a century because it is universally conserved, simple to
control, and extremely well-studied. In preliminary studies in Arabidopsis
thaliana, interrogation of the regulatory landscape during heat stress with
DNaseI-seq revealed several unexpected findings, which this project will explore
through two aims. First, additional DNaseI-seq experiments will be conducted to
establish the generality of the earlier findings for physiologically relevant
temperature conditions and to determine the connection between ambient
temperature increases and acute heat stress. Second, chromosome conformation
(Hi-C) analyses of normal and mutant plants will be used to determine how three-
dimensional chromosome organization and specific histone variants contribute to
the massive transcriptional changes observed in response to heat stress. The
results are expected to lay the foundation for functional analysis of the
regulatory elements responsible for thermotolerance in plants.