* 1516107
* US-German Research Proposal: Neural Dynamics of the Integration of Egocentric and Allocentric Cues in the Formation of Spatial Maps During Fully-Mobile Human Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Scott Makeig, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2018
* USD 504,665.00

How do we learn our way around a new city, building, or other environment?
Spatial learning occurs as we integrate the visual, auditory, and other sensory
impressions we gather as we move through the new environment. This collaborative
project will investigate the brain dynamics of human participants as they
actively navigate new types of laboratory mazes. The goal is to observe and
model, for the first time, the distributed brain dynamics that support spatial
learning during active human navigation. To do this, the investigators will use
an original, non-invasive "mobile brain/body imaging" (MoBI) data recording
approach that combines simultaneous full body motion capture and brain
electrical (EEG or "brainwave") recording. Advanced signal processing methods
will allow them to use non-invasively recorded scalp EEG data to follow the time
courses of electrical brain activity within the cerebral cortex
as&amp;#8232;subjects actively explore computer-defined mazes. Beyond
introducing new methods and software to the field of cognitive neuroscience, the
project could enable improved design of living and work environments,
development of new and effective approaches to improving spatial navigation
abilities of children and people with spatial disabilities, guide better
training for and evaluation of first responder operations, enable more effective
operation of remote observation vehicles, and spur development of methods to
maintain spatial orienting abilities in the elderly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will have three technical objectives: 1) To further develop and exploit
a new computational approach to studying brain source network dynamics of freely
moving individuals, 2) to observe and model transient cortical network
interactions supporting physical navigation in 3-D space, and 3) to examine to
what extent sensory information about the spatial structure of the physical
environment is processed in brain networks that support modality-specific vs.
supra-modal information processing. To accomplish these objectives, the project
will capitalize on unique strengths of the collaborators and the unique
facilities available in the investigators' pioneering MoBI laboratories. The
project will use a novel "Sparse-AR" (perceptually sparse augmented-reality)
approach in which information about the participant's spatial environment is
delivered in the form of brief bursts of sound or light. The Sparse-AR approach
will allow modeling of how our brain activities change as we receive and
integrate new bits of evidence about unfamiliar or familiar features of the
spatial environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (BMBF).