* 1516374
* RUI: Galaxy Encounters on FIRE: Decoding Interaction-Induced Star Formation in the Local Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Jorge Moreno, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 03/31/2018
* USD 265,818.00

Interacting galaxies are a major part of the history, evolution, and dynamics of
galaxies. Projects are now beginning to measure the internal structure and
motions in these fascinating systems, and so the time is right to carry out
theoretical work capable of understanding these observations. This project will
produce a comprehensive suite of galaxy merger simulations and turn them into
simulated images and velocity maps to guide the interpretation of forthcoming
data. The research connects a primarily undergraduate institution with cutting
edge, world class theorists and observers, providing valuable experiences for
under-represented college and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will employ state-of-the-art numerical simulations to investigate the
internal structure and kinematics of interacting galaxies. For the first time,
observations in the Local Universe are measuring these characteristics with
exquisite detail, and for a large number of systems, using deep imaging and
integral-field spectroscopy. The PI and collaborators will use the FIRE
(Feedback In Realistic Environments) model to construct a comprehensive suite of
galaxy merger simulations, resolving Giant Molecular Clouds and the Interstellar
Medium, and directly implementing star-formation and feedback physics. Post-
processing by radiative-transfer codes will create synthetic images resembling
real galaxies, which will be classified both visually and with automated
schemes. Along with kinematic maps, these will support planned observational
projects. This three-pronged design of visual, automated and kinematic
classification will help to overcome any obstacles. All theoretical tools have
been fully tested, and undergraduate mentoring plans already exist using two
postdocs and a graduate student. Considerable efforts are being made to recruit
under-represented students from local state universities and community colleges,
using two existing frameworks, and allowing them to work with a world-class team
of theorists and observers. The project also involves high school teachers and
students from the local under-served Hispanic community, aided by the PI's
native language being Spanish.