* 1516703
* SciStarter 2.0: A Dashboard to Drive Research, Participation, and Community-building in Citizen Science
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2017
* Steve Gano, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,970.00

Arizona State University will develop new features for its SciStarter website
that will expand participation in citizen science and provide rich data for
researching the nature of and impacts of citizen science participation.
SciStarter is a popular online citizen science hotspot featuring more than 850
searchable citizen science projects, added by researchers and project owners,
and serving over 35,000 citizen scientists. The project will develop new
features to add to the current website that will enable participants to explore
hundreds of citizen science projects and select projects of most interest to
them, track their participation, and connect to people and projects they are
interested in. The expanded website will also provide rich data that will help
citizen science projects evaluate their programs and that will rich data for
researchers to investigate the nature of citizen science participation. The
website will be widely accessible to the public through partnerships with
Discover Magazine, the Citizen Science Association, and other
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SciStarter website will develop additional
features to expand citizen science participation and to research the nature and
impacts of participation. The expanded features will include: (1) an integrated
registration for participants to more easily engage in one or multiple citizen
science projects, across platforms; (2) GIS implementation for project owners to
define the geographic boundaries of projects so participants can find them more
easily; and (3) an online, personal dashboard for participants to track their
projects, participation, and contributions to science, share and save data,
record interests in projects, create profiles, and find people and projects of
interest to them. These new features will create opportunities for future
research concerning: (1) understanding how citizen scientists use the site and
how it responds to their needs and interests, and (2) understanding why, how,
and with what impacts citizen scientists participate in research. The project
will support the overall strategy of the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
Program to enhance learning in informal environments through the funding of
innovative resources through a variety of settings. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.