* 1516245
* Stability and Long Time Behavior for Infinite-Dimensional Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Milena Stanislavova, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 195,000.00

This research project is on understanding the stability and long-time behavior
of special solutions for partial differential equations. Specifically, the
principal investigator considers equations used as models governing the motion
of currents in the oceans and the propagation of pulses in optical fibers.
Solitary and periodic waves, often observable in physical systems and lab
experiments, are solutions of particular interest for these applications. The
stability of solutions implies that they are persistent through small changes in
the environment, impurities of the materials, imperfections of the model, etc.
Results of the research can be used to address important problems, such as
optimization, in engineering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a
variety of problems in partial differential equations, focusing on the study of
stability and long-time behavior of coherent structures, such as periodic and
solitary waves and more complicated excited states. The principal investigator
uses the point of view of infinite-dimensional dynamical systems, which takes
advantage of the analogy between partial and ordinary differential equations.
The approach is to look at systems whose time evolution occurs on appropriately
defined infinite-dimensional function spaces and use ordinary differential
equation objects such as invariant manifolds and attractors, as well as more
subtle connections. The proposal consists of two parts. The first part focuses
on the linear stability of waves for several models, both in one and higher
spatial dimensions. The principal investigator finds the spectral stability with
a method that treats both spatially periodic and solitary waves equally well.
Important examples here are the Boussinesq system and the short-pulse equation,
and also the sine-Gordon and Klein-Gordon equations. These problems present many
challenges at the spectral and linear stability level, but virtually nothing is
known for their asymptotic stability. In the second part, the project focuses on
the long-time behavior and nonlinear stability of waves for these models. Of
interest is the relation between linear and nonlinear stability, particularly
for wave equations where the generators for the semi-groups are operator
matrices whose spectrum is not easy to compute. The common feature of these
equations is that they support soliton-like solutions, such as ground or excited
states and solitary or periodic traveling or standing waves.