* 1516651
* Rewiring of Genetic Circuits Regulating Meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Richard Bennett, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

When species evolve, DNA changes can result either in new gene functions or the
'rewiring' of existing functions, i.e., the precise way in which genes work
together to enable vital functions to be carried out. This work investigates the
rewiring of meiosis, which involves a specialized program of cell division,
across multiple species of yeast. In particular, some Candida species are
different from the better-studied baker`s yeast in that meiosis is controlled by
different genes in the two species. Previous results suggest that a protein
(Ste12) which is performing meiosis-unrelated functions in baker's yeast,
evolved to control meiosis in at least one Candida species. This project will
study the rewiring events that led to this repurposing of Ste12 function. The
project will stimulate interest in microbiology and research by establishing
interactions between students, teachers, and faculty at local high schools and
universities. This will be achieved through the growth of a student microbiology
society chapter in Rhode Island and by developing educational tools such as
animated microbiology podcasts. Students from underrepresented minorities will
be particularly encouraged to be involved in this work. In addition, many of the
yeast species investigated in this study are themselves relevant to health and
biotechnology, making an understanding of their biology of general interest and
importance.

The project will utilize comparative and functional genomics to compare how
meiosis is regulated in multiple yeast species. Preliminary experiments have
established that different transcription factors regulate meiosis in different
yeast species, and the molecular mechanisms by which these factors work will be
determined, as well as the rewiring events that led to different circuit
configurations between species. In particular, Ime1 acts as the master
transcriptional regulator of meiosis in several species, while recent
experiments have uncovered Ste12 as a novel regulator of meiosis in other
species. Experiments will include the use of ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq to examine the
precise role of these master transcription factors in regulating meiosis.
Potential co-factors that work with Ime1 or Ste12, and may facilitate circuit
rewiring, will be determined. The fitness advantages that these rewiring events
may confer will also be tested. Together, these studies will reveal how genetic
circuits evolve by transcriptional rewiring of existing circuits, and the
consequences of these rewiring events for the lifestyle of the species.