* 1516092
* Cyber Security Master's Track
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Alberto LaCava, Felician University, A New Jersey Nonprofit Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 237,987.00

Cyber criminals are pushing Internet security and cybercrime prevention
strategies to the limit. As attacks become more sophisticated, defenses must
stay one step ahead. A cybersecurity workforce with an abundance of skilled
workers is a key component of these defenses. Therefore, the overall goal of
this project is to produce cybersecurity workers equipped with the knowledge and
skills to produce the next-generation defenses. Felician College has a rich
source of students that includes underrepresented racial and ethnic minority
students, women, non-traditional adults, and former military personnel. These
populations will bring unique perspectives and experiences to the cybersecurity
field, which are currently lacking. As a small private institution, Felician can
also pilot cutting-edge cybersecurity educational programs and develop cyber
security-specific pedagogical methods that work with small-school
infrastructures. This knowledge has the potential to change the cybersecurity
landscape nationally by extending opportunities to the many students who attend
smaller colleges and universities willing to offer innovative programs in
computer science and cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this
project are designed to promote improvement in cybersecurity education and
workforce development. Specifically, successful implementation of this program
will allow Felician to apply for status as a Center for Academic Excellence in
Information Assurance/Cyber Defense. To accomplish this goal, infrastructure and
coursework will be improved through three specific aims: (1) Re-design existing
and develop new coursework for the Bachelor of Science in cybersecurity; (2)
Build a specialized computer laboratory for use by the undergraduate and
graduate programs; (3) Develop a cybersecurity track within the Master Degree in
Computer Science. Through these activities, two new undergraduate courses will
be developed, seven existing courses will be mapped to required knowledge units,
and six new graduate-level cybersecurity courses will be developed. All new and
re-designed coursework will be developed in accordance with guidelines provided
by the National Security Agency and the Department of Homeland Security.
Rigorous formative and summative evaluation of course content and student
learning outcomes will ensure programmatic success.