* 1516021
* Linking Galactic and Extragalactic Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Loren Anderson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2019
* USD 363,734.00

It is surprising how little we know about global star formation in our Milky Way
Galaxy compared to other galaxies in the Universe. This is because the Sun lies
in the flat Milky Way disk and because nearly all star formation occurs within
this disk. Looking at the sky, the disk appears as a relatively thin band, with
stars at all distances found within this band. This project will disentangle
this band of light into a three-dimensional map with the aim of understanding
the global star formation in our Galaxy. This map will allow us to differentiate
between the brightness of regions (an observed property) with their luminosities
(an intrinsic property). The team will create the three-dimensional map by
measuring the brightness of all known massive star formation regions at infrared
and radio wavelengths, and will use radio observations to turn the infrared and
radio brightnesses into luminosities. Local high school students will assist in
the observations, providing vital research opportunities for the students of
West Virginia. The PI and his students will compare the distribution of derived
luminosities with that of other galaxies to determine the type of galaxy we live
in. They will also estimate how many stars our Galaxy is forming. These results
will help us to better understand star formation in our Galactic
home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a severe lack of communication between
Galactic and extragalactic astronomers because there is no complete sample of
Galactic star forming regions that can be compared to those of external
galaxies. The team will solve this problem by creating a catalog of all Galactic
HII regions ionized by single O-stars using radio recombination line
observations. Local high school students will help with the observations,
providing vital science opportunities for the students of West Virginia. These
observations will allow us to compute kinematic distances from the observed
radial velocities using a rotation curve model. The team will supplement the
distances by locating clusters of HII regions that have similar radial
velocities, and presumably similar distances, and will adjust for catalog biases
using a population synthesis model. The PI and his students will derive HII
region fluxes at wavelengths from 8 micron to 21 cm and turn these fluxes into
luminosities using the catalog distances. They will investigate three
extragalactic results found in studies of the HII region luminosity function
(LF): the break in the Galactic LF seen in some galaxies, the finding that
''clustered'' and ''distributed'' HII-region LFs have different shapes, and the
correlation between the galaxy's LF shape and its Hubble type. The total Milky
Way luminosity can then be computed by summing the luminosities of all catalog
HII regions. The total Milky Way luminosities will then be converted into star
formation rates using extragalactic star formation rate calibrations.