* 1516970
* Data-driven Models of Cell Communication in Embryos
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Adam Finkelstein, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 900,001.00

Understanding the complex set of signals that control communication between
cells in a multicellular organism is a challenging problem that requires a
diverse set of tools to solve. This project will use methods from developmental
biology, applied mathematics and computer science to uncover the complex
signaling patterns that regulate tissue formation in the developing fruit fly
(Drosophila) embryo. The quantitative, computational and visualization tools to
be developed in this study will be applicable to a broad range of signaling
mechanisms in complex three-dimensional tissues or organisms, thereby providing
methods of general applicability in biology. In addition, this project will
provide interdisciplinary training for students from chemical and biological
engineering, molecular biology, and computer science departments, as well as for
postdoctoral fellows with applied mathematics and life sciences backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alterations in the activation of receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) have been implicated in multiple developmental abnormalities, motivating
quantitative studies of developmental RTK signaling. Signaling systems involved
in embryogenesis have been highly conserved in evolution, which implies that
studies in model organisms, such as Drosophila, yield broadly applicable
insights. The early Drosophila embryo provides unique opportunities for high-
throughput quantitative experiments, and this project will focus on signaling by
the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR), a key regulator of developing
tissues in many species. EGFR signaling in the early embryo is accurately
described as a temporal pulse that leads to a stable pattern of gene expression,
and this project will examine the molecular mechanisms controlling the
quantitative parameters of this pulse and its function, as well as establishing
experimentally testable models of EGFR signaling in vivo. This project will also
develop methods to combine information from different experimental assays that
address different aspects of developmental dynamics in different embryos to
generate a stereotypical developmental trajectory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded jointly by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Biomedical Engineering
Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.