* 1516126
* Structure, Mechanism and Nickel Metallocenter Assembly of Lactate Racemase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jian Hu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 549,300.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professors Robert P. Hausinger and Jian Hu of Michigan
State University to characterize the structures and functions of enzymes
involved in lactate biosynthesis. The enzyme that is the focus of this study,
lactate racemase, interconverts two forms of lactic acid, in a deceptively
simple, though chemically challenging, reaction. Information gained with these
complexes may be used to inform other, studies of enzymes dependent upon nickel
metal centers. This research trains postdoctoral researchers in the use of mass
spectrometric, structural, spectroscopic, and mutagenesis studies to
characterize the enzyme and its helper proteins. These individuals interact with
gifted high school students in the High School Honors Science Program and
underrepresented undergraduate students in the Charles Drew Science Scholars
program, the Increasing Diversity and Education Access to Sciences (IDEAS)
program, and the Summer Research Opportunities Program (SROP). Furthermore,
information gained from this project is incorporated into ongoing graduate
courses entitled "Metals in Biology," "Protein Structure, Function, and Design,"
and "Integrated Microbial Biology."

This project examines the functional role and biosynthetic pathway of a recently
identified pyridinium-3-thioamide-5-thiocarboxylic acid mononucleotide that
coordinates nickel as a (SCS)Ni(II) pincer complex and is covalently bound to
Lys184 of lactate racemase, LarA. Synthesis of this cofactor requires the
accessory proteins LarB, LarC, and LarE of still undefined roles. Planned
analyses include investigation of protein bound and free intermediates by mass
spectrometry, structural elucidation of these proteins in their various states
by x-ray crystallography, spectrophotometric and biophysical analyses of LarA
intermediates during catalysis, and in vitro recapitulation of the biosynthetic
pathway by supplying the appropriate cofactors. This research is expected to
expand understanding of nickel biochemistry and elucidate mechanistic details of
oxidation-reduction chemistry involving a tethered, nickel-containing, nicotinic
acid cofactor. The (SCS)Ni(II) cofactor represents the first biological example
of a pincer complex, well known to inorganic chemists.