* 1516718
* SYNERGIES: Customizing Interventions to Sustain Youth STEM Interest and Participation Pathways
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* John Falk, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,998,876.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This research project leverages ongoing
longitudinal research to investigate whether, and if so how, youth from ages 10
to 15 in a diverse, under-resourced urban community become interested and
engaged in STEM. The project addresses a global issue; fewer youth choose to
major in scientific fields or take science coursework at high school or
university levels. These declining numbers result in fewer STEM professionals
and fewer scientifically literate citizens who are able to function successfully
in an increasingly scientific and technological society. These declines are
observed for youth as a whole, but are most pronounced for girls and particular
non-white ethnic minorities. Data collected from youth in this community of
study, including non-white ethnic minorities, mirrors this decline. NSF funding
will support a five-year systematic and systemic process in which project
researchers work collaboratively with existing informal and formal educational
partners (e.g., museums, libraries, afterschool providers, schools) to develop
sets of customized, connected, and coordinated learning interventions, in and
out of school, for youth with different backgrounds, needs, and interests, all
with the goal of averting or dampening this decline of STEM interest and
participation during early adolescence. In addition to new research and
community STEM networks, this project will result in a Community Toolkit that
includes research instruments and documentation of network-building strategies
for use by other researchers and practitioners nationally and internationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed methods exploratory study has two distinct but
interrelated populations - youth and educators from across informal and formal
institutions. To develop a clearer understanding of the factors that influence
youths' STEM interest development over time, particularly among three youth STEM
Interest Profiles identified in a secondary analysis (1-Dislike Math, 2-Like all
STEM, 3-Dislike all STEM), the design combines surveys with in-depth interviews
and observations. To study educators and institutions, researchers will combine
interviews, focus groups, and observations to better understand factors that
influence community-wide, data-driven approaches to supporting youth interest
development. Research will be conducted in three phases with the goal of
community-level change in youth STEM interest and participation. In Phase 1
(Years 1 &amp; 2) four educational partners will develop interventions for a 6th
and 7th grade youth cohort that will be iteratively refined through a design-
based approach. Educational partners and researchers will meet to review and
discuss interest and participation data and use these data to select content, as
well as plan activities and strategies within their programs (using a simplified
form of conjecture mapping). By Phase 2 (Years 3 &amp; 4) four additional
partners will be included, more closely modeling the complex system of the
community. With support from researchers support and existing partners, new
educational partners will similarly review and discuss data, using these to
select content, as well as plan activities consistent with program goals and
strategies. Additional interventions will be implemented by the new partners and
further assessed and refined with a new 6th and 7th grade cohort, along with the
existing interventions of the first four partners. In Phase 3 (Year 5) data will
be collected on pre-post community-level changes in STEM interest and
participation and the perceived effectiveness of this approach for youth. These
data will inform future studies.