* 1517246
* Accretion and Star Formation Induced by the Galactic Center Supermassive Black Hole Sgr A*
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2022
* Farhad Yusef-Zadeh, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2022
* USD 456,106.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how our own Milky Way
Galaxy formed and developed throughout its lifetime. One important aspect of
understanding the formation and evolution of the Milky Way is to study the
supermassive black hole (called Sgr A*) at its center and how the black hole
interacts with the rest of the Galaxy. The proximity of Sgr A* provides an
excellent laboratory in which to investigate two intertwined processes: how
stars are formed in the vicinity of the black hole and how their stellar winds
are subsequently captured. This project will apply observation and theory to
identify sites of current star formation very close to Sgr A* (within 2 parsecs)
and will test ideas about how stars are formed in this
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have an extensive history in
communicating science and research to the public and are committed to continuing
these efforts over the course of this project. The team also includes two
graduate students who have developed Galactic center lessons, some of which
incorporate the WorldWide Telescope (WWT) visualization system, for high school
and community college classrooms throughout the Chicago area. The team will
create and share two WWT tours on the topic of the Galactic center and the Milky
Way Galaxy. Team members will use data, WWT tours and videos in public talks on
the Galactic center black hole, a very popular topic to schools and numerous
astronomical societies. The team will make FITS images related to this project
available to professional and citizen science communities. They will make JPEG
images from the FITS files and embed Astronomical Visual Metadata information
into the image headers. The FITS and JPEG images, WWT tours and videos will be
hosted at Northwestern University and will be accessible through a searchable
content-managed web site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine star
formation where the tidal and radiative effects by Sgr A* are significant. Their
multi-wavelength approach (e.g., VLA, ALMA, VLT, SMA and CARMA) will examine
water masers, compact H-II regions, SED fitting of protostars, proplyds and SiO
outflows in the molecular ring and will identify protostellar outflows lying
within 2 pc of Sgr A*. In addition, the team will determine the mass accretion
rate onto Sgr A* by measuring the mass loss rate of ionized winds from young
stars using radio techniques. The processes that lead to accretion are closely
related to star formation in the nucleus of our Galaxy as well as in the nuclei
of galaxies that host massive black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed
observations of the inner parsec of the Galactic center have primarily been
conducted at infrared wavelengths using Keck and VLT telescopes. The recent
upgrading of the VLA and commissioning of ALMA present an opportunity to apply
novel techniques at radio and millimeter wavelengths to examine two related
topics, star formation and accretion onto Sgr A*. These new capabilities will
allow the team to use massive stars to register the radio and infrared frames
with milliarcsecond accuracy and to determine the proper motion of stars
orbiting Sgr A*. The accurate positioning of stars near the supermassive black
hole will probe general-relativistic curvature of space-time by measuring
periastron shift. The investigators will use a novel pragmatic approach to
studying the disk mode of star formation near the tidally stressed environment
of Sgr A*. The project may have far reaching implications on the nature of star
formation and AGN activity in the nuclei of more active galaxies hosting massive
black holes.