* 1517298
* A combined mathematical and bioengineering approach to elucidate the contribution of circadian factors in the cellular response to genotoxic stress
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,10/31/2020
* Carla Finkielstein, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 10/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

Circadian rhythms are mechanisms that measure time on a scale of about 24 hours
and then adjust the body to environmental signals. Circadian clock genes produce
proteins that are necessary for the generation and regulation of circadian
rhythms. These proteins also regulate genes involved in either cell division or
cell death. Agitation in the balance between cell division and cell death will
lead to cellular dysfunction. In this project, the investigator will use an
interdisciplinary approach that combines biological, mathematical, and
bioengineering tools, to examine the circadian factors that act as mediators in
the interconnected network that controls the circadian clock. This project
includes an educational component that will recruit, retain, train, and graduate
a more academically prepared student body with a global vision of
interdisciplinary research and world opportunities, creating a new sense of
leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses multidisciplinary and
complementary methods to establish signature events that modulate the effect of
genotoxic stress in both cell division and circadian phase resetting across
length scales from molecular to cellular systems. Initially, the study will
focus on intracellular events that dynamically adapt themselves to genotoxic or
physiological challenges to what cells are exposed to. Then, the study will
shift toward understanding how redistribution of clock and checkpoint players
influence the clock itself and promotes resetting. To accomplish this goal, the
investigator will integrate diverse experimental observations and measurements
into mathematical models that simulate concrete and realistic experiments,
reconcile measurements and current data, and illuminate how different components
cooperate to produce a particular behavior. Lastly, additional experiments will
be designed to explore the influence of the microenvironment and systemic
factors in the clock response to genotoxic stress and to the circadian behavior
of multi-cell arrangements in three-dimensional substrates. As a result, the
investigator proposes to: (1) determine how spatial/temporal organization of
circadian components modulates the cellular response to genotoxic stress and
provokes clock resetting; and (2) study the behavior of circadian oscillatory
systems challenged by genotoxic stress in 3D biomimetic environments. The
transition to a system that more closely resembles physiological conditions will
expose additional critical parameters and provide a more comprehensive map of
crosstalk mechanisms, help predict network connections, and generate new
testable hypotheses.