* 1517408
* Collaborative Research: Chromatin Modification in Archaea and its Role in Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Paul Blum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2020
* USD 379,675.00

Epigenetics (the study of physiological variation not caused by DNA) is an
expanding area of great importance to the survival and health of living
organisms. This research will investigate the evolutionary origin of epigenetics
using an archaeal microbe as the studied organism. The results of this project
could establish new ways to understand fundamental aspects of epigenetics. The
project will also provide training for college students through new classroom-
based efforts including hands-on laboratory modules for general microbiology
courses. The modules will be adapted for use in high schools and with
underrepresented minority students in the U. S. Department of Education Upward
Bound program. Graduate and undergraduate students will be cross-trained in
multiple disciplines, including systems biology, genetics, biochemistry, and
microbiology.

A heritable phenotype results from transmission of a DNA allele or chromatin
modification state that controls gene expression. The archaeon Sulfolobus
solfatarics has chromatin proteins that are methylated and acetylated.
Sophisticated chromatin-based mechanisms in eukaryotes are known to regulate
gene expression, but the extent to which similar processes might be used in the
archaeal kingdom is unknown. This project will test the hypothesis that archaeal
chromatin protein modification and gene expression are coupled in a coordinated
fashion. The anticipated results will provide a new context in which to place
transcriptional regulation in the archaea and expand insight into the evolution
of chromatin.