* 1517536
* Transcriptional Silencing and Enhancing Mechanisms in Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Karen McGinnis, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Modifications (called epigenetic marks) of DNA or of the proteins associated
with DNA can cause certain genes to be turned on or off (gene regulation) at
different stages of growth and development. This project will define a mode of
epigenetic-based gene regulation that is poorly understood in all organisms
using as a model system maize (corn), which is an important agricultural product
for human and animal consumption and for bioenergy production in the US. Since
these epigenetic marks are heritable and can be used to turn on genes with
desired traits, this project may uncover novel approaches for engineering new
strains of corn for agricultural purposes. This project will engage high school
students in summer research programs, and offer research experiences and
training to graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins
will be isolated by sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) from a known
epigenetic regulatory sequence in maize. They will be compared from ChIP samples
of DNA in transcriptionally active and silenced states, along with specific
deletions of the known regulatory sequence. Collectively, this will be used to
elucidate the specific protein-DNA interactions associated with transcriptional
silencing and activation. Because the regulatory sequence participates in
allelic communication, proteins involved with epigenetic regulation associated
with allelic communication will also be identified. Analysis of these
interactions will provide insight into mechanisms of transcriptional silencing,
enhancers, and paramutation in eukaryotes and address the complexity of
combinatorial epigenetic regulation.