* 1517390
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Asymmetric division and the temporal dynamics of cell motility
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Shane Herbert, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 11/30/2017
* USD 382,899.00

This collaborative project between researchers in the US (Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center) and the UK (University of Manchester) aims to define the
fundamental mechanisms controlling cell migration during organ development. In
growing tissues, cells usually divide symmetrically to produce two identical
daughter cells. However, in some instances cell divisions are asymmetric and
give rise to intrinsically distinct daughters that have different
characteristics including the ability to move (or motility). This project will
explore the molecular and cellular basis of post-cell division asymmetry in cell
motility and define the functional role of asymmetric divisions in the control
of cell migration during tissue growth. Not only will this research generate
freely available novel computational methods and analysis tools suitable for a
wide array of applications, the findings of this work will have wide-reaching
implications for understanding the control of cell migration across a plethora
of cellular systems and organisms. Through its broader impacts, the project will
additionally expose undergraduate and high school students (with emphasis on
recruiting underrepresented groups) to integrated cross-disciplinary
computational / experimental scientific approaches and provide hands-on
experience of international collaborative research techniques upon the creation
of several new, targeted, interactive Global Interface Science (GIS) workshops.
Moreover, guidance on implementing similar GIS workshops anywhere worldwide will
be widely disseminated via online media.

Asymmetric cell division (ACD) specifies differential daughter cell fates in
many systems, but has never before been implicated in determining the temporal
dynamics of cell motility. This project will define how ACD acts as a novel
symmetry-breaking mechanism to ensure daughter cells acquire distinct motilities
during tissue growth. An integrated in silico and in vivo approach will be
taken, innovating a novel multiscale hybrid, spatiotemporal agent-based model
(ABM) that will inform single-cell live imaging experiments of endothelial cells
in zebrafish embryos. These studies will probe ACD in motile cells, validate
model predictions and altogether elucidate a previously unexplored role for
mitosis in the control of migration. In particular, the interplay of ACD with
cell signaling, geometry and mechanical motility cues across different scales,
from the molecular to the cellular will be investigated through the following
tasks: A) develop new modeling methodologies to investigate the role of
localized intracellular dynamics in the establishment of asymmetric post-mitotic
motility and functionally validate model predictions at sub-cellular resolution
in vivo; B) Predict the effects of ACD-driven differences in cell architecture
on motility dynamics in silico alongside quantification of dynamic alterations
in cell architecture occurring during division in vivo; C) quantify pre- and
post-mitotic fluctuations in cell tension at single-cell resolution in vivo and
define the interplay of cell tension with the induction of ACD and differential
motility in silico and in vivo. The products of this research will include novel
computational ABM models and image analysis software, which will uniquely enable
studies of key aspects of cell migration and will be made freely available to
the wider scientific community. In additional broader impacts, the PIs will
organize international workshops to provide a platform for promoting the
widespread use of similar integrated in silico / in vivo approaches in studies
of tissue morphogenesis across diverse cellular systems and organisms.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.
Within NSF, the award is cofunded by the Division of Molecular And Cellular
Biosciences and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems.