* 1517724
* Understanding the Effect of Environment on Cluster Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Elizabeth Lada, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2021
* USD 411,229.00

The investigators use telescopes to make infrared images of nearby molecular
clouds in the Large Magellanic Cloud, a companion galaxy to our Milky Way
galaxy. Since these clouds are more transparent in infrared images, the
investigators have discovered many stars are forming in these clouds. They
believe most of the stars in our galaxy were formed in clouds very similar to
these. How these stars form remains a mystery. The investigators will make an
important step towards unraveling this mystery by measuring the properties of
embedded star clusters in this companion dwarf galaxy orbiting our Milky Way
galaxy.

The broader impact of this proposal is the University of Florida (UF) Astronomy
BRIDGES program and the continuation of our outreach program in local elementary
schools. The BRIDGES program facilitates the transfer of underrepresented
Hispanic students in the STEM fields from Miami-Dade College, the largest
community college in Florida, to four-year institutions by providing academic
activities, mentoring, and social connections with UF Hispanic faculty members,
UF students in physics and astronomy, and UF senior transfer students. The
program will include multilingual workshops about careers in physics and
astronomy, opportunities to do research in astronomy and present results at
scientific meetings, and visits to UF and the Institute of Hispanic-Latino
Cultures. This outreach program will be conducted throughout the county,
targeting schools with low performance in math and science, most of which are in
areas with high percentage of minority students.

The investigators are conducting the first sensitive, systematic, infrared
imaging survey for embedded clusters in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC), using
the VISTA Magellanic Cloud Survey Data. The data will be used to identify young
embedded clusters within the LMC molecular clouds and thereby create the most
comprehensive survey of very young embedded clusters in molecular clouds in a
galaxy other than the Milky Way. In fact, it will represent the largest and most
uniform survey for embedded clusters in star forming molecular clouds ever done
in any galaxy including our own. In addition to determining the number of
embedded clusters the proposed data will be used to characterize their
properties, such as their sizes, total masses, total luminosities, mass
distribution and birthrate.