* 1517422
* Collaborative Research:  The SAGA Project:  Searching for Dwarf Galaxies Around Milky Way Analogs
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Risa Wechsler, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2020
* USD 290,789.00

Our home galaxy, the Milky Way, is surrounded by dozens of smaller
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;These smaller galaxies are called dwarf galaxies. The
properties of these dwarf galaxies provide clues to how galaxies form and can
test the nature of dark matter. However, the number of Milky Way dwarf galaxies
and their properties do not fully agree with well-established cosmological
models. In order to understand this discrepancy, it is necessary to understand
whether the Milky Way and its dwarf galaxy populations are typical of large
spiral galaxies, or if the Milky Way is itself an unusual galaxy. The
investigators will identify dwarf galaxies around 50 spiral galaxies similar to
the Milky Way. These systems will be compared to predictions to determine
whether the Milky Way's dwarf population is typical, and will provide new
insight into the nature of dark matter and into the formation of our own
Galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators work focuses on a key question of
interest to the public: What is our place in the Universe? They will integrate
results into their array of education and outreach activities, bringing the
excitement of this rapidly-advancing field to a wider audience. They will create
a wiki to collect and disseminate teaching resources, with the goal of lowering
the bar to introducing new practices into the undergraduate astronomy classroom.
While development of innovative and interactive undergraduate material has
accelerated, a survey of university-level science faculty suggests that only a
small fraction of this makes it into the classroom. A single well-designed wiki
which gathers innovative undergraduate astrophysics teaching resources from the
professors who use them is lacking and will significantly increase the use of
such material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will constrain the
distribution of dwarfs around Milky Way-mass galaxies (of which the Milky Way
itself is a single example) by observationally identifying dwarf galaxy
populations around at least 50 systems down to the luminosity of the Milky Way's
Fornax dwarf galaxy (eight magnitudes fainter than the Milky Way). In parallel,
they will construct a comprehensive theoretical framework based on cosmological
dark matter simulations that fully utilizes the results of the observational
program to provide insight into and place new constraints on models of galaxy
formation and dark matter physics. Their goals are to: (1) provide the data and
theoretical framework necessary to distinguish between the multiple proposed
solutions to the "missing dwarf" and "too big to fail" problems and (2) provide
an improved understanding of the Milky Way itself in a cosmological context.