* 1517764
* Dynamics of Transcription Coupled Repair
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Michelle Wang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2020
* USD 462,172.00

UV damage to DNA affects the world population, resulting in sunburn, cataracts,
weakened immune systems, skin cancer and lower food production, and thus,
detailed insight into how this damage is recognized and repaired may present
novel targets for future intervention, particularly in relation to cancer and
ageing. This type of DNA damage is disruptive to both DNA replication and
transcription (the process of gene expression) and must be repaired in a timely
fashion to ensure proper cell function and viability. Transcription coupled
repair (TCR) is part of a global DNA repair mechanism and efficiently targets
DNA damage that interferes with transcription. This project will provide a
comprehensive understanding of the role that the bacterial transcription
coupling factor, Mfd, plays in TCR by detecting, tracking, and visualizing
relevant molecular events during the repair process. The project will offer
research training opportunities to students, and the topic presents accessible
educational opportunities concerning sun exposure, damage and protection for a
general audience. An educational module, covering topics such as sunburn, DNA
repair and long term skin damage, will be developed to bring public awareness to
UV-exposure and it will accessible to teachers nationwide via the "Lending
Library" of the Cornell Center for Materials Research.

The complexity of eukaryotic TCR impedes detailed molecular investigation;
therefore, bacterial TCR, which shares many characteristics, can serve as a
simpler model system. This research is aimed at answering a number of unresolved
kinetic and mechanical questions concerning TCR, specifically how Mfd and UvrAB
proteins that initiate nucleotide excision repair (NER) are targeted to a lesion
and the broader differential functions of Mfd. The research group has an
established track record for developing novel single molecule methods to address
fundamental questions in transcription and DNA replication. Utilization of new
techniques based on DNA unzipping will allow direct resolution of critical
molecular events in TCR, and complement existing biochemical and structural
studies, ultimately enabling a more comprehensive view of the timing and
interactions essential to TCR. An in-depth understanding of the relationships
among relevant proteins in TCR-NER could give us a broader understanding of
bacterial TCR-NER and, potentially, transcription overall. Additionally, further
elucidation of the function and roles of bacterial proteins could shed
significant light on TCR-NER eukaryotic counterparts, providing essential
information and enabling clarification of a more complex system. The results of
this work will significantly contribute to our understanding of the mechanism of
TCR by providing unprecedented views of a fundamental biological process.