* 1517003
* The Double Pulsar: A Rare Laboratory for Relativistic Gravity and  Pulsar Emission Physics
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Maura McLaughlin, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 208,652.00

Neutron stars are the compact, highly magnetized remnants of massive stars that
have ended their lives in supernova explosions. These stars weigh more than the
Sun and yet are only 10 miles across, making them the densest objects next to
black holes. Some of these neutron stars are seen as radio pulsars, which emit
beams of radio emission detectable by telescopes on Earth as they spin. The
rotation periods of pulsars are incredibly stable, allowing them to be used as
ultra-precise cosmic clocks for fundamental physics experiments. Roughly 300 of
the 2500 known pulsars are in binary systems with other stars, and only 10 of
these are in binary systems with other neutron stars. The large masses and short
orbital periods of these double neutron star binaries make them remarkable
laboratories for fundamental physics, and in particular for testing Einstein's
theory of general relativity. One of these double neutron star binaries is truly
exceptional, as it is the only one in which both of the neutron stars are
detectable as radio pulsars. This makes the tests of general relativity more
precise than for any other system and provides the best test ever of general
relativity in the so-called strong-field regime. We also observe interactions
between the two pulsars which can be used to help understand pulsar emission
physics. This proposal will fund analysis of high-precision data taken with the
Green Bank Telescope in Green Bank, WV, that will provide even better tests of
general relativity and provide crucial information about the emission mechanisms
and geometries of the two pulsars in the system. The information gleaned from
the observations of this system is truly unique and the goals could not be
achieved through any other means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the investigators
are focused on one system, the implications of the work are vast. The techniques
they develop will be crucial for future double pulsar systems sure to be
discovered through upcoming wide-field pulsar surveys. They will also develop an
animation which will be of interest to the general public, students, and
scientists. This animation will show how the pulse profile of B varies with time
due to geodetic precession and the changing influence of pulsar A. These
animations will be hosted on a website which will include other educational
materials on the Double Pulsar, pulsar properties, general relativity, and
gravitational waves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General relativity (GR) is the most
elegant and complete description of gravity ever produced. The investigators
will make more sensitive GR tests, including the elimination of alternative
theories of gravity and, possibly, the measurement of second-order Post-
Keplerian corrections to lead to the first measurement of a NS moment of
inertia. This would provide a unique constraint on the NS equation of state.
This work will also lead to measurement of fundamental properties of the system
that will inform understanding of binary evolution, pulsar emission physics, and
detection rates for ground-based interferometers that cannot be measured in any
other way. It will also provide crucial input for gravitational wave detectors,
facilitating one of the most important scientific milestones of the decade.