* 1517624
* RUI: Membrane dynamics at the mating junction of Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Eric Cole, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 09/30/2018
* USD 412,528.00

Tetrahymena thermophile, a single-celled, freshwater protozoan endemic to the
eastern USA, is a genius at performing universal cellular activities in
exaggerated ways. During sexual reproduction, Tetrahymena manufacture thousands
of miniature chromosomes that must be "capped" at each end to preserve their
integrity. This made Tetrahymena the ideal model organism for uncovering the
mechanism of "telomere" capping leading to the 2009 Nobel Prize. Paradoxically,
while Tetrahymena perform almost universal acts of cell biology, they are poised
equidistant from plant and animal kingdoms, and often display novel approaches
to solving fundamental biological problems. This evolutionary distance allows
researchers to gain broad perspective into how life solves many of its
functional dilemmas. The investigators in this research project will take
advantage of this organism's unique place in the tree of life and its hugely
accessible biology, to explore cellular mechanisms that resemble events
triggered in "higher" organisms when sperm meets egg: how do cells communicate
with one another to trigger changes that permit cell-cell fusion; how do cells
attach to one another during mating and; how do cells protect one set of nuclei
while simultaneously destroying another set of nuclei within a common cytoplasm.
The results from this work will inform the understanding of cell biology
associated with these processes in higher organisms. The accessibility of
Tetrahymena makes this a model system for training undergraduates in the art of
molecular and cellular biology and the practice of good science. Students in the
investigator's laboratory will learn to culture live cells, isolate cellular
organelles and their constituent proteins, identify these proteins by Mass
Spectrometry, take the resultant data to clone genes of interest, and perform
sophisticated microscopy and electron tomography experiments to examine
localization of cellular components (proteins, cytoskeleton) during mating
associated events. As students are trained, they will be encouraged to "cross-
train", picking up multiple types of research expertise in both classroom and
laboratory settings, while experiencing a truly collaborative and
interdisciplinary research environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formal
questions that constitute the Intellectual Merit of this research are: 1) Can
cell-adhesion proteins that mediate pair-formation in Tetrahymena be identified
and are they related to products of the Mating Type Locus? 2) Do Tetrahymena
cells engaging in pre-mating encounters exhibit elevated levels of intracellular
Ca++ reminiscent of those accompanying the fertilization reaction in metazoan
gametes? 3) How could physical association of post-meiotic nuclei with membrane
systems of the mating junction shield those nuclei from signals that trigger
macro-autophagy, and 4) What membrane trafficking pathways lead to production
and shedding of micro-vesicles into the extracellular space between mating
cells, and do these shed micro-vesicles perform a signaling function? This study
ultimately explores inter-cellular signaling via surface proteins and possibly
shed micro-vesicles and the programmed cellular responses triggered by those
signals. The work in this project will be performed by undergraduates engaged in
formal scientific training.