* 1517052
* Functional Constraints on the Acquisition of Novel Metabolic Controls
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2018
* James Carothers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2018
* USD 409,633.00

This project addresses a fundamental question about the evolution of the complex
systems that are used by organisms to control their essential activities such as
gene expression and metabolism (the chemistry of life); To what degree have
naturally-occurring control systems evolved to minimize the costs to the
organism of operating the control systems themselves? The project will utilize
synthetic biology approaches to construct a new metabolic pathway in a bacterium
(E. coli) with distinct RNA regulatory mechanisms that can be experimentally
authenticated. The research will employ iterative cycles of experiment and
computational modeling and will not only provide insight into the benefits and
costs of RNA-based regulation, but also serve as a platform for designing more
efficient regulatory systems of microbial metabolic processes in
biomanufacturing. This project is integrated with a formal teaching program and
outreach efforts to inspire more women, underrepresented minority groups, and
first-generation college students to consider careers in science and
engineering. Workforce training and development will be provided to young career
scientists through an interdisciplinary research and education experience in
mathematical modeling, computational biology and genetic engineering. High
school and incoming college students will be introduced to science and
engineering through hosted research experiences that connect familiar real-world
problems in energy and medicine to basic concepts in synthetic biology.

Investigating functional constraints of metabolic control circuitry is an
essential aspect of understanding the design limits that shape the evolution of
complex regulatory networks. The goal of this project is to apply synthetic
biology approaches (an engineered p-amino-cinnamic acid pathway in E coli) to
address the hypothesis that RNA regulatory networks have evolved to minimize the
energetic and metabolic costs of the control system itself. This project will
integrate computational design space analysis, quantitative RNA device
engineering and metabolic pathway construction to investigate the constraints of
dynamic RNA-based metabolic control systems. Specifically, this will involve:
(1) assessing the cost of acquiring novel metabolic functionality; (2) assessing
the cost of acquiring novel RNA-based control functions; and (3) performing
model-driven quantitative assessments of metabolic control system functions.
This work is expected to shed light on whether RNA-based metabolic control
mechanisms in microbes are the result of historical happenstance, are remnants
of an RNA World, or whether they might be uniquely suited to provide control
with low metabolic burden. These efforts will result in new theoretical and
experimental frameworks for both studying and engineering complex metabolic
systems that can be used for metabolic engineering purposes.

This award is funded jointly by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Biomedical Engineering
Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.