* 1517510
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  New Insights from a Systematic Approach to Quasar Variability
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Eilat Glikman, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,230.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. One important aspect of understanding galaxy formation and evolution
is to study quasars and other active galactic nuclei. They are also interesting
astrophysical phenomena in their own right and serve as a probe of relativistic
physics. They co-evolve with their host galaxies and trace the evolution of
cosmic structure. However, most of the methods for quasar discovery are based on
the properties of their broadband spectral energy distributions, and nearly all
known quasars and quasar candidates come from samples that use some type of flux
ratios or just the presence of a non-thermal emission. Variability offers a
spectrum-independent method for quasar discovery. Although variability has been
much studied on the basis of individual or a few objects, variability-based
quasar surveys have so far been limited to small dedicated regions of sky with
at most a few thousand objects and/or poor time resolution. This study of quasar
variability employs the Catalina Real-time Transient Survey (CRTS) data set,
which covers about 80\% of the sky over a baseline greater than 9 years. Its 500
million object data set currently holds about 250,000 known quasars, 500,000
photometric quasar candidates and an estimated 1,000,000 new variability-
selected quasars. This will form the largest quasar data set to date. In keeping
with the CRTS Open Data policy, all quasars (and other classified objects)
identified in this project will be released to the community. This will form a
major new resource for both quasar and more general variability studies. The
statistical methods to be used are also applicable to any irregular-sampled time
series, and the combination of these with machine-learning techniques is a case
study for data-intensive science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaboration with a primarily undergraduate institution and directly enhances
the STEM education of two undergraduates. Working with scientists at the Center
for Data-Driven Discovery (CD3) at Caltech, they will be exposed to cutting-edge
techniques in data science, including high level usage of data mining and
extracting meaningful results from these large data sets. Data products from
this project also form the basis for student projects at the joint US-Chile-
funded La Serena School for Data Science, training the next generation in
applied tools for handling big astronomical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
particular, this project will focus on (i) the correlation of quasar variability
features, particularly characteristic timescales, with physical parameters, such
as luminosity, black hole mass, and the Eddington ratio; (ii) periodic
variability as possible evidence for supermassive black hole binaries; (iii)
variability as a probe of obscuration in young dust-enshrouded red quasars; and
(iv) quantifying wavelength dependencies of variability to improve quasar
selection and constrain different models of physical processes. The study will
employ modern statistical techniques that can work naturally with irregularly-
sampled gappy time series without the need for reprojection or smoothing. In
combination with machine-learning methods, these will produce optimal ensemble-
based results, such as new variability-polychromatic methods for quasar
selection. This project will be a key study on optical quasar variability well
into the LSST era. It is at least two orders of magnitude larger than any
previous study in terms of sky coverage and number of quasars and an order of
magnitude better in terms of time resolution (number of observations /
baseline). It will also substantially increase the number of high likelihood
quasar candidates known, particularly in the regions of the sky not covered by
SDSS.