* 1517751
* The Cellular Actin Network and Virus Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Peter Nagy, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Candi Phoebe Lostroh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 570,000.00

This project will dissect how plant viruses interact with the actin
cytoskeleton, one of the intracellular protein scaffolds along which much
molecular movement (trafficking) occurs. Viruses appear to target the actin
network to reprogram cellular pathways so that they support the virus life cycle
instead of performing normal cellular functions. It has been observed that
viruses modify the functionality of the actin network, thereby dramatically
reorganizing the infected cells to support viral replication. A potential
societal benefit of this research is a deeper understanding of virus-host
interactions that could lead to potent new anti-viral approaches. In addition,
this work will provide training for graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow
and will provide opportunities for high school students to participate in
supervised research and present their results at high school science
competitions.

The project will exploit the new discovery that plant viruses target cellular
cofilin, a major regulator of the actin network. The research will address the
questions: How does a virus exploit cofilin to interfere with the actin network?
How does actin organization control viral replication in cells? The project will
take advantage of yeast as a model host for viruses, allowing the testing of
well-characterized cofilin and actin mutants in virus replication. In vitro
assays with purified components and microscopy-based analysis of the actin
network in yeast and plant cells accumulating viruses will be used to unravel
the steps in the viral replication process that are affected by actin. Proteomic
analysis of the viral replication complex will determine which of the host
proteins that are subverted by viruses are regulated by the actin network.