* 1517032
* Structure-Function Analysis of Ethylene Receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Gevorg Grigoryan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2019
* USD 900,000.00

The plant hormone ethylene plays important roles throughout growth and
development, including regulation of seed germination, seedling growth, leaf and
petal abscission, fruit ripening, organ senescence, and pathogen responses.
Plants perceive ethylene using membrane-bound receptor proteins. Though the
identity of these receptors has been known for some time, the structure of the
ethylene-binding domain has thus far evaded characterization. This project will
combine computational modeling and experimental characterization to resolve the
molecular structure of the ethylene-binding domain. Among the broader impacts is
a benefit society based on the agricultural and industrial significance of
ethylene, and lay the groundwork for the creation of ethylene nanosensors. A
summer art-and-science course will be developed in partnership with a local art
center as part of this project; students will engage in art activities that
explore the connection between ethylene, ripening, and senescence, thereby
allowing students to discover science through art.

Ethylene was the first gaseous hormone discovered and ethylene receptors are
present in prokaryotes and plants. The role of ethylene as a signaling molecule
has been studied most extensively in plants where it plays important roles
throughout growth and development. Ethylene is perceived by membrane-bound
receptors, with the ethylene-binding site found within the transmembrane (TM)
domains of the receptors. A copper (Cu-I) cofactor is critical for ethylene
binding and, based on genetic and biochemical analysis, involves a novel His-
His-Cys-Cys binding site for its chelation. This work will integrate a set of
experiments, built on a foundation of computational modeling, to solve the
structure of the ethylene-binding domain. First, two independent and
complimentary computational approaches will be used to model the structure of
the ethylene-binding domain: a bottom-up approach using energy-driven sampling
of the TM domain, constrained by known characteristics of the binding site; and
a top-down approach based on multiple sequence alignments of eukaryotic and
prokaryotic ethylene binding domains to predict likely contacting residue pairs.
Second, critical features of the ethylene binding domain will be determined by
(1) characterizing the ethylene-binding ability of receptor homologues across
diverse species and (2) mutational analysis of ethylene receptor function based
on predictions of the computational model. Third, based on the computational
model, the ethylene-binding domain will be re-engineered as a water-soluble
analog to aid in its structural analysis and the creation of ethylene
nanosensors. The Broader Impact of the project involves a partnership with AVA
Gallery and Art Center (http://www.avagallery.org/) to develop a two-week summer
course ("RIPE!") will be offered to 9-12 year olds each year. Students will
engage in projects exploring the connection between ethylene, ripening, and
senescence, based around the intuitive awareness of ethylene's role in plants
through the popular expression, "One bad apple spoils the whole bunch".