* 1517152
* Conferences on Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics: 2015-2017
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Michael Siegel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This grant supports the participation of undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, junior faculty, and other researchers in a conference on
"Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics" (FACM) at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology (NJIT) on June 5-6, 2015. FACM 2015 is focused on
mathematical fluid dynamics and applications in biomedicine and climate science.
There will be dedicated minisymposia on biofluid dynamics, the connection
between mathematical modeling and experiment, geophysical fluid dynamics, wave
propagation in fluids, and computational methods, including high-performance
computing and multiscale methods. In addition, there will be five minisymposia
on the application of statistics and data analysis to biomedicine and to
atmosphere/ocean science, which are areas of great current interest. This
conference series brings together mathematicians, statisticians, scientists and
engineers in an environment where significant interaction and cross-
fertilization takes place. More information can be found on the conference
website http://m.njit.edu/Events/FACM15/. The FACM conference series has been
organized over the past eleven years by the Department of Mathematical Sciences
and Center for Applied Mathematics and Statistics at NJIT. The annual meeting is
a forum for the dissemination of research in applied and computational
mathematics and statistics. FACM conferences are more intimate and student
centered than large society meetings, and a goal of the organizers is to
introduce future leaders of applied mathematics to established investigators and
emerging research areas. Participation among graduate students and postdocs is
greatly enhanced with contributed talks through which they give presentations in
minisymposia alongside leading scientists. For students and postdocs, this will
be a learning and networking experience that will help them with their research
and career paths. Special efforts will be made to continue the participation
underrepresented groups in the conference.