* 1517372
* Fluctuations and Control in Cells
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Johan Paulsson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 469,749.00

Biological systems display heterogeneity at every level. Even cells that are
genetically identical and exposed to the same environments can have different
chemical composition. The fundamental reason is that molecules bounce around in
an unpredictable way, much like dice do when thrown on a table, and react when
they randomly collide. This project will describe the randomness mathematically.
Specifically, it will explore the general connection between fluctuations and
control, that is, how controlling some parts of a system creates heterogeneity
in others, much as small variations in the weather must be translated into large
variations in the temperature of radiators to keep the room temperature
constant. Rather than model specific systems, it will take a more general
approach to capture broad principles of complex systems. That makes the results
widely applicable in other disciplines - whether in health and medicine,
ecology, or infrastructure problems where conceptually similar challenges arise.
The project will train students at the interface between scientific disciplines,
as well as generate examples and principles that will be useful in undergraduate
education.

Stochastic descriptions of cells have historically relied on detailed computer
simulations that must guess many of the system details, or simplified toy models
that only include a few reactions. This project will instead focus on the
derivation of theorems of sufficient generality to hold for large families of
processes, to rigorously understand broader design principles of biological
systems. Specifically, the project will focus on deriving bounds on variances as
a function of other system properties, to show, for example, how selection for
maximal anabolic or enzymatic efficiency inevitably leads to large fluctuations.
Similarly, the project will derive fluctuation trade-offs showing how
suppressing noise in some components inevitably increases fluctuations in
others. Mathematically this relies on both Markov and non-Markov processes,
information theory, and fluctuation-dissipation relations, to derive statistical
moments for open ended families of models.