* 1517986
* An Investigation into the Novel Role of PARP1 in Co-transcriptional Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Yvonne Fondufe-Mittendorf, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 12/31/2020
* USD 680,000.00

PARP1 (poly-ADP-ribose polymerase) is a protein important for repairing damaged
DNA in multicellular animals. PARP1 is involved in many biological processes
that monitor DNA integrity, such as cell division, differentiation and cell
death. The DNA in every eukaryotic cell is found in the form of a highly compact
DNA-protein structure known as chromatin, that is unpacked every time when
access to a particular DNA region is needed, and re-packaged immediately after
this process, to ensure the fidelity of the process. PARP1 is known to mediate
these chromatin rearrangements during the initiation of gene regulation. Several
recent studies show that PARP1 also has another, unexpected role in the
different process of RNA splicing, i.e., the mechanism that results in the
correct formation of the messenger RNAs that direct protein synthesis. This
research will provide better understanding of how PARP1 modulates alternative
splicing to effect changes in gene regulation. In addition to making the
findings widely available to other researchers via established repositories and
publication/ presentation of study outcomes, the project will impact the next-
generation workforce by engaging graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students, particularly students from groups underrepresented in the sciences, in
laboratory research in the emerging field of chromatin biology and gene
regulation. Participating students will be trained in bioinformatics, large-
scale genome analyses, and chromatin biology and provided guidance on science
careers. High school students will complete small-scale laboratory projects and
write their first computer code for data analyses. During the course of the
project, five-minute movie clips on gene regulation will be created and
incorporated into an existing biochemistry course. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Strong
evidence supports the regulatory role of chromatin in alternative splicing, an
integral part of cell differentiation and development, contributing to cell
lineage and tissue identity. It is known that the binding of trans-factors
(enhancers or silencers) to pre-mRNA-encoded sequence elements is necessary but
not sufficient for splicing regulation. The recent discovery in this laboratory
that PARP1, a chromatin architectural protein involved in the regulation of
transcription initiation, not only bound at transcription start sites of active
genes but also bound at internal exons, irrespective of the transcriptional
state, suggests different modes of gene regulation by PARP1. Additionally,
recent findings showed that depletion of PARP1 or its PARylation activity
resulted in specific changes in alternative splicing events, and that in vivo
PARP1 bound chromatin, nascent mRNA, and splicing factors. This research will
test the hypothesis that PARP1 regulates co-transcriptional splicing in two non-
mutually exclusive ways: acting as an adapter molecule to recruit splicing
factors to exons and/or to modulate changes to chromatin structure in ways that
affect polymerase elongation and kinetics. Large-scale genomics and gene-
specific approaches will be utilized to map in fine detail the genetic and
biochemical interactions of PARP-1-RNA-chromatin that occur in a cell. Since the
same proteins are present in all organisms throughout the animal kingdom, PARP1
likely regulates alternative decisions similarly in simple and complex
organisms. Therefore, this problem will be studied in a simple organism that is
readily amenable to genetic and molecular analysis, the Drosophila system.
Building on the laboratory's history of student training especially minority
students, this project will involve local high schools, undergraduates, and
graduate students. Additionally, minority students from these schools will be
sought for research opportunities in the laboratory. These individuals will be
trained in bioinformatics, large-scale genome analyses and chromatin biology.
Results from this project will be disseminated to the broader scientific
community in the form of presentations at local, national and international
meetings. Finally, the results of these studies will be published in scientific
journals and presented at scientific meetings.