* 1517049
* Cosmology with the kinematic Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect: Testing fundamental physics and hydrodynamical simulations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Michael Niemack, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 143,714.00

The objective of this project is to develop a new analysis technique to extract
the large scale motions of galaxy clusters via a technique using a phenomenon
called the pairwise kinematic Sunyaev-Zel'dovich (kSZ) effect. This effect is
due to the scattering of cosmic microwave photons in galaxy clusters. Broader
impacts of the work include research training of undergraduate students, and
outreach with planetariums in New York and Philadelphia to give presentations to
and engage with the public on ask an astronomer nights. The proposal team will
also be actively involved in the Ithaca Physics Bus, a new outreach initiative
modeled on a successful program based in Arizona, which brings physics
demonstrations and science experiments to schools and public events using a
converted school bus to promote excitement about STEM disciplines.

The kinematic kSZ approach was used in the first detection of cluster motions in
2012 by cross-correlating Cosmic Microwave Background measurements from the
Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) with optical spectroscopy of luminous red
galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey-III (SDSS-III). Upcoming measurements
will enable more than an order of magnitude improvement on this first detection,
and the project team is uniquely poised to extract cosmological information from
these measurements. The project team has recently shown that upcoming kSZ
measurements have the potential to provide strong constraints on modified
gravity, dark energy, and neutrinos.