* 1517100
* Collaborative Research: Connecting Omics to Physical and Chemical Environment in Community Microbial Ecology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniel Szyld, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

From soils to oceans, microbial communities are dominant in the quotidian and
wider environments -- one really cannot describe or understand how the world
works without understanding the functions of its microbial ecosystems. Further,
microbes are important in many medical contexts, where they are found in richly
interacting communities. Microbial communities have, as well, always been
important in industry, generally as nuisances, but more recently also for
exploitation. Yet, despite their ubiquity, ecology and function of microbial
communities and their interaction with their surroundings is poorly understood
in most circumstances. The "big" question that motivates this project is the
following: To what extent can the function of a microbial community of a given
environment be characterized from knowing the physical and chemical profile of
that environment? Recent increase in power and coincident decrease in cost of
molecular methods has revolutionized the potential to experimentally identify
and characterize community inhabitants and activity. At the same time,
development of sophisticated microprobe and imaging technology has enabled
resolution, down to the microscale, of the chemical environment in which
microbial communities function. What lags is the capability to extract community
function from that data. Whatever the form this capability ultimately takes, it
will by necessity require and incorporate knowledge of the local physical and
chemical environment -- microbial communities are specialists in exploiting
their local physics and chemistry -- and this project develops the mathematical
tools needed to do so. The assembled research team is committed to emphasizing
the importance of chemical and physical concepts in the training of math
biologists, and has already successfully cross-trained graduate students from
different disciplines. This project continues this emphasis and aims to extend
this training to undergraduate students, particularly from underrepresented
groups. The team aims (i) to bridge the training gap between mathematical
biology and microbial ecology, and (ii) to focus attention of mathematical
biologists on in situ physio-chemical and biological realities. Through this
project the impact of microbial communities on biodeterioration of stone
cultural heritage materials is being addressed in an integrated way, from model
to lab to the field to professional practice. This work has an important impact
on conservation efforts and will establish a beginning basis for the scientific
management of stone biodeterioration that can be disseminated internationally
and facilitate collaboration among heritage managers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators study an important microbial community type, namely biofilms
driven by photosynthesis, particularly as subaerial biofilms (subaerial biofilms
are generally non-submerged microbial communities, living together in close
proximity in self-secreted polymeric matrices and exposed to air) on carbonate
stones. The context of the project is cultural environments, specifically
microorganisms that attach to stone and grow as biofilms. These communities can
discolor and degrade cultural monuments, but, at the same time, can offer useful
insights into many microbial communities by providing platforms for developing
and testing hypotheses of microbial ecology. Biofilms inhabiting outdoor
stonework have advantages in this respect. They contain the essential
biocomplexity for survival in open, uncontrolled environments, but, because of
the relatively stringent conditions typical of exposed stone, still have
amenable ecologies, and also are known to demonstrate mutually beneficial
associations with cooperating photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic organisms.
Particularly important, their simplicity and accessibility make them well suited
for use as subjects for development of prototype mathematical methodology needed
for connecting omics-based cell-level metabolic models to physics-based
community-level function models. The linkage of community data to community
model is an essential piece, and one for which mathematics is central, in the
broad program of transforming omics into useable theory of microbial communities
which, in turn, is central to the program of modern microbiology. This project
aims to construct multiscale population models capable of accepting omics (e.g.,
genomics, transcriptomics) and physical (e.g., temperature, light intensity)
data at the microscale, and to develop mathematical methods for bridging the gap
between community level omics and community level population models. The core
target are the modes of regulation among microbial community members and how
they are effected by the physical environment.