* 1517002
* Design Principles of Multicellular Biological Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Weigang Qiu, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 887,516.00

Many biological functions are cooperative in nature and depend on interactions,
both physical and chemical, between cells. This project will investigate the
organizing principles of multicellular assemblies using systems biology
approaches and the social bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa as a model. This
project will test the hypothesis that social bacteria have evolved molecular
mechanisms that confer robustness to their multicellular traits.
Multidisciplinary approaches that combine mathematical modeling, microbial
genetics and comparative genomics will be used to dissect the multiple factors
that affect biofilm formation and swarming motility. Graduate student training
includes extensive research experience in genomic and systems biology. Education
outreach programs will train summer undergraduate student interns and local
scientific community workshop participants in evolutionary genomics and systems
biology analyses including the use of computational tools. The outreach program
is partnered with Hunter College of the City University of New York, a
neighboring large, urban, and public institution.

This project will use swarming as a model of microbial cooperation. Swarming is
a collective form of surface motility that enables bacteria to migrate over
surfaces. Swarming requires the production and secretion of rhamnolipid
biosurfactants by individual bacteria: biosurfactant production requires
significant resources that can be exploited by cheaters who do not produce the
surfactant but take advantage of surfactant production by others. Cooperative
behavior can also be disrupted by mutants with many flagella that take over the
population and disrupt swarming at the cost of being unable to form biofilms.
This project will: 1) dissect the spatial-temporal dynamics of metabolic
prudence, a mechanism regulating the synthesis of rhamnolipids required for
swarming; 2) investigate the evolutionary and molecular mechanisms of
hyperswarming evolution; and 3) dissect the trade-off between two collective
traits: swarming and biofilms in natural bacterial populations. In addition this
project will develop a bioinformatics infrastructure and database to investigate
the genomic correlates of phenotypic diversity in environmental strains of P.
aeruginosa. Specifically, this project will develop novel methods of comparative
genomics based on evolutionary analysis of whole genome sequencing data using
ancestral character reconstruction of both genotypes and phenotypes. The novel
methods will be applicable to other social bacteria.