* 1517511
* Pollen apertures as a model for formation of distinct extracellular domains
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Heather Owen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 07/31/2019
* USD 772,000.00

In an organism, deposition of extracellular materials next to a cell can protect
the cell, change its growth and morphology, or help it to move and communicate
with other cells. To be able to perform such important functions, extracellular
materials must be deposited very precisely, but how cells achieve such precision
is mostly unknown. A beautiful example of an extracellular structure with a very
precise deposition is the wall surrounding plant pollen. Pollen grains from
different species often look remarkably different, in part, because wall
materials are deposited at some places on pollen surface and absent from the
others. The places where pollen wall is absent are called apertures, and these
structures help pollen perform its reproductive function. Across species, pollen
apertures often differ in shape, number, and positions, but within a species
aperture patterns are usually the same. Using formation of pollen apertures as a
model, this project will investigate how cells determine which surface areas
will lack extracellular structures and how positions of such areas are marked.
Understanding pattern formation in the context of pollen will provide insight
into pattern formation during many developmental processes. In broader impacts
of this project, several young scientists will be trained and the results of the
work will be communicated to larger audiences through lectures in an Arts &amp;
Science undergraduate course, microscopy courses, and by interacting with
middle- and high-school students during biology enhancement workshops and a
Capstone internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How cells develop precisely
defined domains of extracellular structures is an important and poorly
understood question. Pollen grains provide an excellent model for studying this
problem, as their surfaces are covered by the cell wall, exine, which assembles
into diverse species-specific patterns. This wall protects sperm cells within
the pollen grains and plays several other important roles in plant reproduction.
In addition to the exine-covered areas, pollen surfaces of most plant species
have characteristic openings, or apertures, where exine is absent or reduced.
This indicates that, in the course of pollen development, specific domains are
formed on pollen surface, which are reliably recognized by the cell wall
deposition machinery as different from the rest of the surface and which will
become apertures. As is the case with exine patterns, apertures often vary
greatly across species, differing in their number, positions, and morphology,
yet within each species their patterns are under tight developmental control. As
well-defined, tightly regulated, and easily recognizable and quantifiable
structures, apertures provide an attractive handle for addressing the complex
problems of pollen surface pattern formation and can serve as a powerful model
for generation of distinct extracellular domains, a process important in a wide
variety of cells and organisms. Through a variety of genetic, cell-biological,
and computational methods and using Arabidopsis pollen as a model, this project
aims to discern how the aperture-specifying domains are formed and to define
cell-biological events important for aperture development. This will allow
creating a paradigm for how plant cells generate functionally distinct
peripheral domains, and how cell wall deposition machinery interprets these
domains to generate extracellular differences.