* 1517561
* Ontogeny of Heel-Strike in Hominoids
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Daniel Schmitt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2020
* USD 84,266.00

This project will study a particular feature of walking and foot anatomy that
may provide new insight about the evolution of bipedalism (walking upright) in
humans. Humans and our closest living relatives, the African great apes, use a
unique foot strike pattern in which they strike the ground with the heel first,
before the rest of the foot (heel strike) when walking. Yet the factors
influencing the evolution of a specialized foot posture and the first appearance
of our unique (human) footfall patterns are still poorly understood. It is
unknown to what degree heel strike is similar across humans and African apes,
how it develops throughout an individual's lifetime, and how different patterns
of heel strike are reflected in the anatomy of foot bones. This study tracks the
development of foot posture in African apes and provides a unique opportunity to
understand why African apes and humans heel strike, and to explore how fossil
hominin foot bones might tell us about walking patterns during hominin
evolution. This project will support an early career female scientist and
provide numerous research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students,
with a specific focus on female and minority students. At the end of the
project, all video and image data will be made available to other scientists and
educators, and used to promote the research and education goals of public
zoological facilities and sanctuaries. Information on heel strike can be applied
not only to the fossil record but also to studies of foot development and
injuries in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
quantify patterns of heel strike functional morphology throughout ontogeny in
African hominoids. The study will quantify the range of variation in pedal
mechanics and anatomy among living primates who use a heel strike through an
experimental, comparative, ontogenetic approach, and ask: (1) are the mechanics
of heel strike the same in all contexts in which it occurs?, (2) how do body
size, behavior, age, and hind limb dynamics influence heel strike mechanics?,
and (3) can heel strike be detected in external and internal calcaneal anatomy?
To test hypotheses regarding the effect of hind limb mechanics on heel strike,
kinematic data are analyzed from non-invasive video recordings of infant and
adult chimpanzees and gorillas walking. To investigate how foot inversion and
associated ground reaction forces that load the calcaneus change during
locomotor development, the center of pressure and ground reaction forces
incurred by the foot are recorded with a pressure mat mounted on top of a force
platform. These data are compared with previously collected video data of wild
chimpanzees. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and medical computed tomography
(CT) are used to model how the African ape heel pad attenuates impact forces in
the absence of a calcaneal lateral plantar process. These data are compared with
microCT data of calcaneal trabecular architecture in captive and wild extant
apes and humans and then applied to early fossil hominin calcanei (A. afarensis,
and A. sediba). This integrative project is transformative because it
investigates an entire functional chain: locomotor behavior and gait mechanics
(kinematics, kinetics, and plantar pressure) throughout ontogeny, internal and
external calcaneal structure in extant apes, and interpretation of fossil foot
bone functional morphology. A comprehensive understanding of heel strike
variation in living apes and its evolution in fossil hominins is an essential
first step toward a broader understanding of the evolution of heel strike in
hominoids.