* 1517226
* Collaborative Research: Hydrodynamic Simulations of the Local Group
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Boylan-Kolchin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 248,007.00

The Local Group of Galaxies (including the Milky Way, Andromeda, and their
satellite galaxies) contains the best-studied galaxies in the Universe. These
objects can act as a Rosetta Stone for our understanding of galaxy formation and
the nature of Dark Matter, a substance that makes up more than 80% of the mass
in the Universe. Dark Matter remains mysterious and is yet undetected through
direct methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two investigators will develop highly
advanced supercomputer simulations of the gravitational pull of members of the
Local Group, beginning from the very early Universe and running the simulation
to the present day. These simulations will be compared to state-of-the-art
observations to further our understanding of the nature of Dark Matter and how
galaxies form. The investigators will work closely with graduate students,
helping to train them to be independent researchers with valuable computational
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will also engage in an array of
broader impact and outreach efforts associated with the proposal. One will help
instruct and supervise a summer program that provides hands-on research
experiences for high school students and fosters an interest in STEM fields to a
student group of 50% women and 30% under-represented minorities. The other
investigator will work to provide underrepresented students with resources,
skills, and connections that will allow them to pursue and complete graduate
degrees in Physics and Astronomy. Additionally, the investigators will provide
their simulated galaxy catalogs and mock observations to the public via a web-
based interface that is already operational for the investigators' past
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will consist of a total of seven
high-resolution simulations of Local-Group like volumes, providing excellent
statistics. The novel aspects of the proposed work will include: (1)
sophisticated implementations of star-formation and feedback physics using a new
code that relies on meshless hydrodynamic solvers, and (2) the first study of a
simulated Local Group that has high enough resolution, realistic enough physics
modules, and a large enough simulated volume to capture the formation of dwarf
satellites, isolated dwarfs, and Milky Way/Andromeda analogs in the same
simulation. The investigators will compare the star formation histories, gas
content, morphologies, kinematics, and metallicities of the simulated galaxies
to observations. A key goal will be to discern whether cosmic reionization
imprints characteristic signatures in observable properties of dwarf galaxies.