* 1517474
* 1% accuracy in fundamental stellar parameters? Not without an extensive redesign of eclipsing binary models.
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Andrej Prsa, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Eclipsing binary stars can be used to determine the radius and mass of stars by
relying on simple geometry and well understood laws of physics. Observations
obtained over the last decade have greatly improved in accuracy, so the
theoretical models used to interpret these data require substantial revision.
This project identifies the aspects of theoretical models in need of revision
and proposes a path to update the models. This will enable accurate (within 1%)
measurements of stellar masses and radii. Precise determination of fundamental
stellar properties is critical to many branches of astrophysics, from studying
the life cycles of stars to determining distances throughout the universe. The
advances in modelling approaches and classification are applicable to many
problems in astronomy, physics, engineering, and applied mathematics. Conducting
this program at a primarily undergraduate institution will provide opportunities
undergraduate students learn modern research tools and techniques.

The investigators will develop the following improvements to their eclipsing
binary modelling codes: (a) optimize stellar surface discretization to mitigate
systematics in distorted systems and to be able to model more complicated
structures such as accretion disks; (b) systematically treat Doppler boosting
for all modelled binaries; (c) devise a numerical framework for the Generalized
Roche Potential that will allow for tilted spin axes of components to the
orbital axis; (d) rigorously treat multiple body systems, predicting eclipse
timing variations, tertiary eclipses, dynamical interactions of extended bodies,
and other related phenomena; (e) revise the limb darkening treatment to resolve
the ingress/egress fitting problems and, consequently, eliminate systematics
from the determination of stellar radii; (f) implement a new morphological
classification scheme based on modern embedding algorithms; (g) provide a new
formalism for statistical error estimates using Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods
and Bayesian inference to resolve a long-standing issue of underestimated
parameter errors; (h) account for finite integration time corrections; and (i)
write a back-end in python that will allow code parallelization in high
performance computing and make it available to the broader astronomical
community.