* 1517573
* Southern Serpents: The Internal Structure of Interstellar Filaments in the Fourth-Quadrant of the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Audra Hernandez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 368,081.00

The birthplace of nearly all stars lies within the interstellar molecular clouds
that reside in the disk of the Milky Way Galaxy. Previous observations of the
Galactic disk suggest that many of these clouds are filamentary over a wide
range of physical scales. While astronomers agree that stars form within the
densest regions of interstellar clouds, they currently do not understand the
importance of interstellar filaments for the process of star formation. The only
way to measure the three-dimensional structure of interstellar clouds is through
spectroscopic radio observations. The investigator will use three spectroscopic
surveys in concert to probe both the atomic and molecular internal structure of
interstellar filaments within the southern Galactic plane. The main research
objectives are to 1) characterize the velocity structure of the filaments and
compare this to numerical models to draw conclusions about their lifetimes,
stability and star-formation efficiencies, 2) trace the turbulent structure of
the filaments using higher order statistics on both the atomic and molecular
observations.

The investigator volunteers with the University of Wisconsin-Madison McNair
Scholars Program as a Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
Professional Advisor aimed at preparing first-generation, low-income, and
minority undergraduates for graduate school and beyond. This research will also
provide training and mentoring opportunities for undergraduate students.

If filamentary clouds are the only structures with densities large enough to
form stars, then the theory of Galactic star formation needs to be focused on
the formation and evolution of filamentary molecular clouds, including
filamentary sub-structures where proto-stellar activity occurs. This research
project will make a contribution by directly identifying and characterizing
interstellar filaments through spectroscopic observations of both their
molecular gas and atomic envelopes. One of the main data products will be a
catalog of filaments, along with the results from the dynamical studies done on
them. This will allow future research on where proto-stellar activity resides in
relation to filamentary structure.