* 1517970
* Collaborative Research: Raising the Bar: Radio Investigations of the Structure and Dynamics of the Galactic Bulge
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ylva Pihlstrom, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 306,230.00

The investigators will search for red giant stars along the plane of our Milky
Way galaxy, using radio telescopes. These stars have the remarkable
characteristic of acting like ultra-bright lasers, emitting radio waves due to
the molecule Silicon Monoxide (SiO), which is found in the environment
surrounding this type of star. Because of this unique feature, radio telescopes
can detect these stars at great distances, even when they are hidden in clouds
of dust and gas. The investigators will use the stars to study the structure of
our galaxy and understand how our Galaxy is being pulled by the gravity of other
nearby galaxies and clusters of stars in our Galaxy. By looking for unusual
motions of stars in the galaxy, the investigators can detect the past collisions
of dwarf galaxies with our Galaxy.

The investigators will test models for a key feature seen in our Galaxy, "the
bar", a linear structure extending on both sides of the center of our Galaxy.
The bar is thought to partially result from the gravitational pull of clusters
of stars and gas. These clusters merged to become part of our Milky Way. In
addition to the bar, our Galaxy also shows a "bulge" near the center, where
stars reach high orbits. In our region of the galaxy the stars are concentrated
in a disk.

The researchers will provide student participation opportunities and education
within the science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) disciplines. This
includes finding minority students to work on the project and concentrating on
strengthening female participation. Through this research award, graduate
students will be trained and additional undergraduate students will be have to
opportunity for summer research jobs.

Specific science goals include the modeling of the dynamics and the structure of
the Galactic bulge and the central galactic disk. This data will allow defining
the relationship of the bar to the populations of the Galactic plane and Center,
and the effect of the strongly boxy potential of the bulge on dynamics, and the
presence of a ``long'' bar. In particular, both N-body models and self-
consistent models will be compared with direct dynamical measurements from the
stellar maser velocities. From near-infrared spectra elemental abundances and
properties of the circumstellar envelopes will be determined.

The investigator's studies will also be important for understanding the
structure of all spiral galaxies. The Galactic bulge provides a unique
laboratory, as it is the only place where detailed studies are possible for the
processes taking place in many disk galaxies.