* 1517290
* Distal Residues in Enzyme Catalysis and Protein Design
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 818,211.00

Title: Distal Residues in Enzyme Catalysis and Protein Design

Enzyme engineering -the capability to design proteins to act as catalysts for
particular, desired chemical reactions- is currently in its very early stages.
This project seeks to develop design principles for enzyme engineering, using
properties of the protein structure that can be computed. This project builds on
very recent discoveries that reveal new information about how nature builds the
catalytic center of a protein molecule, wherein multiple layers of amino acids
within the protein structure provide the necessary properties that enable
chemical reactions to happen within living organisms at physiological
temperature and under mild conditions. Many of these same reactions, when
performed in a laboratory or industrial setting, require high temperature and
caustic conditions. An important, ultimate goal of this work is to be able to
design protein catalysts to perform industrial chemical reactions, because for
most industrial chemical processes, there is no natural enzyme that can serve as
a catalyst. The development of such protein catalysts for industrial use will
translate to less energy usage, lower costs, less waste, and fewer unwanted by-
products. Thus the ability to design protein catalysts has many potential
benefits to the environment, to the economy, and to human well-being. This
project will train doctoral students and undergraduate research interns,
including members of underrepresented groups, to become highly qualified
scientists in the areas of biochemistry and computational biology; the
cultivation of such expertise is vital to the regional high-tech economy and to
U.S. competitiveness in the global economy.

This project will explore how distal residues contribute to enzyme catalysis,
establish additional principles about their role in catalysis, and take the
first steps toward using these principles for enzyme design. The project takes a
multilateral approach, combining theory, computation, biochemical experiments,
x-ray crystal structure determination, x-ray solution scattering, and high-field
electron spin resonance spectroscopy. These simulations and experiments will
provide information about the electrostatic, structural, and dynamic effects of
amino acid residues, including remote residues, on catalysis. The specific
examples to be studied in this project, a Y-family DNA polymerase DinB and an
aldolase, were chosen because they lead into - and provide insight into -
protein design problems. The effects of distal residues on proton transfer
equilibria in the active site, and the associated requirements for catalysis,
will be investigated. Study of the roles of individual residues in Y-family DNA
polymerases will increase understanding of the mechanism of extension in DNA
replication and repair of damaged DNA. The results will be used to address
whether improved extension capability can be engineered into the polymerase
DinB. Investigation of the interactions between residues in a natural aldolase
will increase understanding of its catalytic mechanism; the emerging principles
will be used to improve activity of an artificially designed retroaldolase. New
features to address the problem of enzyme design, namely the predictability and
importance of distal residue participation in forging the right catalytic
properties and the use of coupled protonation states, are introduced. The
capability to design enzymes that can catalyze any desired chemical reaction is
a grand challenge in science. This project will develop design principles to
build on the knowledge base that is necessary to create such enzymes. Enzyme
design principles to be developed and tested in this project thus have potential
impact on biotechnology, environmental remediation, agriculture, and the growth
of a "green" economy, as well as the chemical industry.