* 1517819
* The Birth and Death of Stellar Clusters: Uncloaking the Roles of Stars, Gas, and Physical Environment in Nearby Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Rupali Chandar, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,207.00

A better understanding of the full life cycle of star clusters, from birth to
death, is important for many areas of astronomy, including the formation and
evolution of galaxies, the initial stellar mass function, the fraction of stars
forming in clusters, and for understanding whether the conditions for star
formation in the early universe when now-ancient globular clusters were young
are the same as they are today. The goal of this program is to shed light on two
as-yet poorly understood epochs in the life cycle of a star cluster -- just
before they are born and very soon after they form.

This program supports the training of a postdoctoral researcher. Results from
the research done for this project will be used in age-appropriate, hands-on,
activities as part of 'Girls in Science', an all-day outreach event aimed to
foster middle-school girls' interest in science.

The investigators will study the formation of star clusters, and also their
destruction, in nearby galaxies. Star cluster formation is one of the most
fundamental processes in galaxies, and occurs over an incredibly diverse range
of environments and physical conditions, far broader than those found in the
Milky Way alone. Clusters are born in the dense parts of giant clouds of
molecular gas, and many are subsequently dispersed by several different physical
processes. The goal of this program is to shed light on two as-yet poorly
understood epochs in the life cycle of a star cluster -- just before they are
born and very soon after they form. Observations with the National Science
Foundation's new Atacama Large Millimeter Array enable direct study of clouds in
distant galaxies covering a much wider range of physical conditions than our
nearest neighbors. The properties of these clouds, particularly their mass
functions, when compared with those of young star clusters in the same galaxy,
provide important clues to understand the efficiency with which stars and
clusters form under different physical conditions. Even as clusters are forming
within molecular clouds, the energy and momentum injected by newly born massive
stars pushes out left-over interstellar material, which eventually shuts off
star formation and leaves many young clusters gravitationally unbound. Physical
constraints on this process are poor, but measurements of the ionized gas both
inside and outside of very young clusters using observations with the newly
commissioned Discovery Channel Telescope (DCT) will distinguish between
different predictions.