* 1517021
* Probing the Explosive Origins, Evolution, and Interactions of Supernova Remnants
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Laura Lopez, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,541.00

Supernova events, the explosion of stars, play an essential role in the
Universe. These events are incredibly bright, but rare, seen only once every 100
years in our galaxy. Because these events create all the elements important for
formation of life, planets and the next generations of stars, the investigator
plans to study the material ejected (Supernova Remnants or SNRs) after the
explosions, which may be studied many thousands of years after the explosions.

The investigator will combine available radio, infrared, optical, x-ray and
gamma-ray data to produce an consistent survey of the 371 known SNRs in our
galaxy. The investigator and her team will employ a quantitative approach which
is critical to compare these complex sources and to maximize the scientific
utility of the data. The project is the first large-scale effort to analyze
these observations in a systematic way, using mathematical tools and
hydrodynamic simulations developed by the authors. This research will provide
crucial insights regarding the nature of Supernova explosions, the chemical
enrichment of galaxies, and the complex interaction between Supernova ejecta and
the gas and magnetic fields in our galaxy.

The investigator will expand the existing Ohio State physics department Masters-
to-PhD bridge program to include the astronomy department. The goal of this
program is to improve diversity and inclusion in PhD programs, and expanding
this initiative to the astronomy department will enable under-represented
minorities students to gain research experience and mentorship in astronomy. Her
team will network and recruit students from minority-serving institutions.