* 1517719
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Immune Dynamics of RNA Viruses In Reservoir and Nonreservoir Species
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Linda Allen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,803.00

Over 50% of all human infectious diseases are zoonotic or originate through the
cross-species transmission of viruses from wildlife to humans. Included among
these are hantaviruses, which pose a significant threat to public health
worldwide and are classified as emerging infectious diseases. Hantaviruses are
transmitted to humans through contact with infected rodent excrement. Although
hantaviruses cause little morbidity or mortality in their rodent reservoir, they
establish a persistent infection that spills over into sympatric or human hosts.
Spillover infection in nonreservoir rodents results in an asymptomatic acute
infection without any apparent proinflammatory response or disease, whereas
spillover in humans results in severe pathology (hantavirus cardiopulmonary
syndrome) with mortality reaching 40-50%. Very little is known regarding the
differences in the innate/adaptive immune response to hantavirus infection that
characterize these three distinct responses: persistence, viral clearance, or
severe pathology. The primary goals of this research are to formulate and to
test new mathematical models based on carefully designed in vitro experiments
for hantavirus infection and to identify key immune components at crucial time
points that differentiate between natural versus nonnatural reservoirs (rodents
and humans). This knowledge is essential for designing interventions and
therapeutics for treatment of hantaviruses and other similar zoonotic viruses
for which treatment is not currently available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The in
vitro experiments are designed to clearly distinguish the pathways during
hantavirus infection in natural reservoir (rodents) versus spillover into
nonreservoir hosts (rodents and humans). Three different hantaviruses, endemic
in North America, will be used to infect endothelial and immune cells: Sin
Nombre virus, Black Creek Canal virus, and Prospect Hill virus in two different
types of host cells, deer mice and human. Dependent on the combination of host
and hantaviral species, three different outcomes can be observed in either
reservoir or nonreservoir hosts: (i) persistence of infection with no disease,
(ii) acute infection with viral clearance, and (iii) severe pathology and
disease. In the lungs, endothelial cells and macrophages are the primary target
cells of hantavirus. Based on the experimental outcomes, deterministic and
stochastic mathematical models will be formulated and statistically validated
for the dynamics of these and other cells important in the early phase of the
immune response. Methods from ordinary and stochastic differential equations,
Markov chains and branching processes will be used to model the virus-cell-
immune dynamics that includes activation of proinflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cytokines. Mathematical and statistical methods will be developed
to identify thresholds that determine specific immunological pathways. In the
broader context, this research will have educational and scientific impacts
through cross-disciplinary training of students and a postdoc in mathematics and
biology, through outreach and professional activities, and through development
of new mathematical models and statistical methods. The mathematical models,
methods, and data will be shared with other scientific groups to investigate
questions and hypotheses regarding other zoonotic viruses important to public
health such as avian influenza, Hendra, Ebola, and SARS Coronavirus.