* 1517577
* Multistationarity and Oscillations in Biochemical Reaction Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Casian Pantea, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 198,003.00

This project focuses on two of the most important behaviors in biological
dynamics, playing key roles at all scales, from molecular to cellular, to
tissues and organisms. Multistationarity refers to the capacity of a system to
operate at alternative steady-states, and is observed experimentally as
irreversible switch-like behavior; oscillatons are periodic variations in the
concentration of interacting elements (genes, metabolites, enzymes, etc). The
interplay of multistationary and oscillatory behavior underlies crucial
physiological processes: cellular division, differentiation and apoptosis,
cellular signaling, enzyme regulation, circadian rhythms, and membrane potential
activity in neurons and heart cells are only a few examples. Many diseases
involve disturbances of these processes as a result of deregulation of
multistationary and oscillatory behaviors in specific gene networks or
biological pathways. A better understanding of the two behaviors may lead to
developments in the study of such diseases. In this project, the investigator
will create mathematical tools and software that will allow biochemical and
biomedical scientists to analyze dynamical features of relevant biological
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of multistationarity and
oscillation is intimately linked to the existence of feedbacks and to other
subtle features of the structure (i.e. wiring diagram) in the underlying
reaction network of interacting elements. Design principles associated to
multistationarity and oscillations have long been proposed and refined over the
years, but there is not yet a complete picture of the relationship between
structure on one hand and multistationary or oscillatory behavior on the other.
In this project, the investigator develops new mathematical theory and expand
existing results to strengthen our understanding of this connection. In
particular, algorithms will be developed to identify key structural properties
of biochemical reaction networks that give rise to multistationarity and
oscillation. These developments will be implemented in user friendly, open
source software, to assist and complement theoretical and experimental work in
biochemical and biomedical fields. For example, in a joint effort with
experimental collaborators, the investigator will analyze the ERBB network of
receptor tyrosine kinases whose multistable behavior is involved in early events
in cancer onset. This work also opens up exciting possibilities in
bioengineering for the design of reaction networks with prescribed properties,
relevant to research in cellular differentiation and with applications to tissue
engineering and drug development.