* 1517046
* Linking Reactive Nitrogen Metabolism and  Redox Homeostasis in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Elizabeth Vierling, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 06/30/2019
* USD 695,007.00

As global climate change and shifting economic patterns alter the distribution
of water and other resources, it is increasingly important to understand the
control of plant growth, development, and productivity. This project
investigates how the molecule, nitric oxide, controls these processes. Nitric
oxide plays significant roles in almost every living organism. Recent data show
that nitric oxide helps plants to conserve water and produce seeds. GSNOR is a
protein responsible for breaking down excess nitric oxide inside of cells;
furthermore, plants that lack GSNOR are sensitive to heat stress, make fewer
seeds, and suffer damage from excess nitric oxide. These observations suggest
that GSNOR regulates nitric oxide levels and may also alter nitric oxide
perception in plants. This research project will employ cutting-edge
technologies to determine how GSNOR governs the reaction of nitric oxide with
other proteins in the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana. This project has
potential to uncover the means by which plants adapt to stresses such as heat
and drought, and will inform efforts to improve the productivity of plants in a
changing climate. In addition to involving one postdoctoral fellow and a
graduate student, the project will also provide training opportunities for
University of Massachusetts undergraduates and for high school students and
teachers from Amherst Regional High School.

The goal of this project is to understand how nitric oxide (NO) and redox
metabolism are integrated to control plant growth and development. Recent data
implicate NO and protein cysteine oxidation (redox) in processes critical to the
plant life cycle. Virtually all organisms utilize NO as a regulatory molecule,
and cysteine oxidation is known to influence the biological function of many
proteins in eukaryotes. The enzyme S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (GSNOR) plays
a key role in NO homeostasis by catalyzing the NADH-dependent reduction of
S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), the major reservoir of bioactive NO. In this
research, investigators will employ molecular genetic, biochemical, metabolomic,
and proteomic methods to assess the role of GSNOR in protein redox regulation
and metabolic pathways in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Experiments
will: (1) test the hypothesis that GSNOR activity is regulated post-
translationally by redox modifications and/or by interaction with other
proteins; (2) determine how alterations in protein nitrosylation may control
plant phenotype; (3) measure how mutation of GSNOR alters GSH redox poise in
vivo; and (4) measure flux of specific metabolic pathways whose altered
regulation may be controlled by redox modifications. This work will help
elucidate the role of GSNOR in morphological and molecular phenotypes of plants
associated with traits such as flower development, fertility and response to
stress.