* 1517753
* Supernova Progenitors, Stellar Remnants, and their Binary Companions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Vassiliki Kalogera, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 402,512.00

The study of binary stellar systems has attracted renewed attention in the past
decade as they are shown to play a critical role in a wide range of astronomy
areas: X-ray and pulsar binaries, gamma-ray bursts, extrasolar planets,
gravitational-wave sources, supernova (SN) progenitors, cosmology, and
especially transient astronomy. Observational advances have transformed the
landscape and have highlighted the limitations of current modeling attempts. At
the same time binary evolution modeling has not advanced significantly in the
past decade; in turn, this has limited our ability to understand and interpret a
number of current observational results related to binary populations. Building
on their past experience, the investigators in this project will advance the
physical sophistication of binary modeling and compact object formation and
evolution. They will develop the next-generation binary-populations simulation
tool (PSyDLib) with major, key advantages for self-consistent, physical
modeling. The team will take advantage of the continued increase in
computational power and the public availability of MESA, a versatile, robust
stellar structure and evolution code. All the simulation codes will be made
publicly available for other research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will take advantage of the PI's established connections with local
schools (urban and suburban in the Chicago area), prior/current work with high-
school teachers, and astronomy's appeal to children to address a critical need
in elementary- and middle-school level STEM education. At all school levels the
Next Generation Science Standards that are currently being implemented call for
the introduction and use of computational thinking and modeling. However, in
this area most school teachers do not have expertise and voice their need for
professional development and appropriate curriculum materials. In collaboration
with small teams of experienced teachers, the PI will develop computational
astronomy curriculum materials. The PI will also capitalize on past work on
astronomy visualizations and develop new ones for mass transfer in binaries and
X-ray binary formation. The PI will use them extensively at public outreach
presentations at Chicago's Adler Planetarium and the Evanston High School new
planetarium. The PI will also involve two female graduate students who will be
trained in advanced computation, hence contributing to a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the team will
develop new modules and an innovative hybrid software structure to incorporate
(i) realistic mass-transfer sequences and physical assessment of stability, (ii)
advanced treatment of common-envelope evolution eliminating the need for ad-hoc
parameterization, and (iii) self-consistent orbital evolution for the general
case of eccentric, asynchronous binaries due to tides and mass transfer. The
project's science goals focus on studies of (i) core-collapse supernovae in
terms of the physical properties of both their progenitors and their binary
companions and compare to observational results from supernova surveys and (ii)
high-mass X-ray binaries in the Milky Way and the Magellanic Clouds, which
provide a plethora of observed systems with very different properties than
originally expected. Given the more substantial XRB samples, the investigators
will actually use the comparisons in (ii) to calibrate their models and assess
the reliability of predictions for (i). The anticipated results will not only
help to explain current observations but will also provide motivation and
predictions for future multi-wavelength observations.