* 1517506
* Dissecting the interplay between forces and dynamics of the mitotic apparatus and kinetochore attachments
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Daniela Cimini, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 06/30/2020
* USD 579,291.00

Cell division, the process of generating two cells from one, is essential to
life. A single cell undergoes consecutive cell divisions to generate a fully
developed organism. Moreover, within any organism, dying cells are continuously
replaced by new cells via cell division. A key process in cell division is the
equal partitioning of the replicated DNA into two daughter cells, a process
known as mitosis. During mitosis, the DNA condenses into chromosomes, each
constituted by two sister chromatids and the cell cytoskeleton reorganizes into
a structure known as the mitotic spindle. The microtubules (MTs) of the mitotic
spindle interact with the chromosomes by connecting to specialized protein
structures, the kinetochores (KTs) that assemble on each sister chromatid. The
MTs of the mitotic spindle can produce forces that can move the chromosomes
within the cell and eventually separate the sister chromatids and deliver them
to opposite poles, ensuring formation of two daughter cells with correct DNA
content. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate mitotic chromosome
segregation is a key aspect of our understanding of how life is maintained and
propagated. This research project explores the mechanisms responsible for
generation of forces within the mitotic apparatus that lead to movement of
chromatids such that they are accurately separated during mitosis. The findings
of this research will be communicated and disseminated broadly. Moreover, the
project will offer opportunities for interdisciplinary research training and
education. Finally, an outreach activity, designed for teaching children (grades
5-8) about cell division, will be developed and offered as a permanent activity
at the SEEDS - Blacksburg Nature Center and to local schools (through the
Biological Sciences Outreach Program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objective of this project is to dissect the interplay between forces and
dynamics of the mitotic apparatus and kinetochore (KT) attachment state during
specific mitotic stages. The central hypothesis is that not only the forces
produced by the mitotic spindle and the dynamics of the mitotic apparatus are
important to ensure correct KT attachment and accurate chromosome segregation,
but that, in turn, the KT attachment state (e.g., correct vs. incorrect) can
influence the dynamics of the mitotic apparatus and the distribution of forces
within the mitotic spindle. The overall objective of this project will be
achieved by addressing the following aims: 1. Quantitatively dissect the
interplay between KT attachment types and kinetochore-fiber length/angle
required for promoting and maintaining spindle pole separation. 2. Define the
independent roles of MT poleward flux and KT mechanical properties in correction
of KT mis-attachments. 3. Identify the mitotic apparatus mechanical properties
that control anaphase chromosome dynamics. Quantitative experimental approaches
will be combined with mathematical modeling to reach a level of knowledge that
goes beyond the pure understanding of cellular and molecular mechanisms and
allows to make predictions on how such mechanisms respond to perturbations. This
project will also have broader impacts, which will be ensured through
initiatives in various areas including research dissemination, interdisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students, and outreach to K-12 students.