* 1517791
* Exploring the Solar Neighborhood with the GALEX All Sky Survey
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Graeme Smith, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2021
* USD 97,900.00

The history of element creation in our Milky Way galaxy is preserved in dwarf
stars. By observing the nearby stars at ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths the
investigators will unravel that history. The investigators will use the GALEX
satellite images to measure the properties of the relatively faint dwarf stars
in the solar neighborhood. These observations, made at UV wavelengths,
complement observations made at the optical and infrared wavelengths with ground
based telescopes. The investigators will also advance our knowledge of nearby
stars, with potential impacts across other fields of astronomy.

The research activity is designed to help train a young scientist and the
project is defined as a set of projects suitable for high school students. The
investigator's team will bring underrepresented minorities into their research,
expanding participation in basic science.

The investigators will measure the UV-based colors of stars and calibrate the
colors to estimate stellar metallicity and stellar age. Their research will aid
in understanding the formation and age of stars in our galaxy. They will combine
measurements of dwarf star colors from previous optical surveys, such as the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the Geneva-Copenhagen Survey, to determine the age-
metallicity relations and age-versus-trajectory for stars in the Milky Way.