* 1517058
* Bilateral BBSRC NSF/ Bio - Modelling Cellular Differentiation in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Terri Long, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 513,651.00

Plant growth and development are flexible and prone to changes in character
depending on the immediate environment of the plant. The processes of growth and
development in plants depend on stem cells that divide and differentiate, but
little is known about the mechanisms that govern stem cell differentiation.
Understanding the properties that govern stem cell differentiation into
different cell types (termed the cell fate decision process) is important for
understanding the transition from single stem cells into mature cells and
ultimately tissues and plants. This project engages research teams from the US
(North Carolina State University) and the UK (University of Cambridge) to
address the complex signals and regulatory programs that orchestrate cell fate
decisions. Iron is an essential plant micronutrient which when deficient affects
plant developmental processes, and this project will develop mathematical models
to predict the emergent behaviors that are seen in response to changing iron
availability. This project will provide insights into biological mechanisms
common to all organisms and has important implications for agriculture and food
security in terms of increased crop yield in response to stress. The combined
use of experimental and mathematical modeling approaches will provide new
interdisciplinary educational opportunities in biomathematics and molecular
biology, engaging students (including groups underrepresented in science) at
levels from kindergarten through high school and including undergraduate and
graduate students.

This project integrates experimental and computational approaches to identify
gene regulatory and signaling networks that govern the progression of plant stem
cell differentiation. The project will employ computational modeling approaches
to predict cellular responses to intrinsic and extrinsic cues related to iron
availability and its impact on phloem sieve element differentiation. The
termination stage of sieve element development is characterized by programmed
nuclear degradation. Differentiation of the sieve element is a powerful model
for this kind of study because of a relatively rapid progression. Ordinary
differential equations will be developed to assess how gene expression dynamics
affect the differentiation of sieve elements. These equations will be
incorporated into an Agent Based Model to enable the simulation of multiple
cells differentiating simultaneously. The iteration of experimentation and model
refinement will be instrumental for understanding the genes and networks that
govern this differentiation process.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.