* 1517491
* Toward physically-predictive modeling of massive black hole growth and feedback in galaxy formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Claude-Andre Faucher-Giguere, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2019
* USD 440,389.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. Nearly all galaxies appear to have massive central black holes
(BHs)---many with ones much, much larger than our Milky Way's. Observations
reveal close connections between galaxies and massive BHs. However, the
formation of massive BHs, how they grow, and how they affect the galaxy life
cycle via feedback remain poorly understood. Fundamental advances in our
understanding of gas transport from galactic scales into galactic nuclei by
gravitational torques and in observations of galaxy-scale winds driven by active
galactic nuclei (AGN) are transforming our understanding of BH growth and
feedback and are enabling definitive progress in answering these questions. This
project is a multi-scale simulation program that builds on these breakthroughs
and on the investigators' previous analytic modeling. The project will begin
with ultra-high resolution simulations (down to about 0.01 pc) of BH growth and
feedback in galaxies and galactic nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will
also produce visualizations from their simulations specifically designed to
support their education and outreach efforts. The visualizations, which will
include both time-dependent animations and 3-D interactive exploration modules,
will be displayed at the Space Visualization Laboratory at the Adler Planetarium
in Chicago. The PI, the postdoc funded by this award, and graduate students in
the group will volunteer once a month for "astronomy conversations" at Adler,
which attract up to 300 visitors per hour of all ages. Through these astronomy
conversations, the team will explain the fascinating roles of black holes in
galaxy evolution to the public. They will also integrate educational materials
into a year long computational astrophysics course for high school students
offered through Northwestern's Center for Talent Development. In the course,
students learn to code in Python and apply these skills to pursuing an
independent research project using a large astronomical data set of their
choosing. Videos (which will include explanations of the science behind the
simulations and of how they were created) will introduce the students to a new
kind of simulated data set that they can work on for their projects. The
investigators will also continue to actively involve undergraduate students in
their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's simulations will include an
explicit model for stellar feedback that self-consistently produces a multiphase
interstellar medium and star-formation driven outflows. These simulations will
be used to study the physics of BH accretion and the interaction of wide-angle
AGN-driven outflows in a representative set of model galaxies, including the
effects of AGN on gas and star formation, and to calibrate AGN fueling and
feedback models for use in cosmological simulations. BHs will then be
implemented in cosmological simulations (about 1 to 100 pc resolution) that will
allow the PI to investigate the origin of massive BHs (seed models and the need
for super-Eddington accretion), the emergence of galaxy-BH scaling relations,
the role of AGN feedback in quenching star formation in massive galaxies, and
the effects of AGN outflows on halo gas. A systematic approach, building up from
small to larger scales, will enable the PI to resolve the main uncertainties of
previous simulations of BHs on galaxy and cosmological scales. To maximize the
impact of the simulations, radiative transfer calculations, which will allow a
direct test of the results with a wealth of current and future observations,
will be tightly incorporated in the project. The goal of this multi-scale BH
study is to achieve for BHs a level of predictive power comparable to what has
become possible for star formation. The sub-resolution BH models that will be
developed will enable substantially more predictive BH modeling in galaxy-scale
and cosmological simulations---thus alleviating arguably the largest uncertainty
in current galaxy formation theories.