* 1517828
* Statistical Dynamics of Balanced Cortical Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Robert Rosenbaum, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

A quantitative understanding of the cerebral cortex is a major challenge of
science in the 21st century. Mathematical and computational models are useful
tools in developing this understanding since they allow scientists to test
theories about which neural connectivity patterns give rise to which neural
activity patterns. However, the cortex is too complex to represent every detail
in a model. For example, the human cortex contains billions of neurons arranged
in hundreds of interconnected subregions. Instead, mathematical studies rely on
identifying fundamental organizing principles of the cortex and using them to
build and study simplified models. One such principle is the widely reported
balance between the activity of excitatory neurons (which promote activity in
other neurons) and inhibitory neurons (which suppress activity). Most previous
studies of excitatory-inhibitory balance do not account for the spatial
connectivity structure of cortical neuronal networks. This project studies the
implications of excitatory-inhibitory balance when the spatial structure
cortical neuronal connectivity is taken into account. Prior work has shown that
this combination of balance and spatial structure produces similar neural
activity patterns as those observed in experimental recordings. The project will
use this foundation to construct mathematical models that link anatomical
features of the cortex to functional properties such as the neural coding of
visual information and the neural basis of motor learning. As such, the project
will contribute to the understanding of the cortex and its function. A deeper
understanding of cortex can improve disease treatment, brain machine interfaces
and the capabilities of intelligent machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
comprises three sub-projects that use spatially extended balanced network models
to provide new insights into the following three features of cortical networks:
(1) Correlations between the activity of neurons. Correlated neural activity
plays a role in neural coding and disease. Previous balanced network models
produce small correlations in contrast to larger correlations observed in many
cortical recordings. This project explores how spatial network structure
introduces new network states with larger correlations. (2) Intrinsic dynamics.
Previous balanced network models produce simple macroscopic dynamics, but the
computations required to learn new motor sequences rely on more complicated
network dynamics. This project explores the rich dynamics exhibited by spatially
extended balanced networks and their ability to support motor learning. (3)
Sensory coding. This project explores the impact of balance on sensory coding in
a model of the primary visual cortex that accounts for the intricate spatial
structure of orientation tuning maps. The mathematical techniques developed in
this project represent novel approaches to studying spatially extended neuronal
networks, which typically involve nonlinear integral equations. In the proposed
work, excitation-inhibition balance is exploited to show that these equations
become linear at large system size, facilitating the analysis of networks with
realistic neuron models and connectivity structure. The novel mathematical
approaches contribute to the general study of complex systems and dynamics on
large networks.