* 1517831
* Collaborative Research: The Circumgalactic Medium: Understanding Observations from Theory
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jane Charlton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2018
* USD 129,526.00

Precisely how galaxies initially form and how they change throughout their
lifetimes are among the least understood problems in astrophysics, and
understanding the formation and life cycle of galaxies is key to developing the
broadest astronomical perspective on how the Universe evolved to its present
state. Many projects are centered on unraveling these mysteries. This project is
focused on understanding the circumgalactic medium (CGM) to uncover its role in
the life cycle of galaxies.

PI Churchill will expand his previous Broader Impact program based upon his
course "Into the Final Frontier." This course links students to Space Port
America and the growing aerospace and tourism industry rapidly growing in Las
Cruces, New Mexico. Special emphasis is placed on forging STEM related
opportunities for minority students, which comprise 45% of New Mexico State's
student population. Two graduate students will be supported in New Mexico. PI
Charlton plans to transform her successful science fiction, interactive, web
astronomy course into a video game to teach K--12 students, while achieving STEM
astronomy standards for the state of Pennsylvania. This project will support two
pre-selected skilled and talented students to construct the game and integrate
it into local schools. One graduate student will be supported in Pennsylvania.

The CGM is understood through observations and analysis of absorption lines in
the spectra of quasars. However, being blind to the actual properties of the
absorbing gas, present day analysis methods are uncalibrated. That is, our
cumulative knowledge of the CGM and its role in galaxy evolution is based upon a
host of implicit and explicit assumptions that remain untested or quantified.
Using the Eulerian hydrodynamic N-body cosmological simulation code hydroART,
the team will use the quasar absorption line technique, coupled with direct
analysis of the simulations, to study highly-detailed simulated galaxies with
various star formation and feedback physical models. The galaxies will range in
viral halo mass from 10.5 < log(M/Msun) < 12.5 and in redshift from z ~ 0-3. The
team aims to address these questions: (1) What is the relationship between the
gas phase structures in and surrounding galaxies and the physical model for star
formation and stellar feedback? (2) How well do models that yield galaxies
matching global galaxy properties also match the observed properties of the
gaseous reservoirs? (3) How does the CGM regulate the baryon cycle and galaxy
evolution? (4) Do current analysis methods of absorption lines yield inferred
gas properties (metallicities, spatial-kinematics distributions, gas phases, and
gas reservoir masses) that are consistent with the gas being probed in the
simulations? (5) What are the quantitative relationships between inferred gas
properties from observational analysis and the gas actually giving rise to the
absorption? (6) What are the implications and how do they change our
understanding of the baryon cycle and galaxy evolution?