* 1517110
* DEEPN analysis of the Ras Superfamily GTPase Interactome
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Christopher Stipp, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,025,000.00

All cellular functions require that proteins group together in different
combinations, forming complexes with highly specialized functions. Yet,
conventional approaches for studying such complexes have significant
limitations. For example, because some complexes come apart easily, they are
invisible to many standard experimental approaches. In addition, some proteins
can alter their shape to interact with different partner proteins. To address
some of the limitations of conventional approaches to study protein complexes, a
new method called DEEPN will be refined that uses modern cutting-edge DNA
sequencing technology to help identify protein interactions. DEEPN will be
applied to the study of an important family of proteins that change their shape
in response to biological stimuli. These studies will have high scientific
impact since they will define new connections between proteins and their
functions. This project will simplify and streamline this new methodological
approach so that it is easy, effective and economical for other scientific
investigators of varying levels of expertise (including undergraduate
researchers) to perform. In addition, a number of interdisciplinary research and
educational activities for undergraduates will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DEEPN strategy (Dynamic Enrichment for
Evaluation of Protein Networks) was developed as a robust method for
simultaneous discovery of dozens of protein interactions with statistical
certainty. DEEPN uses newly available next-generation, high-throughput DNA
sequencing approaches to computationally determine protein interactions. This
technique will be used to comprehensively describe the protein complexes that
involve members of an important family of proteins that regulate many cell
functions, the Ras superfamily. These proteins are among those that undergo a
shape change that influences their function, and DEEPN will be used to follow
specifically how such changes affect the composition of protein complexes. The
scientific merit of this work is that it will bring new mechanistic insights
into how members of the Ras superfamily of proteins collectively contribute to
almost all aspects of cellular function. The impact of this study will be broad
because it will: 1) streamline methods and develop new computational tools that
will allow other investigators to apply the DEEPN approach to the study of other
important cellular functions, and 2) integrate aspects of the DEEPN approach
into a laboratory class, exposing upper-level undergraduate students to how
molecular biology and computational bioinformatics can be combined for modern
state-of-the-art cell biology research.