* 1517085
* Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Cell Calcium
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Victor Matveev, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Calcium-dependent synaptic neurotransmitter release is the primary means of
communication between neurons in the central and peripheral nervous systems,
including the mammalian brain. It is triggered by the entry of calcium ions into
the cell, followed by their diffusion and binding to calcium-sensing proteins.
This fundamental physiological cell process is called secretory vesicle
exocytosis, and is also responsible for neuro-muscular communication and the
release of hormone from endocrine cells. Accurate modeling and deeper
understanding of cell calcium signals that trigger neurotransmitter release and
endocrine hormone release is at the core of the current project, and may provide
deeper insight into the function of neural and endocrine systems both in the
normal state and in pathological conditions, for instance type-II diabetes. This
project will employ advanced mathematical and computational techniques in order
to gain deeper knowledge of physiologically relevant cell calcium dynamics with
high resolution in time and space. This will include further development of an
open-source computational tool called CalC ("Calcium Calculator") for the
simulation of three-dimensional cell calcium ion diffusion and calcium binding
(http://www.calciumcalculator.org), contributing to the infrastructure for
computational modeling in the biological sciences, facilitating rapid and
effective dissemination of the obtained results through the publicly accessible
on-line simulation file database. Students will be trained in the highly
interdisciplinary field spanning applied mathematics, cell biophysics and
computational neuroscience, contributing to the development of future
researchers capable of using advanced computational methods to tackle problems
of broad societal impact in the life sciences.

This project addresses several challenges in the modeling of cell calcium
dynamics leading to neurotransmitter and hormone release. One of these
challenges is taking into account the strong influence of various intracellular
calcium-binding molecules, collectively termed calcium buffers and sensors, on
cell calcium diffusion. This project extends recent studies of calcium diffusion
in the presence of buffers with several calcium binding sites that bind calcium
cooperatively through a mechanism similar to the process of cooperative binding
of oxygen by hemoglobin. Cooperative binding distinguishes an important class of
calcium buffer-sensors evolutionarily linked to calmodulin, and deeper
understanding of their influence on calcium signals is important for the
understanding of cell physiology.This project also explores the relationship
between the two most widely used approaches in modeling calcium dynamics: the
deterministic approach that models calcium as a continuous concentration
distribution, and the stochastic approach that simulates trajectories of
individual calcium ions and is assumed to be more realistic, but more expensive
computationally. A novel analytical method will be applied to more accurately
estimate stationary distribution of calcium near a single membrane calcium
channel, allowing efficient modeling and analysis of calcium "nanodomains" that
form around open calcium channels. Finally, through collaborative work with
experimental physiologists, obtained methods and results will be applied to
understand the interplay between calcium diffusion, buffering and sensing that
underlies the observed dynamics of vesicle release in specific types of
mammalian synapses and endocrine cells.