* 1517649
* Unveiling the Physics and Progenitors of Cosmic Explosions with a One Day Cadence Supernova Search
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,01/31/2018
* David Sand, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 01/31/2018
* USD 538,039.00

Supernovae are linchpins for understanding the chemical and star formation
history of the Universe. Despite progress, some of the most basic questions
about supernovae persist, and this proposal seeks to answer the question: What
are the explosion mechanisms and progenitor star systems of supernovae? In the
early hours to days after explosion, supernovae provide clues to how they
explode, and what their progenitor star systems were. The PI will carry out a
3-year, one-day-cadence supernova search of nearby galaxies, which is expected
to discover about 30 extremely young supernovae within 1 day of explosion. This
will help determine which type of stars explode into particular types of
supernovae. Through this research, a diverse set of undergraduate students will
be trained in technical skills and t to take leadership roles in scientific or
educational careers. They will be involved in all phases of the research, and
they will lead an effort at Texas Tech's Gott Observatory to obtain light curves
of SNe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use the prompt telescope to conduct a
nightly survey of galaxies within 40 Mpc. Discovered supernovae will immediately
be observed with the FLOYDS spectrographs at LCOGT. They expect to discover
around 10 type Ia supernovae and about 20 core collapse supernovae within 1 day
of explosion. For type Ia supernovae, the team will study early light curve
signatures related to the distribution of 56Ni and of shocking between the
supernova ejecta and any non-degenerate companion star. They will also hunt for
the carbon material most likely associated with a companion progenitor white
dwarf. For core collapse supernovae, the team will witness the shock breakout
from the surface of the progenitor star, and the subsequent cooling in the
initial hours to days afterwards, which allows for a measurement of the
progenitor star's radius and circumstellar material composition. The results
will be used to constrain the progenitor and explosion mechanism of each
supernova. All supernovae discoveries will be made public immediately after
discovery to facilitate rapid follow-up observations.