* 1517378
* Cavities and pressure effects in proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Bertrand Garcia-Moreno, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,263,679.00

Proteins are large biological molecules that are an essential part of all living
organisms, in charge of all biochemical processes and of all cellular
housekeeping tasks. Proteins are the most complex molecules known. This project
will use pressure to examine the molecular determinants of stability and other
fundamental properties of proteins. One goal is to understand why the structure
of proteins, and in particular, the presence of empty cavities inside the
protein, renders them sensitive to pressure. These cavities are involved in many
important biochemical processes, such as enzymatic catalysis (enzymes are
proteins that facilitate chemical reactions), thus it is important to understand
properties such as their volume, whether they are empty or whether water is
found inside them, how they change over the course of functional processes, and
how they affect the essential communication between different parts of the
protein. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will be trained in
computational and experimental biophysics. Dr. Garc√≠a-Moreno is actively engaged
in the development of a modern science curriculum focused on the training of
biology students in more physical, computational and quantitative approaches. He
also has been very active and will continue to be engaged in his role as mentor
and advisor to students from many groups that are underrepresented in science.

Proteins can be unfolded with pressure. This implies that the net volume of the
unfolded state is smaller than the volume of the folded state. The origins of
these volume differences are not obvious. This project is focused on fundamental
and systematic studies of cavities and pressure unfolding of proteins, with
emphasis on the roles of cavities as determinants of pressure unfolding and on
the properties of the cavities. One goal is to examine the relationship between
the size, character, state of hydration and location of cavities, and a
protein's sensitivity to pressure, its thermodynamic stability, and the
magnitude of volume change measured upon unfolding. A second goal is to study
the effects of cavities on fluctuations and correlated motions, on dynamics in
the hydrophobic interior, on structural cooperativity, and on internal
hydration. The experiments that will be performed for this project will further
fundamental understanding of structural and thermodynamic consequences of
cavities in proteins, especially under conditions of high hydrostatic pressure.
The approach that will be pursued involves equilibrium thermodynamic experiments
to measure volume changes with pressure unfolding monitored by Trp fluorescence
and high pressure NMR, measurement of thermodynamic stability with chemical
denaturation, x-ray crystallography to determine crystal structures of proteins
to describe the location and volume of internal cavities, and MD simulations to
examine the state of hydration of cavities and structural consequences of the
application of pressure. High pressure NMR spectroscopy will also be used to
examine the response of proteins to pressure with atomic resolution, by
characterizing the pressure dependence of fast backbone and side chain dynamics.

This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics in
the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.