* 1517245
* Vectorial Folding of Large, Multidomain Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Weitao Yang, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 755,643.00

Title: Vectorial Folding of Large, Multidomain Proteins
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are biological molecules composed of amino acid
building blocks connected into polymer-like chains. They are critically
important in life processes by providing structural elements to cells and by
performing many active cellular functions, for example as oxygen carriers in red
blood cells, by generating contractile forces in muscles and by supporting the
immune system because they are able to recognize and bind foreign molecules.
Their ability to perform their cellular functions is dependent upon proteins
folding into the appropriate structure. When proteins misfold, not only do they
loose function but they can also cause diseases such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's disease. To date, significant progress has been made toward
understanding of how small (~100 amino acids), model proteins acquire their
three-dimensional structures, however, very little is known about folding
mechanisms of large, complex, multi-domain proteins that dominate all forms of
life. The long-term objective of this project is to advance understanding of the
folding mechanisms of large, complex, multi-domain proteins by using a
combination of experimental and computational techniques. This project will
provide an exciting interdisciplinary education and research opportunity for 3
graduate and 6 undergraduate students. This project also combines several
experimental disciplines and it will provide a rich learning experience for all
people involved, junior and senior researchers alike. Outreach activities will
involve K12 students and their teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
the mechanism of folding of large, complex, multi-domain proteins will be
examines using a combination of experimental and computational techniques. The
hypothesis that large multi-domain proteins fold sequentially under vectorial
constraint conditions to avoid misfolding, and not in a two-state-fashion
typical of small proteins, will be examined. Single-molecule protein folding
data will be acquired by combining DNA and protein engineering with Atomic Force
Microscopy-based and optical trap-based single-molecule force spectroscopy (AFM-
SMFS, OT-SMFS) measurements. Computational methods such as Steered Molecular
Dynamics (SMD) will be performed in parallel to experimental measurements and
aid in interpreting data. Multi-domain proteins present a unique problem for
interpreting AFM-SMFS and OT-SMFS data: the domain that gives rise to a signal
must be identified out of the multiple domains in the protein. To circumvent
this issue, novel polypeptide-based 'folding probes' such as antiparallel
coiled-coils will be developed that can be inserted into large proteins at
critical positions to report on the folding status of the surrounding structure
when interrogated by SMFS. These studies will examine mechanical folding of a
number of large proteins with increasing size and structural complexity that
supports their important biological functions such as ATP synthesis or DNA
replication. The research will advance the knowledge about one of the most
fundamental unsolved problems in biology; mechanisms allowing long amino acid
chains to fold into complex, multidomain structures.