* 1517913
* Development and Analysis of Autonomous Metabolite Valves
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Kristala Prather, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2019
* USD 370,383.00

The ability of microbes to convert organic materials (feedstock) into a vast
array of chemical products makes them ideally suited as chemical factories.
Advances in this technology require redirecting natural and engineered metabolic
pathways (i.e. the pathways of chemical reactions in the cell) towards the
production of the desired chemical. One means of redirecting microbial
metabolism is to manipulate the pathways so that the desired amount of
metabolites flows toward the desired pathway at the appropriate time. This is
akin to opening a valve to permit the flow of chemicals into a factory at the
appropriate time and in the appropriate amount. In this study a set of
bioengineering tools will be developed for detecting accumulation in a microbe
of a signalling molecule and for detecting the depletion of a nutrient in the
growth medium. When the targeted concentrations of the signal molecule or
nutrient are reached the expression of specific metabolic pathways will be
altered appropriately to increase production of the desired chemical. This
toolkit will be made broadly available to synthetic biology and metabolic
engineering researchers. Workforce training and development will be provided to
young career (undergraduate and graduate students) scientists through an
interdisciplinary research experience.

There has been great interest in developing strategies to control the flux of
metabolites at the appropriate time and in the appropriate amounts to optimize
yields of microbially synthesized chemicals. To achieve high product yields
requires balancing the need for increasing cellular biomass with the diversion
of metabolites towards the synthesis of the desired product. An ideal system
would allow dynamic control of metabolite flow towards product synthesis without
the need for any user-provided inputs. This project aims to develop and analyze
the use of autonomous metabolite valves to control the appropriate flux of
metabolites through a heterologous pathway at the appropriate time. In contrast
to other systems that rely on exogenous amendments to control metabolite flux
this system will rely on the intracellular accumulation of microbially
synthesized signals or the depletion of a specific nutrient in the growth
medium. At targeted concentrations of the signal molecule or nutrient, gene
expression will altered to increase the flux of metabolites toward synthesis of
the desired product. The objectives of this study will be to: 1) develop and
analyze quorum sensing-based metabolite valves; 2) develop and analyze
metabolite valves based on the natural phosphate starvation response; and 3)
integrate the quorum sensing and phosphate starvation valves into a single
strain to assess system compatibility. While a specific metabolic pathway will
be investigated for valve performance as proof of concept, it is also envisioned
that these devices will be useful for more general physiological studies such as
the impact of metabolic shifts on cellular behavior.

This award is funded jointly by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems.