* 1517567
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of Early Metabolism: Carbon Fixation, Anaerobic Respiration and ROS Detoxification in the Anaerobic Vent Bacterium, Thermovibrio ammonificans
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Costantino Vetriani, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2020
* USD 472,559.00

Bacteria that can live without oxygen (anaerobes) and survive in hot
environments (thermophiles) inhabit extreme environments such as deep-sea
hydrothermal vents that resemble the early Earth. These modern-day bacteria co-
evolved with our planet, and as a result, these organisms carry both ancestral
and more recently acquired genes and can be used as models to reconstruct the
evolution of microbial processes, including how these bacteria obtained energy
and the carbon needed to grow. To gain insight into these processes Thermovibrio
ammonificans, an organism that inhabits deep-sea hydrothermal vents, will be
studied. Integrated into these studies will be outreach activities for middle
and high school students. Lesson plans will be developed and used in after-
school programs, in professional training programs for K-12 educators, and
informal activities such as the 4-H Summer Science Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anaerobic chemolithoautotrophic bacteria inhabiting deep-
sea hydrothermal vents are critically important from an ecological standpoint;
by fixing carbon dioxide of geothermal/magmatic origin in the absence of oxygen,
they are the primary producers in these environments. This project will provide
insight into the evolution of early and acquired bacterial metabolism by
leveraging different types of culture approaches (batch and continuous cultures)
with comparative genomic analyses of the model organism, Thermovibrio
ammonificans. Experiments will address whether an early Earth ancestor of T.
ammonificans was originally a hydrogen-oxidizing, sulfur-reducing bacterium that
could form needed organic substances from simple inorganic substances (such as
carbon dioxide). With the gradual rise of oxygen in the atmosphere, more
efficient terminal electron acceptors became available and this bacterium
acquired genes that increased its metabolic flexibility - e.g., the capacity to
use nitrate as well as carbon dioxide - while retaining ancestral metabolic
traits (such as the ability to live without oxygen and survive high
temperatures). The mechanisms of carbon fixation, anaerobic respiration and
detoxification of reactive oxygen species in T. ammonificans will be
investigated using a combination of transcriptomic, proteomic and biomass carbon
stable isotope analyses. This study will provide invaluable information on gene
expression in T. ammonificans grown under chemical and nutrient conditions that
reflect, as closely as possible, those encountered in its natural environment
and will provide insight on gene regulation and expression in response to
changing environmental conditions. This study is anticipated to help reconstruct
the ancestral and acquired metabolic traits of this deep-branching organism and
shed light into the emergence and evolution of autotrophic carbon fixation
pathways.