* 1517695
* A New Structural Architecture for Recognition of DNA Damage
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Brandt Eichman, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2019
* USD 660,000.00

This project is funded jointly by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical
modification and damage of DNA from a continual onslaught of cellular and
environmental agents alters genetic information and threatens all aspects of
cellular function. DNA repair proteins exist in all organisms to remove damaged
DNA and protect the integrity of the genome. This research aims to understand at
the atomic level how DNA repair proteins locate a particular type of DNA damage
and initiate the process of fixing it. This program will enhance the educational
benefits to society through 1) integration of research and education in the
laboratory and the classroom, 2) vertical integration at all levels of training
--from undergraduates to postdoctoral associates, 3) practical structural
biology experience for undergraduates, 4) community outreach, and 5)
participation by women and underrepresented groups, and 6) integration of
science and art to enhance scientific communication. The close proximity of the
College of Arts and Science and the School of Medicine at Vanderbilt University
provides an exceptional collaborative training environment. Practical hands-on
X-ray crystallography laboratory modules have been incorporated into the PI's
courses to provide students with the unique opportunity to directly participate
in all aspects of protein structure determination. All personnel associated with
this research are involved in recruiting students from underrepresented groups
from regional institutions, and the PI is involved in outreach through
interactions with local high, middle, and elementary school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this research is to
determine the mechanisms by which DNA repair enzymes locate and repair aberrant
DNA. This research focuses on the structures and functions of a relatively new
superfamily of DNA glycosylases, represented by the Bacillus cereus AlkD enzyme,
that catalyzes the excision of cationic alkylated DNA nucleobases, including
N3-methyladenine (3mA) and N7-methylguanine (7mG), which are among the most
prevalent forms of DNA damage. Because of their inherent instability, the basis
for recognition and removal of cationic alkylbases from DNA is unknown. The
AlkD-related enzymes are unique in that they are the only DNA glycosylases
specific for cationic lesions and with the ability to excise bulky
modifications. Additionally, these enzymes are constructed from a tandem helical
repeat architecture that has emerged as an important nucleic acid processing
platform in chromatin remodeling and DNA damage response proteins. The PI's
group has established that unlike other DNA glycosylases, AlkD does not need to
flip the nucleobase target out of the DNA duplex prior to catalysis. Thus, the
AlkD superfamily is an ideal system to study the fundamental requirements for
base excision repair of alkylation damage repair, with strong potential to
reveal novel mechanistic insight into DNA damage recognition. Four specific aims
will integrate structural and computational biology, biochemistry, and genetic
approaches to 1) determine the physicochemical features that underlie
recognition and excision of cationic N3- and N7-alkylpurines, 2) elucidate the
diversity among the AlkC/D superfamily that defines substrate specificity, 3)
investigate how this unique damage recognition platform can excise bulky DNA
adducts, and 4) understand the apparent redundancy between alkylpurine DNA
glycosylase activities in Bacillus and to determine if AlkD participates in
alternative repair pathways.