* 1517006
* Dynamical Mass and Heating of Galaxy Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Matthew Bershady, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2020
* USD 693,710.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. One important aspect of understanding galaxy formation and evolution
is the study of the motion and structure of a galaxy's disk system as observed
through the action of the stars and gas of the galaxy. This project uncovers the
archaeological record of mass-assembly and dynamical evolution of today's galaxy
disks, revealed by relations between stellar motions and stellar populations.
This basic research project will be conducted at a public University, where
advances and discovery are combined with teaching and training to a large and
diverse audience. The proposed project broadly disseminates knowledge and
achieves scientific and technical literacy in these ways: (1) Research and
teaching infrastructure will be enhanced by launching science projects on a new
WIYN Observatory instrument. (2) STEM course development on galaxy dynamics and
spectrograph instrumentation will intertwine with basic research as part of the
PI's on-going faculty duties. (3) Graduate and undergraduate training of the
future STEM workforce will include astronomical observations, data analysis,
instrument commissioning, data mining, and collaborative research. (4)
Educational tools on fiber-optics and their use in society will be developed,
implemented, and assessed as part of a public project in our Space Place
outreach facility, targeted at school-age students and adults. (5) A four-year
lecture series on the Milky Way and external galaxies will be connected to this
educational project, presenting expert knowledge on fiber-optic astronomical
surveys to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects's primary objective is
to couple the relative amplitude of rotation and velocity dispersion of gas and
stars with stellar ages and abundances, used as chronometers, to probe the
dynamical heating of disks over the past 4--6 Gyrs. This is analogous to what is
being measured with resolved stars in ground-breaking studies of the Milky Way,
here albeit more coarsely resolved yet broadly applied to a representative
galaxy sample over a wide range in halo mass. This study is leveraged by a new
integral-field unit (IFU) on the WIYN 3.5-m telescope and a large IFU survey
being undertaken in the fourth generation of the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary outcome of this work will be to answer
the question of whether apparent variations in stellar mass-to-light ratios are
due to changes in the stellar initial mass function, uncertainties in the late
phases of stellar-evolution, or subtleties in the assumed distribution of
luminous and dark matter. The approach enables accurate measurements of disk
mass by explicitly tying the vertical gradients in disk stellar populations into
a self-consistent dynamical model. In so doing, the study determines how recent
disk heating-rates depend on galaxy properties and environment, thereby
constraining the astrophysical source(s) of this phenomenon. The project
calibrates a method for measuring stellar velocity dispersions via the
asymmetric drift between gas and stars, a related dynamical phenomenon
discovered decades ago in the Milky Way and now measurable in external galaxies.
The method will be applied to the current generation of integral-field
spectroscopic survey data on nearby galaxies and has application at high
redshift. The broader implications of this project include the following: (1)
Determining the vertical heating rate of spiral disks using spectrophotometric
chronometers is novel and establishes a concrete picture of the stellar density
profile in the largest dissipational structures in the universe. (2) Coupling
differences between stellar and gas kinematics with stellar population ages
provides a new means for estimating dynamical mass and calibrating the mass-to-
light ratios of stellar populations. (3) Calibrating mass-to-light ratios places
stringent constraints on late phases of stellar evolution, the efficiency with
which star-formation locks baryons into stars, and the inner density profiles of
dark halos.