* 1517521
* I-Corps:  Single Chip Intravascular and Intracardiac Ultrasound Imaging Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Coronary heart disease is one of the leading causes of death in the US and some
60M people in the US alone have some form of heart disease. Therefore, a great
need exists for the advancement of devices and procedures to diagnose, treat,
and correct a wide variety of forms of heart disease. Procedures such as radio
frequency (RF) ablation to correct arrhythmias, reopening of totally blocked
arteries and trans-catheter valve replacement are prolonged and sometimes not
successfully performed due to the difficulties in the guidance of catheter based
diagnostic and therapeutic devices within the cardiovascular system. This
I-Corps team has developed a miniature forward looking 3-D ultrasound imaging
system which essentially provides a flashlight for cardiologist or surgeons to
navigate through the vascular system and within the heart. The proposed
technology is developed to address the unmet need in image guidance for complex
interventional heart procedures.

The device that invented provides meaningful, real-time anatomical information
occurring within the structures of the heart, as well as coronary and peripheral
veins and arteries in a three dimensional view. The device should allow a less
practiced clinician the ability to achieve the same results as a very skilled
surgeon in less time and with similar accuracy. It should also allow certain
catheter based minimally invasive procedures such as recanalization of blocked
arteries which were declined because of the limitations of present devices, to
now be done and avoid the open heart surgery. In the long term, the technology
has the potential to displace the current catheter based ultrasound imaging
systems completely by providing equal or better performance at reduced cost
since it will dramatically reduce the assembly and catheter cabling which are
the main cost drivers.