* 1517785
* Collaborative Research: High Resolution Spectroscopy and Spectro-Astrometry of Warm Gas in  Herbig Ae/Be Stars: A Search for Forming Gas Giant Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Mate Adamkovics, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2018
* USD 104,484.00

This team will use ground-based telescopes and computer models to detect and
characterize exoplanets in disks around other stars. The team will apply novel
techniques to detect gas giant planets that are still in the process of forming.
If successful, these results would allow us to connect the initial conditions of
the planet-forming environment to the kinds of planets that form. Inherent
curiosity about how our own planet came to be attracts students from all
backgrounds into STEM disciplines. The students involved with this project will
have the opportunity to carry out research at one of the frontiers of modern
astrophysics by exploiting data available from state of the art observatories
and computational modeling. Previous students involved in this group have
applied their experiences to careers in K-12 education, industry, national
defense, in addition to more traditional research careers. This project will
also provide research-based learning opportunities for students in the South
Carolina State University - Clemson University bridge program, actively
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in astronomy.

This program has three principal science goals. (1) Search for circumplanetary
disks around companions orbiting Herbig Ae/Be stars: generate a uniform atlas of
all archival high resolution M-band observations of Herbig Ae/Be, search for
variable CO emission indicative of an orbiting companion, and obtain additional
observations. (2) Search for dynamical markers of massive substellar companions.
(3) Apply this group's thermochemical model to sources with observed OH and CO
emission to test the hypothesis that OH primarily arises from the inner rim of
circumstellar disks.