* 1517007
* Observing Virtual Universes
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2019
* USD 375,388.00

This project will benefit both the research astronomy community and the general
public in the US by providing access to the Millennium Database, the most
important and widely used simulation worldwide, which has so far been a fully
European effort, published and maintained in Germany, and largely inaccessible
elsewhere. Once established, other simulation datasets will later be made
available, providing a resource of tremendous value, capable of making a
meaningful difference to US scientists. The virtual numerical laboratory that
will be created represents technical solutions widely applicable to many areas
of scientific and educational endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cosmological
computer simulations with large dynamic range that model statistically
representative parts of the observable universe are an essential component of
the quest to understand the structure of the universe, and in particular how
galaxies form, how they are distributed in space, and how environment influences
their evolution. The data sets produced by such simulations have started to
exceed in size and richness the results of the largest observational surveys,
straining the computational and storage resources that support the required
complex algorithms. This is especially true because much of the analysis will be
performed by scientists who were not involved in the original work and may be
unfamiliar with the properties of the simulation outputs. This project will
allow access to the original simulations, and simultaneously extend and complete
the creation of synthetic observations that can be directly compared to
telescope data. The system will allow experts and non-experts to investigate the
virtual universes created by simulations and match them to observation, by
forming a virtual observatory with access to everything from raw outputs,
through idealized intermediate products, to realistic model observations. Users
can investigate such aspects of gravitational collapse as scaling relations and
distinct clustering patterns, and study systematic biases and information loss.
The objective is to enable everyone to perform the sort of scientific
experiments on simulation data that can currently only be done by
specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broadly usable technical solutions that
will be created by this study will tie raw Petabyte size simulation output files
to structured relational databases, with direct applications as diverse as
turbulence and genomics. Forward modelling to the observational domain will
benefit any area where theory and simulation must be interpreted by non-
specialists. The project will establish the Johns Hopkins group as a core US
partner in the European Virgo Consortium, and further establish a public
simulation database effort in the US.