* 1517221
* Computational Studies of Protein-Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Benoit Roux, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,027,550.00

One of the most basic questions about the protein molecules in the living cell
is the manner by which they interact with one another. How proteins recognize
and bind (stick) to the correct partner(s) is one of the ways information is
communicated within and between the cells. This is how cells process information
and make decisions at the molecular level. Atomic-level information is essential
to explain the specific interactions between proteins in terms of structure and
dynamics. The research project consists in developing and improving the
computer-based approach of "molecular dynamics" to calculate and predict
accurately how proteins bind to one another. Molecular dynamics (MD) consists of
using Newton's classical equation, force = mass x acceleration, to simulate the
motions of all the atoms as a function of time. The MD simulation, although an
approximation to the real world, provides detailed information about the time
course of the atomic motions that cannot be accessed experimentally. The
approach based on atomic models and MD simulations is advantageous because it
does not rely on any particular assumption about protein binding. Being able to
predict the possible binding partners of a protein from computations will open
the door to a much better understanding of living cells. In addition to
developing methods that will be of broad utility to the scientific community,
the project will provide inter-disciplinary training and mentoring to young
scientists at the undergraduate and graduate level (including members of under-
represented minorities), as well as outreach to high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project consists in improving the theoretical
and computational methods to calculate and predict accurately how molecules bind
to one another. According to the theory of statistical thermodynamics, the
quantity that controls the association of molecules is the binding free energy.
This mathematically well-defined quantity can be calculated using computer
simulations of atomic models of the molecules of interest. Molecular dynamics
(MD) simulation can help elucidate the fundamental principles governing the
binding of biological molecules at the atomic level. MD consists of constructing
detailed atomic models of the macromolecules and using Newton's classical
equation, F=MA, to literally simulate the dynamical motions of all the atoms as
a function of time. The microscopic forces (the "F" in Newton's equation) are
approximated by using a potential function, also called a force field,
constructed from simple analytical functions. Validating the accuracy of the
force field is also an important use of computations based on MD simulations.
The calculated trajectory, though an approximation to the real world, provides
detailed information about the time course of the atomic motions, which is
impossible to access experimentally. Efforts in this area are likely to have a
large impact because biology is entering a quantitative era that requires an
ability to predict the binding of molecules. The first specific objective of the
research is the design and development of novel computational methodologies
addressing the specific challenges presented by protein-protein interactions.
Sampling the large number of accessible configurations of the solvated proteins
is critical. Simply running longer unbiased MD is not going to lead to success,
and special enhanced sampling methods are needed to achieve this. The second
objective is to validate and test the computational methodology and assess the
accuracy of the atomic force field on the basis of well-known protein-protein
complexes. It is important to know if the results are correct for the binding
free energy, the entropy and enthalpy decomposition, and the kinetic rate of
association. In the last stage, the objectives are focused on testing the
computational method with respect to increasingly challenging
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Chemical Theory, Models, and
Computational Methods Program in the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.