* 1517241
* Cyanobacterial Cell Division: Mechanisms and Inputs Towards the Decision to Divide
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Katherine Osteryoung, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2019
* USD 591,632.00

Recently, recognition of the considerable promise of cyanobacteria as
engineering platforms for bioindustrial and sustainable bioenergy solutions has
fueled growing interest in research on these organisms. This research project
aims to address the molecular regulation of cyanobacterial cell division. The
project will use a combination of biochemical methods, advanced microscopy, and
computational simulation to investigate core mechanisms of cell division in
cyanobacteria. The project will investigate the influence that light has on this
organism's cell division. As a related part of the project, a new molecular
biology approach designed to allow experimental control of the abundance of
target proteins in cyanobacteria will be developed, providing an additional tool
to study the important proteins controlling division, but also permitting a
potentially powerful new method for cyanobacterial research and engineering. The
fundamental knowledge to be gained from this project will be broadly relevant to
scientific questions of evolution and ecology, as well as to cyanobacterial
engineering and applications in "green" bioenergy. The proposal will also
provide training opportunities for two graduate students and numerous
undergraduates from underrepresented groups through undergraduate research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ the model unicellular
rod-shaped cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongates, PCC7942, to investigate
mechanistic and regulatory aspects of cell division in cyanobacteria. A
combination of quantitative imaging, biochemical, molecular engineering, and
modeling approaches will be used to understand how the unique cellular
architecture and photosynthetic lifestyle of cyanobacteria impact their cell
division systems in relation to those studied in classic heterotrophic models.
Specifically, the S. elongatus homologs of the Min system proteins, which
control the positioning of the cell division complex (divisome), will be
investigated using localization studies involving careful construction of
functional reporters expressed under endogenous and/or tunable promoters. The
dynamics of the cyanobacterial Min proteins, their capacity to display
oscillatory behavior, their genetic and biochemical interactions, and their
influences on the organization of the divisome will be examined in relevant
mutants and genetic backgrounds, and in the context of the large and potentially
confounding thylakoid membrane system. The upstream influences of light,
circadian rhythms, and photosynthetic metabolism on the control and activity of
Min factors and cell division will also be investigated. To facilitate
functional analysis of important/essential division proteins, a degron tag-based
system will be developed to allow inducible degradation of target proteins. This
technique may be broadly applicable to predictably regulating protein abundance
beyond the scope of this project. Finally, the project will utilize computer
simulations to examine the predicted effects of thylakoid membrane structure on
the self-organization properties of the Min system and to compare modeling
predictions to the experimentally derived results in S. elongatus.