* 1517541
* Abundance of the Elements and Stellar Chemistry
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2021
* Katharina Lodders, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 02/28/2021
* USD 586,091.00

The investigators will provide a fundamental framework for interpreting the
abundances and chemical composition of the gas and dust in stellar environments.
The investigations are important for many different areas in astrophysics and
the chemistry of the cosmos. A major task is a large update to the reference set
of abundances of the elements in our own Solar System, derived from samples of
meteorites; these so-called "solar abundances" are used as a fundamental
references for the study of properties of other stars and galaxies in the
universe.

The investigators will lead a cross-campus initiative, encouraging undergraduate
students from the computer sciences to participate in this research. The results
from this research are integrated into new/revised textbooks and in class
materials and lectures. The female investigator serves as a role model for young
women considering scientific careers. Outreach: The investigators work with the
university public affairs office to issue press releases to spread results to
the public; e.g., about brown dwarf weather, raining pebbles on a molten-rock
planet, or about evaporating the Earth. Their investigation also supports a PhD
thesis and undergraduate research.

Element abundances are an important input to many chemical models in astronomy.
The solar elemental abundances are commonly used as a reference when describing
astronomical objects. The proposed chemistry calculations are relevant for
understanding gas molecule and condensate formation in protostellar disks (with
and without planetary formation); and in ejecta of evolved stars that feed dust
and gas to the ISM, from which new stellar and planetary systems originate.
Dying stars rarely have overall solar composition, especially not for C, N, and
O, that govern redox conditions. The gas and dust chemistry strongly depends on
the C/O ratio and the study aims to derive a complete set of condensation
temperatures for all elements under non-solar conditions. The proposed work for
chemistry at non-solar metallicities is highly relevant to planet formation
models around high metallicity stars, as well as condensation around low-
metallicity stars or even in dusty galaxies at high red-shift.