* 1517488
* The Dynamical Echoes Of Dark Matter Sub-Structure: In Simulations &amp; In Spirals Out To z ~ 0.1
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Sukanya Chakrabarti, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 07/31/2019
* USD 325,053.00

The current cosmological paradigm includes two significant and unknown physical
entities called "dark matter" and "dark energy," which are used to model the
Universe as we know it. Understanding the distribution of dark matter remains
one of the most fundamental problems in astronomy and is the focus of this
project. There are many discrepancies between dark matter sub-structure in the
existing computer simulations and in observations. There are too few massive
satellites relative to simulations, and at low Galactic latitudes there are
hardly any Milky Way satellites. This project aims to extract essential
information on the dark matter distribution in spiral galaxies by building on
the investigator's ongoing work in characterizing galactic satellites from
analysis of disturbances in extended disks of hydrogen
gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communicating scientific results to a broad audience
and promoting diversity benefits the astronomy community and our society at
large. This project will be carried out at Rochester Institute of Technology
(RIT), which has historically been primarily an undergraduate
institution:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Women in Science: The PI will organize regular
meetings with visiting women colloquium speakers, with the goal of gathering
advice on professional development. Dr. Chakrabarti will also continue
participating in the Expanding Your Horizons program, which is geared towards
engaging middle school girls in science.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Computational Bootcamp:
Every summer, the PI will provide a two-week, intensive computational bootcamp
geared towards entering graduate students. The goal of this bootcamp is to serve
as a bridge---providing an introduction to computational astrophysics, with
hands-on lectures that illustrate the basics of computing and applications to
astronomy. The PI will work through simple examples in IDL and Python, and she
will encourage women and minority students to attend the bootcamp, and assign
mentors for entering students.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Visualization Laboratory: The PI
will continue producing 3-D animations of galaxy collisions, which will be
showcased in the Viz-Lab at RIT. Three-D movies are becoming an increasingly
popular tool to engage the public and are effective in widely disseminating
research on galaxy evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will carry out the
following technical tasks:&lt;br/&gt;(1) The Milky Way: By matching simulated
orbits of the Milky Way satellites with HST proper motions and tidal debris, the
PI will derive constraints on the orbital parameters, as well as the initial
stellar (and dark matter) distribution of the Milky Way satellites. The PI will
produce models that are consistent with both the HI and stellar data of our
galaxy, which displays large ripples in the outskirts, a prominent warp, and
vertical waves in the galactic disk.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Probing The Dark Matter Halo:
Dark matter halos evolve as a function of time, and they may have complex
shapes. The PI will determine if the inference of the halo potential from
stellar streams is viable for time-varying potentials. By deconstructing the
hydrodynamical cosmological simulation ERIS, the PI will study if the
distribution of satellites and the morphology of the gas and stellar disk is
representative of the Milky Way or local spirals.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Shaking and
Rattling The Local Spirals: By simulating a wide range of encounters with sub-
halos from cosmological simulations, and mapping to multiple observational
constraints in a statistically robust manner using a Monte Carlo Markov Chain
analysis, the PI will produce realistic mock catalogs and evolutionary histories
of HI disks and their satellite populations.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Strong Spiral Lenses
in HI: As the SWELLS sample is a sufficiently low redshift sample of strong
spiral lenses (z_avg ~ 0.1) showing visible signs of interaction, the PI will
compare and contrast the team's HI analysis and gravitational lensing to derive
two independent constraints on the dark matter distribution.