* 1517522
* Evolution of the mechanism of peptidylglycine-alpha-amidating monooxygenase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* L. Mario Amzel, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,028,700.00

Title: Evolution of the mechanism of peptidylglycine-alpha-amidating
monooxygenase

Peptides are very small proteins made up of short and precise sequences of amino
acid building blocks. Many peptides serve as signaling agents such as hormones
and neurotransmitters in complex multicellular organisms. After synthesis many
of these signaling peptides require further modification for activation. In this
project, the investigator will study the enzymes needed for a specific peptide
modification from several distantly related organisms. The goal of the research
is to identify different structural and chemical changes across the different
organisms that resulted in the gain or the loss of different features of the
enzyme. Determination of the mechanism of this important step in the
modification of peptide signaling molecules and how the mechanism changes in
different organisms will guide the development of new ways of producing
synthetic modified peptides. The work will also lead to a better understanding
of how different enzyme structures can give rise to improved efficiency or
specificity for a chemical reaction. The laboratory of the PI will continue its
efforts to bring the excitement of science to high school and undergraduate
students with emphasis on including underrepresented minorities in the research
programs and STEM education.

Communication between different parts of an organism via secreted peptides is a
widely distributed biological signaling mechanism. Many of these peptides
require amidation at their carboxy terminus for full-activity. Such peptides are
expressed as precursors that, after processing, contain a glycine residue as
their last residue. Oxidative cleavage of the glycine N-C(alpha) bond produces a
des-glycine amidated peptide and glyoxylate. Only one enzyme in the complete
phylogenetic spectrum is known to catalyze this reaction: the bi-functional
peptidylglycine-alpha-amidating monooxygenase. The reaction takes place in two
stages, the hydroxylation of the glycine C(alpha) by peptidyl-glycine-alpha-
hydroxylating monooxygenase, and cleavage of the N-C(alpha) bond by
peptidylglycine-alpha-amidating lyase. This project will study the
peptidylglycine-alpha-amidating monooxygenases from several distantly related
organisms with the goal of determining when in evolution they appeared, while
trying to identify the structural and chemical changes that resulted in the gain
or the loss of different features of the enzyme not critical for the chemical
reaction. Structural and biochemical information obtained by X-ray diffraction,
small angle scattering and kinetic measurements of the proteins from
evolutionarily distant organisms will be used in this work.