* 1517460
* Collaborative Research: A uniform sample of Kepler eclipsing binaries as benchmark stars to constrain stellar models and evolution at the bottom of the main sequence
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,04/30/2019
* Andrej Prsa, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 04/30/2019
* USD 170,000.00

This research program will improve our understanding of low-mass stars (those
with less than 80% of the Sun's mass). The team will obtain extremely precise
measurements of the masses and radii of nearly 200 eclipsing binary stars. These
measurements will drive improvements in theoretical models of stars. These
models are used across a wide range of astrophysical disciplines, and they are
particularly important for characterizing the tremendous number of exoplanets
that astronomers are discovering. Accurate models of stars are needed to
evaluate the habitability of Earth mass planets, and the results from this
program will be particularly timely as the next generation of exoplanet searches
begins explicitly targeting low-mass stars. This Penn State and Villanova
collaboration involves undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers in
all facets of the research, and members of both teams actively participate in
public outreach events.

The primary objective of this program is to measure the mass and radius of
binary stars with precision better than 3%, while also characterizing the stars'
compositions. This measurement precision is necessary to address well recognized
discrepancies for low-mass stars of 5-15% between predictions of current models
and the handful of existing measurements. These measurements are achieved
through the combination of ultra-precise photometry from NASA's Kepler
observatory and extensive high-resolution ground-based spectroscopy from near-
infrared and visible wavelength spectrographs (APOGEE, HYDRA, HRS) that have
been collected by the team. Data are analyzed with cutting-edge algorithms for
light-curve modelling (PHOEBE), multi-dimensional radial velocity measurements
(TODCOR/TRICOR), and Markov Chain Monte Carlo techniques for assessing robust
and repeatable parameters and parameter uncertainties. Results from this program
will more than double the number of low-mass stars with both precision mass and
radius measurements, and with spectroscopically determined compositions.