* 1517273
* Collaborative Research: Development of Novel Two-photon Fluorescence Polymer Probes for High Resolution Deep Tissue Intravital Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Kevin Belfield, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 305,057.00

1403525/1403535 Kevin D. Belfield, University of Central Florida Komatsu,
Masanobu, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute Development of Novel Two-
photon Fluorescence Polymer Probes for High Resolution Deep Tissue Intravital
Imaging

Significance Biophotonic materials and processes are fast becoming pervasive in
many new and emerging technologies from telecommunications to biomedical
imaging, technologies that have far reaching impact on society. In vivo imaging,
coupled with efficient multifunctional nanoprobes, promises to
transformationally impact the field of nanomedicine and diagnostics in a manner
that may have profound effects on societal well being. Two-photon fluorescence
microscopy (2PFM) for deep tissue imaging is a developing technology with unique
subcellular resolution. To take full advantage of 2PFM, fluorescence probes with
high two-photon absorption (2PA) cross-sections and high fluorescence quantum
yields are critical all the while being nontoxic and heavy-metal free. The
future of nanomedicine and diagnostics lies in the development of
multifunctional nanoplatforms that combine both highly specific targeting and
efficient imaging functionality, facilitating temporal and spatial site-specific
imaging, not in carefully controlled cell culture but in vivo in living tissue.
This highly interdisciplinary proposal aims to develop advanced polymer-based
probes for in vivo 2PFM angiogenesis imaging. In vivo 2PFM may provide real-
time, minimally invasive monitoring of tumor progression, a tumor's response to
anti-cancer therapies, and wound healing in much greater detail than is
currently known. This project constitutes an excellent platform for
interdisciplinary research training and education in advanced materials and
microscopy techniques. Students that are traditionally underrepresented in
science and engineering will be especially encouraged to participate in this
project. There will be strong international engagement through Belfield's
participation in the European Commission's FP7 Marie Curie Actions program,
supporting the development of an interdisciplinary-trained, diverse, globally
adept, highly-skilled workforce.

Technical Description Few efforts have been reported on approaches to push the
limits and improve the contrast and quality of two-photon fluorescence
microscopy (2PFM) imaging in tissue. In this proposal, we propose to
dramatically improve probe performance and targeting selectivity in 2PFM imaging
through controlled multivalency, integrating multiple highly efficient 2PA,
near-IR emitting fluorophores and vectors that target specific biomarkers in a
polymeric nanoplatform. This approach is expected to enhance cellular
interaction through increased avidity and bioavailability due to the small size
and biocompatibility of the nanoprobe. We propose a polymeric nanoplatform
approach to prepare well-defined probes that provide high local fluorophore
concentration to achieve high contrast imaging and multiple targeting moieties
on the same polymer chain to enhance avidity, hence reducing the dose needed.
This is expected to provide optical sectioning with subcellular resolution from
deeper within tissue and make it possible to track biologically important
events, such as sprouting of vessel tip cells, in three dimensions. Tumor
angiogenesis is a complex biological process that can only be studied in living
animals. However, techniques for the study of tumor angiogenesis in vivo are
acutely lacking. We will push the limits of in vivo 2PFM by studying
angiogenesis and vascular cell growth and movement, processes important for the
pathogenesis of a number of diseases, while helping us gain a better
understanding of the biology of tumor angiogenesis.