* 1517824
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Nearest Stars on Solar System Scales
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Elliott Horch, Southern Connecticut State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2019
* USD 335,326.00

This project will explore the environments of more than 2000 of the nearest star
systems to the Sun. The objectives are to (a) discover how unusual our Sun is in
its stellar solitude, (b) understand how many stars of different types are
multiples, (c) provide fundamental statistics that will drive our knowledge of
how stars form, and (d) provide a list of stars where analogues of our Solar
System might be found. The project allows us to place our own Sun in context in
our Galaxy, answering the broad question, "How does our Sun compare to other
stars?" It will also provide important information about the likelihood of
habitable worlds. The project provides opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate student training at both institutions, each of which includes
significant fractions of minority students. Both institutions will develop
supplemental observing programs for students and general public using local
facilities, and they will integrate these with their educational programs.

Two high-resolution imaging surveys will be completed using the Differential
Speckle Survey Instrument (DSSI), a unique speckle imaging system that provides
diffraction-limited imaging in two colors simultaneously. Observations will
primarily be taken at Lowell Observatory's 4.3-meter Discovery Channel Telescope
and at the Gemini North 8.1-meter Telescope. The first survey will target more
than 1500 stars within 25 parsecs with V magnitudes brighter than 16. Observing
nearby stars with DSSI will enable mapping of their stellar environments down to
separations smaller than the distance of Mercury to the Sun, even at the horizon
of the sample. The results will provide crucial insight into the star formation
process, and the statistics of stellar multiplicity will be the benchmark for
other types of multiplicity studies, with an emphasis on the Solar System scales
crucial for planet formation. The second survey will target more than a thousand
K-dwarfs within 50 parsecs in an equatorial sample that can be observed from
both the northern and southern hemispheres. Incorporating other techniques
together with DSSI images, these stars will be surveyed for companions down to
Jovian masses to provide a unique data set of companions spanning a mass range
of 1000 for this specific spectral type, providing a legacy data set that can be
referenced for decades to come.