* 1517638
* Kinetic and Multiscale Simulations of Particle Acceleration in Astrophysical Shocks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Anatoly Spitkovsky, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2019
* USD 457,936.00

This project will study how particles get accelerated to high speeds in
astrophysical sources, focusing on a special mechanism known as Fermi
acceleration. Although it is believed that a considerable fraction of the energy
in material flowing around pulsars, supernovae, and other strong sources, can be
converted into very fast particles, which are identified by the patterns of
radiation they give off, the mechanism is not well understood. After this study,
the Fermi mechanism will be much better characterized, and may be tightly
constrained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acceleration of particles in collisionless
shocks is at the heart of most models of non-thermal phenomena in the Universe.
Observations of synchrotron emission suggest that such shocks in pulsar wind
nebulae, in jets from active galactic nuclei, in gamma-ray bursts, and in
supernova remnants, can convert a significant fraction of the flow energy into
relativistic particles with power-law spectra. However, although it is usually
invoked as the cause, the conditions for operation of the first-order Fermi
mechanism and its efficiency are not understood from first principles. This
project will construct a self-consistent theory of shock acceleration by
performing large-scale multidimensional particle-in-cell and hybrid simulations
of astrophysical collisionless shocks, and study the microphysics of plasma
instabilities, particle scattering, and magnetic field generation, necessary to
calibrate nonlinear diffusive shock acceleration theory. Specific questions
include: 1) the criteria for existence of shock acceleration, and its
efficiency; 2) how accelerated particles influence shock structure and
evolution; 3) the proton and electron spectra generated in realistic shocks. The
tools developed during this work will enable multi-scale modeling of shocks and
will derive particle spectra in the nonlinear regime from first principles. This
research will provide predictive power to the hypothesis that Fermi acceleration
in collisionless shocks is the origin of high-energy cosmic rays and non-thermal
particles, and could place tight constraints on the models of magnetization and
on the composition of astrophysical outflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because Fermi
acceleration is a fundamental process in astrophysics, the results will be of
value to observers, experimentalists, and theorists studying high-energy
astrophysical and cosmological sources, and are even applicable to shocks in the
solar system. The findings will guide a new generation of laboratory
experiments. The work will involve postdocs, and graduate and undergraduate
students, training them in numerical modeling and visualization, and thus
preparing them for careers in science and technology fields, where large-scale
computing increasingly plays an important role. An interactive plasma physics
tutorial will be developed to bring intuitive understanding of these thorny
subjects to specialists and the general public alike.