* 1517456
* Modeling Steep Surface Waves Evolving Under Wind Forcing and Energy Dissipation Due to Wave Breaking
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Wooyoung Choi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 234,205.00

Ocean waves play an important role in many areas of science and engineering,
notably climatology, meteorology, ocean environment, marine transport, and
coastal engineering. They are generated by drawing energy from wind, evolve
through nonlinear wave interactions, and are eventually dissipated by wave
breaking. When fully developed, ocean waves have wavelengths that span scales
from centimeters (capillary waves) to kilometers (tsunami). Computationally
resolving models for ocean waves over such a wide range of spatial scales is an
enormous challenge, and it is impractical to solve the full hydrodynamic
equations over a large surface area of the ocean. These facts have produced an
increasing interest in developing a novel and efficient computational tool that
can simultaneously treat wind forcing, breaking wave dissipation, and nonlinear
wave interactions. This research project aims to contribute to the development
of such a tool. Once it is developed, the computational model would be useful
for researchers working on physical oceanographic processes and climate change,
because the transfer of energy and momentum across the air-sea boundary is
fundamental to their work. A graduate student is involved in the project.

To predict accurately the evolution of nonlinear surface waves, the investigator
and his colleagues develop a reliable and efficient phase-resolving wave model
combined with theoretical models of wave breaking and wind-wave interaction.
Through numerical simulations using a pseudo-spectral method and controlled
laboratory experiments, the predictive capability of the integrated wave model
is examined for steep surface waves evolving under wind forcing. To achieve this
goal, a robust breaking criterion is first determined though numerical
simulations of the wave model and then is confirmed with laboratory experiments.
Then, through viscous boundary layer analyses at the deformed surface of steep
waves, the viscous energy dissipation rate and the air pressure distribution
over the free surface, as well as a criterion of airflow separation, is
identified in terms of local flow and wave characteristics. By coupling the
results of the boundary layer analyses with measurements of wave breaking and
wind-wave interaction experiments, the energy dissipation and wind forcing terms
are determined and integrated into the wave prediction model. Finally, the
resulting wave model is validated by comparing its numerical solutions with
laboratory experiments.