* 1517237
* New Probabilistic Methods for Observational Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Hogg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2019
* USD 328,312.00

Future astronomical surveys will be producing such enormous quantities of data
that new analysis methods are becoming imperative. Especially when large
quantities of information must be distilled into theoretical insights, and the
individual items are themselves actually of less certainty, a probability-based
approach offers impressive advantages. This project will generate toolkits to
implement such novel approaches to the extraction of knowledge from
overwhelmingly large data sets. With the potential to transform the way science
is done both in cosmology and in other areas under threat of being swamped with
data, the impact of this work cannot be overestimated. The methods will both use
and propagate collaborations with applied mathematics that make the impossible
possible.

New cosmological surveys will require measurement of smaller signals using
larger numbers of galaxies which are individually observed at lower confidence.
This will require data analyses that are as information-preserving as possible.
This project will create new methods for cosmological data analysis that permit
inferences using not lossy, derived data products, such as galaxy catalogs,
best-fit redshifts, or correlation function point estimates, but something much
closer to the original imaging and spectroscopic data. These techniques will be
informed by the principles of probabilistic inference and applied-mathematics
technology. The work creates three related toolsets. Toolset 1 is for
reconstruction and marginalization of cosmological density fields, which could
be the mass, galaxy, or neutral-gas density field, or the two-dimensional
projected mass density. Toolset 2 is for cosmological inference that makes
proper use of probabilistic information about galaxy and quasar redshifts,
improving probabilistic redshift information, and providing informative
imputation of missing redshifts, thereby producing predictions and tools for
smaller-scale scientific questions. Toolset 3 is for propagation of
probabilistic image-level quantities such as galaxy shapes and the point-spread
function, into weak-lensing studies of large-scale structure. This will permit
inference from survey data conditional priors over galaxy shapes, and use them
in a justified forward-modeling measurement of the shear field and cosmological
parameters. The toolsets from this project will be the first practical methods
for cosmological inference and large-scale structure measurement that can make
full and proper, justified, use of probabilistic outputs. For the first time, it
will be possible to perform simultaneous inference or refinement of catalog-
level properties along with large-scale structure and cosmological inferences.
Simultaneous inference will significantly reduce statistical biases in
cosmological measurements, and also reduce variance in catalog-level quantities.

The toolsets will be papers and methods but also open-source codebases, with
benefits beyond cosmology. These developments will help create standards for
generating and delivering probabilistic outputs. The research will reach
populations inside and outside academia by producing pedagogical papers on
inference, data analysis, and computational statistics in the physical sciences.