* 1517080
* Moduli spaces of complex dynamical systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2014,10/31/2017
* Laura DeMarco, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 10/31/2017
* USD 237,767.00

Polynomials and rational functions of a single variable provide basic examples
of non-invertible dynamical systems. Even the simplest families of examples
exhibit complicated dynamical behavior; the most famous is the family of complex
quadratic polynomials, where the Mandelbrot set continues to baffle researchers.
The primary goal of this project is to explore the dynamical moduli spaces of
polynomials and rational functions. The projects proposed (both the questions
and the proposed solution strategies) combine ingredients from complex analysis
and arithmetic or algebraic geometry. In one direction, the PI aims to study the
distribution of postcritically-finite rational maps within the moduli space. In
joint work with Matthew Baker, the PI has formulated a dynamical analogue to the
Andre-Oort conjecture in arithmetic geometry. Questions of this type are not
only analogies: for example, the PI aims to use dynamical techniques to recover
a result by Masser and Zannier about torsion points in families of elliptic
curves. The main tools are recent developments in analysis and dynamics on a
Berkovich analyticspace. In a slightly different direction, the PI is studying
bifurcation sets and bifurcation measures in distinguished subvarieties within
the moduli space. Here the techniques are predominantly analytic. New questions
have stemmed from experimental work, using the new computer program Dynamics
Explorer developed by Boyd &amp; Boyd. The PI is also interested in classical
problems about the existence and classification of symmetries of rational
functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last five or ten years,
"algebraic dynamics" has become an extremely active area of research; the
questions have become more refined as senior researchers enter the subject with
very different backgrounds and we uncover connections to many areas of
mathematics. Roughly speaking, algebraic dynamics is the study of dynamical
systems that preserve an underlying algebraicstructure. Such systems arise
naturally in applications (for example, the one-dimensional logistic family is
algebraic), and they play a role in the analysis of arithmetic objects studied
by number theorists (for example, in defining height functions associated to
arithmetic varieties). The PI is actively involved in the exchange of
mathematical ideas between number theorists and dynamicists. On one hand, her
questions are about the fundamental stability of dynamical systems: under what
conditions is a system insensitive to small perturbations? On the other hand,
the special class of dynamical systems she studies exhibits a rich algebraic
structure, bringing dynamical features into a long history of arithmetic
geometry. Finally, the project has an experimental component that works very
well with students and junior researchers; the PI is actively involved in
research projects and training programs for undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral researchers.