* 1517528
* ELUCID - Exploring the Local Universe with Reconstructed Initial Density Field
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Houjun Mo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 08/31/2018
* USD 374,078.00

The nearby universe shows clumpy structures, such as stars and planetary
systems, galaxies, and clusters of galaxies, arranged in a beautiful yet complex
cosmic web. The distant, early universe appears much smoother. The question of
how clumpy structures formed from a smooth early universe remains an exciting
astrophysical mystery. Furthermore, the interaction of galaxies and their
surrounding intergalactic medium is also a matter of intense current research.
This project addresses important questions about the formation of structure in
the universe over 14 billions years of cosmic history. The researchers will seek
to answer questions that include: What drives the formation of the large-scale
structure we observe and how do galaxies like the Milky Way form and evolve in
the cosmic web?  Are simple physical laws as we understand today able
to reproduce the complex structures in the vast cosmos, as well as their
interaction with each other? The project will also support the work and
professional training of a graduate student in astrophysics, parallel computing,
and computer visualization. Movies about the time evolution of matter (both dark
and visible) in the universe will be made to allow the public to witness how
simple physical principles can be used to reproduce the complex structures in
the vast cosmos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will develop a new method,
using numerical simulations and semi-analytical modeling, to reconstruct initial
conditions from which the cosmic density field in the low-redshift universe has
evolved; simulate the cosmic density field in both dark matter and gas using the
reconstructed initial conditions; and study the relationship between galaxies,
dark halos, dark matter, and the intergalactic medium to test theories of galaxy
formation. The accuracy of this new method and its reliability will be
quantified using detailed numerical simulations. Simulations will be run
multiple times to explore cosmic variance. An output from this work will be a
mock SDSS catalog, available to explore the comparison between observations and
theory directly. The results of this research will provide insight into the
processes that shape galaxies and large-scale structures, as well as the
relationship between galaxies, and their environments and dark matter.