* 1517842
* Collaborative Research: From Biology to Mechanism: Harnessing Compliance in Locomoting Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Anette Hosoi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 240,000.00

Inventors have long viewed the agility and grace of animals that crawl, swim,
and fly in all environments with awe and envy. However, the ability to replicate
the versatility, stability, and efficiency of biological locomotion in
engineered systems has eluded scientists and engineers alike. This project will
identify fundamental principles of locomotion, with an emphasis on the role of
one of the most fundamental biological attributes, compliance. Compliance is
ubiquitous in biological locomotion, appearing in diverse forms of life from the
elastic ribbed tail of a fish, to the membrane wings of an insect, to the sinewy
muscular body of a snake; when a human turns a door knob or picks up a spoon --
tasks that are nontrivial for robotic systems -- they can rely on compliance in
the hand to passively adjust to small disturbances and uncertainties in the
environment. This project seeks to bridge the gap between classical studies in
rigid body mechanics that have long been the purview of the discipline of
robotics, and compliant biological strategies for locomotion. The research will
rationalize compliant strategies and structures that appear in nature. This
knowledge can in turn be used to design new classes of versatile compliant
machines, which may include robust strategies for locomotion and manipulation in
robotic systems and new compliant mechanisms for harvesting energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, which lies at the intersection of controls
and the mechanics of continuously deformable systems, will develop two new
mathematical approaches to tame the complexity associated with optimization of
compliant systems. The first takes its roots in geometric mechanics, which has
already proven effective in the study of locomotion of simple systems. The
second inverts the optimization problem by first solving for optimal kinematics
(e.g. optimal stroke patterns for swimmers) with a dynamic cost function, and
subsequently inverting the optimal kinematics to find the associated dynamic
parameters (such as bending stiffness). In addition to the development of these
two new mathematical tools, the project will investigate the role of compliance
within the context of different biological locomotion modes. Through decades of
cumulative research, the scientific community has established a reasonable
understanding of the role of compliance in isolated applications, such as legged
walking and running, but comparatively little is known in terms of how this
concept extends to other modes such as crawling, swimming, and insect flight.
This research will address the issue through investigations of the underlying
physical principles that motivate the form and physiology of each of these
systems. However, the greatest contribution will come through the amalgamation
of these results. By developing new insights across multiple locomotion modes,
this project aims to extend the findings into a generalized framework for
compliance and locomotion. This framework will then serve as a jumping off point
for engineers, who can situate their own systems within a greater map of
compliant design methodologies.