* 1517113
* The First Multi-Object Reverberation Mapping Survey: Transforming  Our Knowledge of Distant Black Hole Demographics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Donald Schneider, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2019
* USD 336,508.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. One important aspect of understanding galaxy formation and evolution
is to study supermassive black holes (SMBHs) at the centers of galaxies and
active galactic nuclei (AGNs). The investigators in this project will use a
pioneering new data set acquired through the Sloan Digital Sky Survey multi-
object reverberation mapping project (SDSS-RM) to transform our knowledge of
black hole demographics and the physics of AGNs across the observable Universe.
This project will yield the first set of reliable reverberation-mapping (RM)
black hole masses (MBH) that includes targets at very large distances from Earth
(with redshifts z &gt; 0.3); these RM results will allow us to investigate
whether SMBH growth leads or lags galaxy star formation and to more accurately
characterize the physics regulating the growth and feedback of
AGNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the investigators will use SDSS-RM data
to design and execute a summer research program for high school students
participating in Penn State's Summer Research Experience in the Eberly College
of Science. This program is operated in collaboration with Penn State's Upward
Bound Math and Science center and targets students from underserved school
districts in Pennsylvania. The investigators will provide low-income students
with the opportunity to interact with scientists and to learn basic astronomy
data analysis. This program will provide mentoring experience for postdocs, who
will supervise the Penn State student leading the workshop. This Penn State
student will in turn gain experience by mentoring the high school students
participating in the program. Both faculty collaborators will mentor the
participating postdocs; this will give them the opportunity to teach,
strategically plan for future career goals, and become leaders in large-scale
time-domain spectroscopic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
use the SDSS-RM data to accomplish the following: (1) Measure black hole masses
for 100 quasars, tripling the existing sample size and expanding it to cover the
broad range in quasar parameter space missed by previous RM surveys (in
redshift, luminosity, and emission-line properties), (2) Employ these black hole
masses to improve substantially our understanding of black-hole/galaxy scaling
relations used to characterize supermassive black hole (SMBH) mass demographics,
and (3) Characterize the structure and physics of the broad line-emitting region
using the responses of various emission lines and velocity-resolved
reverberation methods. Unlike previous work, which was limited by highly
uncertain MBH values that resulted in largely unconstrained estimates of any
possible evolution of SMBH-galaxy relationships, the SDSS-RM data set will
distinguish between causal or coincidental coevolution by enabling the first
study of evolution in the intrinsic scatter of the MBH-host galaxy correlations.
The response of the broad line region across various emission lines will provide
crucial insights regarding the physics governing and regulating AGN and
SMBH/galaxy evolution.