* 1517823
* CNH-L: Linking Land-Use Decision Making, Water Quality, and Lake Associations to Understand Human-Natural Feedbacks in Lake Catchments
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Christopher Duffy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,799,931.00

People around the world benefit greatly from the critical services provided by
freshwater lakes, such as drinking water, recreation, and fisheries. However,
human activities can contribute to pollution and the growth of harmful algal
blooms that degrade the lake waters that people rely upon and enjoy. This can
generate a strong incentive for behavioral change. For example, citizen-driven
lake associations often form in response to deteriorating water quality, and are
becoming increasingly effective in driving changes in land management and
policies that greatly improve lake environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines the linkages between land use, lake water quality, and local
communities in three contrasting U.S. lake systems. Insights from these lake
systems will in turn inform the study of human-natural system dynamics across
thousands of other lakes throughout the northeastern and midwestern U.S. An
understanding of these relationships and feedbacks will help inform the
development of effective programs and policies to protect and enhance lake water
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the nature and extent of
linkages among human and natural systems in lake catchments. The project will
develop a novel coupling framework that links process-based human and natural
system models to trace the effects of land-use decisions on nutrient fluxes
through lake ecosystems; represent how hydrological and limnological processes
transform nutrient loads into changes in the water quality metrics valued by
people; and determine how water quality changes feed back into human decision
making by affecting property values and collective action by citizen groups. For
three contrasting catchments in the northeastern and midwestern U.S., the
project explores these linkages by deriving essential management variables that
describe the critical drivers of human-natural system dynamics and the
relationships between those drivers. These results provide an integrated
foundation for a suite of statistical approaches that will be used to scale up
and extrapolate the results to a diverse set of lake catchments representative
of continental-scale gradients. These complementary activities will generate
insight into broad-scale human-natural system dynamics, extending scientific
understanding to enhance decision making to protect the valuable natural systems
provided by lakes.