* 1517365
* Collaborative Research:  Up-scaling from Leaf to Canopy the Aerosol-sized Particle Collection Mechanism Within a Non-uniform Canopy Medium
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Sara Pryor, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2016
* USD 54,170.00

Atmospheric aerosol particle concentrations represent one the largest
uncertainties in understanding of both historical and possible future climate
forcing, and even regional atmospheric chemistry models exhibit considerable
discrepancies with in situ observations of particle size distribution and
composition in part because of the complexities of particle dynamics, including
dry deposition. Given the expansive forest cover and relatively high particle
deposition velocities over forests, the role of forested ecosystems in removing
aerosol particles is drawing increased attention in a number of scientific
disciplines and regulatory agencies. However, significant uncertainties remain
due to: (1) difficulties associated with field measurements of particle size
resolved fluxes and mean concentrations, (2) lack of detailed and simultaneous
measurements of the canopy medium and, more importantly, foliage surface
characteristics, and (3) challenges in describing all the main features of the
transporting agent (turbulence) within and immediately above the canopy. This
project will address three key aspects of particle deposition onto forested
surfaces using a combined experimental and modeling approach at multiple
hierarchical scales (leaf-to-canopy) by exploring: (1) the relative importance
of, and correct descriptions of, the foliage collection mechanisms at the leaf
scale, (2) deposition flux partitioning between foliar and non-foliar elements,
and (3) up-scaling results from aspects [1] and [2] to the entire
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Canopy scale size-resolved particle fluxes and
mean concentration profiles will be measured in a diverse array of forested
sites (conifers and broadleaf) endowed with "idealized" micrometeorological
conditions and in controlled experiments in an environmental chamber. Findings
from these experiments will guide the development of new particle collection
schemes at the leaf level by accounting for leaf surface properties, turbo- and
thermophoretic components. Also, how to upscale these results to the canopy
level from measurements that can now be acquired from remote sensing platforms
(e.g. leaf area density) using multi-level and particle size-resolved canopy
turbulence closure models will be explored. The model results will be evaluated
at three forested sites using size-resolved mean particle concentration profiles
and two-level eddy-covariance particle flux systems positioned above the canopy
and in the understory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
improvements in process-level understanding of particle dry deposition and for
mechanistic descriptions suitable for application in a range of numerical models
from earth system models to regional scale air quality models. To facilitate
maximal use of the research products derived, the data sets and the models will
be made publically accessible via a project website. The project will support
one post-doctoral scholar and one graduate student, who will have opportunity to
engage with the broader scientific community via interaction with the BEACHON
(Biosphere-atmosphere Exchange of Energy, Aerosols, Carbon, H2O, Organics &amp;
Nitrogen) research team and European collaborators. Opportunities for
undergraduate students will be offered within the BSES (Bachelor of Science in
Environmental Science, http://www.indiana.edu/~bses/) program to undertake their
capstone research experiences.