* 1517295
* Allosteric elements in the superfamily of small GTPases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Carla Mattos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 926,863.00

Title: Allosteric elements in the superfamily of small
GTPases&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Small GTPases are proteins involved in
virtually all aspects of cellular function, from the control of cell
proliferation, regulation of cell death, motility, transport of membrane
vesicles containing molecular cargo within the cell and transport of molecules
between the cell cytoplasm and nucleus. Their activity is regulated by
conversion of a molecule (GTP) bound to their active site to GDP and inorganic
phosphate. They belong to a group of over 150 proteins classified into 5
families: Ras, Rho, Rab, Arf and Ran. The goal of this research project is to
determine how representative proteins in the Ras, Rho and Arf families, protein
families that are found on the cell membrane, have evolved specific structural
details associated with their distinct functions. The investigators will test
how interactions with the cell membrane affect the function of these small
GTPases. This will be done using a multidisciplinary approach based on
complementary state of the art biophysical and biochemical experiments designed
to elucidate the fundamental molecular mechanisms through which these proteins
work. In addition to continuing to promote diverse laboratory and departmental
environments in which this project will be conducted, there will be a new Future
Faculty Fellowship mentoring program at the university level associated with the
ADVANCE program at Northeastern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins in the Ras
superfamily of GTPases (Small GTPases) are involved in vastly diverse functions
in the cell, where they work through a tightly regulated mechanism of switching
from an active GTP-bound state to an inactive GDP-bound state. There is now
substantial evidence that interaction with the membrane is an integral part of
the regulatory mechanism through allosteric modulation linking membrane-
interacting hot spots to the active site. In this project, investigators aim to
determine the nature of these interactions and to map the allosteric pathways in
three representative members of the superfamily: HRas, RhoA and Arf1. The
investigators hypothesize that specific membrane elements play a key role in
regulating the function of G-proteins across most branches of the superfamily.
They will will test this hypothesis by using a series of phospholipid head group
mimics to determine the binding specificities of membrane components to HRas,
RhoA and Arf1 and by studying the effects of strategically designed mutants on
the conformational ensemble of states and associated hydrolysis rates. This will
be done using a combination of X-ray crystallography, hydrolysis rate
measurements, solution scattering experiments in the wide angle regime (WAXS)
and accelerated MD (aMD) simulations, each method providing a perspective that
together will lead to a mechanistic view of regulatory mechanisms that have thus
far been unexplored within the superfamily.