* 1517629
* Collaborative Research: The Ever-Changing Network: How Changes in Architecture Shape Neural Computations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Kresimir Josic, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,445.00

Our brains are constantly changing. Experiences and memories leave their
imprints on connections between neurons. Understanding this process is
fundamental to understanding how the brain works. While this question has been
of central importance to neuroscience for decades, at this moment researchers
are well positioned to make significant progress -- new recording devices and
imaging techniques are revealing the activity and changes within the networks of
the brain at unprecedented scale and resolution. Sound mathematical models are
essential to keep up with the mounting avalanche of data. The goal of this
project is to develop mathematical tools to assist with improving understanding
how networks of neurons are shaped by experiences. Developing this theory is
crucial for understanding learning, as well as associated disorders. The project
will focus on how learning improves the brain's ability to make decisions and
store memories. Graduate students and postdocs joining this project will be part
of an established, interdisciplinary mathematics research community. Trainees
will gain a wide perspective of mathematical neuroscience through integrated
research at three institutions, including extensive visits among them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project builds on earlier results of this
team to address a central challenge in the mathematical analysis of
biophysically realistic neuronal networks: How brain activity changes brain
structure over time. Understanding neural computation demands a description of
how network dynamics co-evolves with network architecture. The research team
will address this challenge by answering specific questions about the interplay
between spatiotemporal patterns of neural activity, the attendant changes in
network architectures, and the resulting neural computations. This project
focuses on two main questions. First, what mathematical techniques can describe
the co-evolution of network dynamics and network connectivity toward stable
assemblies of neurons? To address this question this project will build a theory
describing how global network structure evolves under the dynamics of
biophysically realistic plasticity rules that operate on the scale of individual
spikes and synapses. Analysis of these models requires novel multiscale and
averaging methods. The resulting equations allow analysis of the stability of
network architectures and their dependence on stimulus drive. With these
results, the second question can be addressed: How does network plasticity
create spatiotemporal dynamics that support the basic building blocks of neural
computation? Models to understand how plasticity forms networks whose dynamics
underlie specific operations on incoming stimuli will be developed to address
this question. The mechanism by which long-term plasticity can reshape the
connectivity of a network to encode a precise temporal sequence of events will
also be investigated.