* 1517231
* Formation and biological activity of functional protein aggregates
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Eric Ross, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2019
* USD 595,510.00

Title: Formation and biological activity of functional protein aggregates

The interior of cells contains high concentrations of protein. Cells have
complex systems to prevent these proteins from aggregating. However, recent
evidence has shown that the aggregation of specific proteins is used to regulate
various important cellular functions. In this research project, the
investigators will use a combination of genetic, biochemical and computer
modeling techniques to develop improved methods to predict this particular
protein aggregation, and to examine how such aggregates are used to regulate
cellular functions. This project will offer diverse interdisciplinary training
to junior scientists. A portion of the research will be conducted in the context
of a novel laboratory course, which is designed to be a hybrid of independent
research and traditional laboratory classes. This course will allow students to
generate new, publishable research, but in a sufficiently structured setting to
allow for training of a large number of students. Additionally, the PI will
continue to expand his "Biochemistry is Elementary" outreach program. This
program introduces elementary school students to the scientific process and to
basic concepts in biochemistry using exciting, hands-on activities.

Despite the growing realization of the importance of prions and prion-like
aggregation in normal cellular physiology, the exact basis for and regulation of
these aggregation events are poorly understood. In this project, the
investigators will utilize a combination of genetic, biochemical and computer
modeling techniques to develop improved methods to predict prion-like
aggregation and to examine how prion-like aggregation of RNA binding proteins
affects the formation of cytoplasmic RNA-protein granules. The first goal is to
develop better tools to predict prion aggregation and to predict how protein
modifications affect prion activity. These studies will generate new resources
to facilitate searches for new prion-like elements, and will provide key insight
into the regulation of prion-like aggregation. The second goal of the project is
to examine the role of prion-like domains in the formation of cytoplasmic RNA-
proteins granules. These studies will provide a framework for studying
functional protein aggregation, while offering insight into the role of prion-
like aggregation in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression.