* 1518532
* CNH-L: The Potential for Aquaculture in Lake Victoria and Implications for Wild Fisheries and Fish Commodity Markets
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Leslie Kaufman, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,798,150.00

Aquaculture (farmed fish) surpassed wild capture fisheries as the major source
of fish production to the world in 2014. On one hand, aquaculture promises to
fill the gap left by declining wild fisheries and to provide the world with a
reliable, affordable form of fish. On the other hand, aquaculture can have
negative consequences such as pollution, inequitable distribution of benefits,
and ecological impacts on the wild fish harvested to produce fish feed. These
tradeoffs are becoming increasingly evident around Lake Victoria. In the face of
stagnating wild fisheries in Lake Victoria and a surging human population around
its shores, aquaculture may improve food and livelihood security in Kenya,
Uganda and Tanzania. An international team of researchers from three U.S., one
Canadian, and three African institutions are investigating the potential for
Lake Victoria-based aquaculture and the implications for wild fisheries, global
and local supplies of fish, and regional economic development. Researchers will
investigate how global demand for fish affects local markets and the fishers who
supply them, how the distribution of benefits from aquaculture can be made more
equitable, and how building aquaculture facilities in and near lakes affects the
ecology and economics of wild fisheries. This work fills a critical gap in
knowledge about the links between aquaculture and wild fish, and it will
increase understanding of how emerging markets in developing countries can be
structured to promote sustainability and equitability. Given links between
poverty and political violence, improving food and income security in East
Africa will promote development in a part of the globe with strategic importance
to the United States. This project will also build technical and analytical
capacity at three East African research institutes, train students in socio-
ecological systems modeling, and engage a diverse international,
interdisciplinary research team.

This project investigates the dynamic links between the ecology of Lake Victoria
(a natural system), the economy of its surrounding fisheries (a human system),
and the bridge between these systems created by aquaculture. Within the natural
subsystem, dynamics of fish abundance are regulated by predation, competition,
and lake productivity. Within the human subsystem, dynamics of demand for fish
are driven by local fish consumption and global fish exports. The natural
subsystem supplies fish catch to the human subsystem, and the human subsystem
impacts fisheries through fishing effort. Aquaculture links these systems
through additional production of fish and response to demand. This research will
investigate the effects of aquaculture on wild fisheries and food commodity
markets through an ecosystem accounting model (MIMES) that links lake biological
dynamics with human socio-economic dynamics. New environmental, biological and
socio-economic data will be collected through trawl, acoustic, and
questionnaire-based surveys. New and existing data will be synthesized with GIS.
The expansion of a forecasting model (International Futures or IFs) will
investigate effects of global demand dynamics on our system. Finally, MIMES will
be used to assess scenarios of aquaculture growth and tradeoffs in fish
population dynamics, food security, and income security in the Lake Victoria
basin.