* 1518755
* EAGER:  Engineering the Ionic Polymer Phase Surface Properties in a PEM  Fuel Cell Catalyst Layer
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Trung Nguyen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Nguyen - 1518755

Proton exchange membrane fuel cells, also known as polymer electrolyte membrane
(PEM) fuel cells, are being developed for transport, stationary fuel cell and
portable fuel cell applications. A PEM fuel cell transforms the chemical energy
liberated during the electrochemical reaction of hydrogen and oxygen to
electrical energy, as opposed to the direct combustion of hydrogen and oxygen
gases to produce thermal energy. The structure of their membrane assembly
consists of an anode and a cathode that is separated by an electrolyte that
contains a catalyst. A stream of hydrogen is delivered to the anode side where
it is catalytically split into protons and electrons. The newly formed protons
permeate through the polymer electrolyte membrane to the cathode side. The
electrons travel along an external circuit to the cathode side creating the
current output of the fuel cell. Meanwhile, a stream of oxygen is delivered to
the cathode side where oxygen molecules react with the protons permeating
through the polymer electrolyte membrane and the electrons arriving through the
external circuit to form water molecules. Such fuel cells operate at relatively
low temperatures, are small and lightweight, making them ideal as potential
replacements for internal combustion engines that use fossil fuels as their
energy source. This project is aimed at developing better PEM fuel cells.

High power density operation in PEM fuel cells is often limited by high liquid
water saturation levels in the catalyst layer due to high wettability of the
ionic polymer phase that is added to provide three dimensional ionic access to
the catalyst sites. In this EAGER project a simple approach is proposed based on
a hypothesis generated from recent discoveries on interfacial properties of
fluorocarbon-based ionic polymers. It is that heat treatment at high relative
humidity leads to a polymer surface with a high fraction of sulfonic acid groups
and a high degree of hydrophilicity, while heat treatment at dry conditions
leads to a polymer surface with a small fraction of sulfonic acid groups and a
very high fraction of the hydrophobic PTFE phase. Based on these observations,
it is hypothesized that if the external surface of the ionic polymer coating
located in the pores of the catalyst layers could be made hydrophobic, any water
that is produced at the catalyst surface and diffuses through the polymer
coating to the polymer coating/gas phase interface would bead and move away
without forming a layer over the polymer coating. Therefore, oxygen and hydrogen
gases would have direct access to the ionic polymer phase and catalyst surface.
If this morphology could be achieved the fuel cell performance is expected to be
greatly increased. To test this hypothesis, two tasks are proposed: 1)
Validating the hypothesis that heat treating an ionic polymer (e.g., Nafion) in
a dry or low RH condition will lead to a polymer film with a permanent
hydrophobic external surface and determine the heat treatment conditions that
are optimal for the formation of a permanent hydrophobic external surface; and
2) Confirming that modifying the membrane?s outer surface wetting property does
not affect the proton conductivity within the polymer film, nor does it
adversely affect the polymer/catalyst interface.

If this approach is successful, it could transform water management in PEM fuel
cells and lead to the development of higher performance, lower cost, and more
durable fuel cells. This could accelerate the commercialization of fuel cell
powered vehicles, an energy efficient and environmentally friendly
transportation system. The PI has been actively recruiting students from
different ethnic, racial, gender, geographical, economic and family backgrounds
and has been preparing these students for the global market. The PI will also
organize visits to local elementary schools and middle schools to host
demonstration workshops on fuel cell and other renewable energy sources.