* 1518078
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course:  Frontiers and Techniques in Plant Science
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2018
* USD 311,313.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory course on Frontiers and Techniques in Plant
Science provides opportunities for a diverse group of scientists to learn about
the latest developments and methods that are used for plant science research.
The three-week course offers intensive immersion into the cross-disciplinary,
cutting-edge approaches being used in plant biology research at the interface of
biological and computational sciences. Students who take the course will be
prepared to join the next generation of leaders in interdisciplinary research on
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific content of the course evolves in
parallel to trends in the field; current emphasis is on genomic, evolutionary,
analytical and computational themes using a number of plant models, including
Arabidopsis, maize and tomato. The course format includes lectures, hands-on
laboratories, and informal discussions catalyzed by three instructors and a
cadre of invited lecturers who are leaders in their fields of research. Faced
with high demand for the course, course organizers pay special attention to
enrolling a demographically diverse group of students. Post-course evaluations
by both instructors and students helps to inform decision-making about content
for subsequent years. Past participants have reported high satisfaction with the
course, and long-term follow-up indicates that the course has long-lasting
impact on the careers and research directions of participants.