* 1518145
* Superspace Refinement of Protein Crystals
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Gloria Borgstahl, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 600,949.00

Macromolecular crystallographers visualize in extraordinary detail the large
molecules needed for life, using X-ray diffraction analysis of crystals of these
molecules to determine the locations of each atom in three dimensions, thereby
describing the entire structure of the macromolecule. However, sometimes the
crystals do not form in a way that permits accurate X-ray diffraction and
analysis. The analytical tools to deal with this problem, when it happens, have
not yet been developed, and the goal of this research project is to provide the
methods and computer software needed to study the atomic structure of protein
crystals of this nature. This method will computationally add another (4th)
dimension to the structural analysis permitting "superstructures" of the
molecule to be defined. This highly innovative project will open the field,
permitting others to complete difficult but important multidimensional
crystallography projects. This research will provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students including members of groups underrepresented in science.

This project includes activities that will be beneficial to many areas of the
biological sciences including macromolecular crystallography, cell biology and
DNA repair. The project is focused on the structure determination of
incommensurately modulated protein crystals. The unique diffraction patterns
from modulated crystals contain "off-lattice" satellite reflections next to the
main reflections. The intellectual merits of the proposed activity are
multifold. The first incommensurately modulated protein crystal structures will
be solved and advances will be made to the methodology of macromolecular
crystallography. The main objective of this research is to develop new
macromolecular X-ray crystallographic software for the refinement of
incommensurately modulated crystals in superspace and to apply them to solve
several crystal structures that currently cannot be solved. The methods employed
include protein crystal growth, X-ray diffraction data collection and structure
determination. Innovative approaches to protein crystallography and software
development will be used. Activities will include extensive modification of
crystallography software for the determination of macromolecular structures in
superspace using modulation functions. Simulated data will be used as a test
case. Then the algorithms will be applied to well characterized incommensurately
modulated crystals of profilin:actin, UvsY recombination mediator crystals and
then to many other unsolved modulated crystals. The resulting continuum of
structures within each crystal will be analyzed within the framework of the
current biological/biochemical literature.

This project is supported jointly by the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.