* 1518726
* RUI: Measurement and modeling of rainfall interception loss from Georgia Southern University's urban forest.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Stephen Underwood, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 05/31/2018
* USD 214,572.00

Forest canopy can reduce precipitation reaching the ground by up to 50% through
interception, storage, and evaporation of droplets from leaf and bark surfaces.
This process, called "interception loss," impacts run-off, recharge, flood
flashiness, erosion, etc., and cost of stormwater management. It is not well
understood how canopy structure affects interception loss, particularly in urban
forests. This research addresses this by monitoring interception loss variables
for a common SE US tree species (the loblolly pine) across a natural-to-urban
gradient in forest structure. Interception loss variables monitored include
rainwater stored in and evaporated from the canopy, passing through the canopy
(throughfall), and draining down the stem (stemflow) as well as air temperature,
humidity, wind speed/direction, pressure, and incoming solar radiation during
and after rainfall. These measurements will be related to new, high-resolution,
non-destructive laser-scanning (LiDAR) techniques to address 2 questions: 1) how
do stand structural changes ranging from natural conditions to common urban
conditions affect interception loss processes; and 2) Will LiDAR-measured canopy
structures and interception loss processes improve estimation and prediction of
hydrologic processes and, thereby, improve water management and planning? The
hypothesis is that, because tree stand conditions affect branching and leaf
structures, interception loss and its underlying variables will vary in response
to storm conditions. Inclusion of these responses in common models will have
predictive value for water management concerning shifts in storm conditions .
This is an RUI (Research at Undergraduate Institutions) project that will train
undergraduate students in cutting-edge hydrologic science and be incorporated
into educational outreach efforts reaching thousands of K-12 students,
undergraduate students, high school teachers, and community members. Georgia
Southern University (GSU) has a substantial African American student population
(25.7% and 26.4% of undergraduates in 2012 and 2013), so the project will
provide research experiences to underrepresented groups. Project data will be
used to develop management practices on the GSU campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forest canopy rainfall interception loss (I) is documented
to exert significant influence on run-off, recharge, flood flashiness, erosion
and the cost of stormwater management infrastructure. However, it is not well
understood how the forest canopy structure controls the components of I
(storage, S, and evaporation, E), particularly in urban forests. No existing
study has: 1) compared S and E behavior along a natural-urban forest continuum
of differing canopy architecture or 2) incorporated terrestrial LiDAR (TLiDAR)
measured canopy structures and the interaction of these structures with S and E
dynamics into common I models. This study will do this along a natural-to-urban
forest structure gradient on the Georgia Southern University (GSU) campus using
a regionally dominant species (Pinus taeda, loblolly pine). The study will
couple existing biometeorological monitoring methods (meteorological, stemflow,
and throughfall measurements) with novel terrestrial LiDAR techniques (LaserBark
and L-Architect) to compare S and E in urban forests with directly, non-
destructively measured canopy structural metrics. This addresses two questions:
1) how do across- and within-storm dynamics of S and E vary for 2 urban forest
structures, and how does this compare to natural tree stands, and 2) to what
extent can inclusion of directly-measured canopy structures in urban stands
alter I outputs, parameters, and even parameterizations for the most commonly
used models (i.e., the Gash- and Rutter-type)? These findings will advance
nearly all hydrologic models that simulate or include forest interception
processes. Six undergraduates supported by this proposal will receive
substantial research experiences spanning the breadth of research activities
(including field instrument training, installation, and maintenance; data
collection and processing; modeling and model evaluation; manuscript
preparation; and presentation at national meetings) in a timely and critical
subfield of water resource management. Data will also be used to improve: 1) the
L-Architect model, which is being incorporated into Computree, a tool used by
the Office National des ForÃªts (France) for national improvement of forest
inventories; and 2) the sustainable irrigation practices currently employed on
the GSU campus.