* 1518916
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: Practical Foundations for Networking with Many-Antenna Base Stations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Lin Zhong, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,931,000.00

To meet the exponentially growing demand in mobile data, opening up more
spectrum for data services is not enough. The wireless industry and research
community are desperately searching for technologies that can use spectrum more
efficiently. The trend in wireless networks is reducing cell sizes combined with
increasing number of antennas per device and especially, per base station. In
theory, the efficiency of spectrum use increases proportionally to the number of
base-station antennas; a large number of antennas promises not only a large gain
in spectral efficiency but also a much simplified system. However, it remains an
open question how these theoretical promises can translate into spectral
efficiency gains in practice. Indeed, simply increasing the number of base-
station antennas will break today's network system designs at many places,
across several layers. The goal of this project is to provide the much needed
practical foundations for networking with many-antenna base stations. The
project will not only explore novel approaches toward scaling up the number of
base-station antennas to 10s and even 100s; but also rethink the entire network
architecture exploiting the emergent properties as the number of base-station
antennas grows large. With emphasis on realizable network designs using the NSF
CRI-funded ArgosNet testbed, the project team will work closely with our
corporate partners to ensure that project outcomes impact the next-generation of
wireless networks. The project will establish a unique inter-university
education and research program, that will involve both undergraduate students
and underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Toward providing the
practical foundations for many-antenna MIMO networks, the project goal will be
innovations in three related thrusts. (i) Scalable Control and Coordination: the
project will develop scalable designs of control and coordination functions for
multi-user multi-input, multi-output (MU-MIMO) networks. In particular, it will
design a suite of protocols for network-wide CSI collection that significantly
reduce its overhead. (ii) Scalable Resource Allocation. The project will develop
novel resource allocation solutions for many- antenna MIMO networks in order to
support both high data rates and low-latency requirements. It will contribute a
novel scalable scheduling framework that use slow-time-scale information or
statistical channel information and design scheduling policies based on MIMO
rateless codes. (iii) Empirical Foundations from Measurements. The project will
perform previously impossible real-time measurements of MU-MIMO channels in
order to understand channel correlation, variation and reciprocity and their
relationships with spectrum band, mobility, and hardware impairment. In
particular, the project will derive novel models, reciprocity calibration
methods, and novel channel state representations that will power research in
network designs.