* 1518878
* NeTS: Large: Measuring and Modeling Internet Choke Points as Threats to Online Freedom
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Stephanie Forrest, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,400,000.00

Pressing policy questions with respect to Internet chokepoint, such as questions
about Internet balkanization or the effects that a specific policy might have,
are difficult to answer for two reasons. First, the data available are typically
limited to a single country or small cross-section of the Internet for a short
period of time. Second, the data do not lend themselves well to simple analysis
such as averages or direct comparisons. Research is needed that bridges the gap
between collecting long-term, wide-scale data and answering the ever-evolving
high level questions that policy makers have.

This project develops advanced capabilities for measuring Internet chokepoints
and analyzing and modeling the data in a way that informs real policy questions.
This project is carrying out Internet chokepoint measurements longitudinally and
on a global scale, in multiple layers of the network stack including both TCP/IP
layer filtering and filtering in social media. The project also studies the role
of tunnels and network virtualization in how different countries and
organizations implement chokepoints in order to have central locations for
implementing policy. In order to accomplish these goals, the project is
developing advanced TCP/IP side channel techniques for measuring TCP/IP layer
filtering and understanding network topology, novel inference algorithms and
natural language processing techniques to discern subtle manipulations of social
media, and robust modeling techniques based on Agent Based modeling to analyze
the data in a meaningful way.

In terms of broader impacts, the project will provide new capabilities: (a) to
inform policy makers about violations or threats to digital speech freedom, and
(b) to advise democratic and anti-chokepoint efforts on how to circumvent
chokepoints and limit retributions to citizens around the world. All source code
developed as part of this project will be released under a GNU Public License
(GPL) license, and the datasets will be made publicly available. A key part of
the proposed project is mentorship of graduate and undergraduate researchers in
all aspects of research, and recruitment and outreach to middle- and high-school
students in New Mexico. The University of New Mexico is both a Carnegie RU/VH
Very High Research Activity University and a HACU Hispanic Serving Institution
as well as an EPSCoR state. This puts UNM in a unique position to involve groups
that are underrepresented in computer science, and truly disadvantaged
economically, in world-class Internet measurement research.