* 1518263
* Collaborative Research: First Light and Reionization with Lyman Alpha Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Bahram Mobasher, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 07/31/2018
* USD 86,894.00

The team will use ground-based telesopes, kitted out with special purpose
filters, to hunt for the most distant galaxies in the&lt;br/&gt;Universe. These
galaxies were the first to form and are probably responsible for radically
transforming the matter in the young&lt;br/&gt;Universe from a neutral to an
ionized state. That state-altering transition sent the young Universe down a
path that led to the rich panoply of galaxies, stars, and planets in today's
mature Universe. The data acquired for the research will exhibit
rich&lt;br/&gt;patterns in the strength of the signal as a function of its
electromagnetic frequency. As part of a novel outreach effort, the team will
sonify these data, that is, convert them to audible frequencies and imprint them
with rich patterns in the loudness of the signal. This allows the human ear to
"detect" the most distant galaxies known. MP3 files will be developed and
released along with explanatory material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the
project is to investigate when and how the early Universe became reionized, a
key unsolved problem in cosmology. A&lt;br/&gt;staged observational approach
will be taken. In the first stage, data from narrow-band surveys will be
acquired to find candidate&lt;br/&gt;Lyman-alpha-emitting galaxies at redshifts
of 7.7 and 8.8. In the second stage, spectroscopic follow-up of the candidates
will be done&lt;br/&gt;to confirm their high redshifts and form a luminosity
function of Lyman-alpha-emitting galaxies. That function will yield constraints
on&lt;br/&gt;the degree of ionization of the intergalactic medium (IGM) at those
redshifts. The team pioneered this luminosity-function approach,
using&lt;br/&gt;it to show for the first time that the IGM is largely ionized at
a redshift of 6.5. The team's new work will place the first
constrains&lt;br/&gt;on the degree of ionization of the IGM at even more extreme
redshifts. The spectroscopy will also be used to study other
IGM&lt;br/&gt;properties. The spectroscopic data acquired for the research will
exhibit rich patterns in the strength of the signal as a function of its
electromagnetic frequency. As part of a novel outreach effort, the team will
sonify these data, that is, convert them to audible frequencies and imprint them
with rich patterns in the loudness of the signal. This allows the human ear to
emulate a spectrograph. MP3 files will be developed and released along with
explanatory material.