* 1518894
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identity Work, Stigma, and Status among Wounded Warriors
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Meredith Kleykamp, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 11,164.00

Increased public attention on wounded and injured veterans of the Iraq and
Afghanistan wars has popularized the term "wounded warrior." Wounded warrior is
a new and symbolic phrase that parallels a shift in the larger social context
for post-9/11 wounded veterans. In this dissertation, This research examines the
symbolic meaning of "wounded warrior" and how this construct creates social
expectations that impact the community and everyday lives of wounded post-9/11
veterans. Using in-depth interviews with 40 post-9/11 wounded/injured/ill
veterans in combination with a content analysis of the mainstream media coverage
of wounded veterans over the past decade, this project analyzes how the wounded
warrior context shapes the social relationships, identity, and structural
resources for the newest generation of wounded veterans. Because of the
increased recognition of invisible injuries such as Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)
and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), this research uses the visibility of
one?s injuries (whether they are seen or not and the nature of the injury) as a
comparative focal point for analyzing the convergence and divergence of the
portrayal and personal experiences of veterans within the wounded warrior
construct.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The wounded warrior construct provides a
theoretically unique opportunity to examine interactions among stigma, identity,
and status. How veterans enact their identity and role as a wounded veteran also
illuminates how veterans' status as a wounded warrior can counteract the stigma
from their service-connected injuries/disabilities/illnesses. Using qualitative
data from in-depth interviews with post-9/11 wounded veterans and a content
analysis of recent media coverage, this study addresses three specific
interactions among stigma, identity work and visibility: (1) how and when the
potential stigma of an individual veteran's injuries is counteracted by their
status as a wounded warrior, (2) how this affects the management of their
identity through identity work, and (3) how individuals with different visible
and less visible injuries negotiate within the same identity framework and
expectations of being a wounded warrior. The complex range of injuries and
whether those injuries align with stereotypical images of a "wounded warrior"
changes veterans? ability to offset stigma, bringing into question how, when,
and under what circumstances this stigma offsetting process occurs. Completed
interviews highlight how veterans? identity work as a wounded warrior is
influenced by public perceptions of wounded veterans and point to differences in
the experience of stigma by context, such as visibility/recognition of injuries
and across social situations. This project will provide an interpersonal view of
the trials associated with reintegration into civilian society experienced by
those who have been wounded in recent military conflicts.