* 1518501
* CNH-S: RUI: Understanding the effective processes by which communities manage tropical forests
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Peter Klepeis, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will evaluate the effective management
of tropical forests by communities. The project will draw on and contribute to
understandings of the ways that individuals, groups, and organizations
collectively manage forests and other resources in the face of increasing
population and changes in land-use and environmental conditions. The project
will provide new insights regarding the ways effective community interactions,
including communication and knowledge sharing between stakeholder groups, and
strong forms of leadership can build trust and enhance the capacity of
communities to undertake effective community-based land management. Project
results will provide new perspectives regarding the mechanisms through which
communities can effectively manage forests. The project also will provide
valuable education and training opportunities for undergraduate students at a
small liberal arts college as well as enhancement of international collaborative
links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a focused case study
of 45 sites where the cultural significance of the site leads to shadow
conservation. They will measure the changes in forest size, shape and crown
closure over the last 50 years and assess the present ecological status of the
forests. They will determine the elements of social cohesion that impact forest
use and valuation, and they will assess how the ecological status of the forests
affects social cohesion and societal customs such as religious practice. They
also will determine which management strategies are most effective at
maintaining healthy forest ecological status. Project findings will provide new
insights and information that will contribute to a broad line of inquiry and the
insights generated by this project will have practical value for community-based
management of forests and other landscapes in the U.S. and elsewhere. This
project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
(CNH) Program.&lt;br/&gt;