* 1518359
* CNH-L: A Telecoupling Model to Account for Spatial Subsidies of Ecosystem Services Provided by Transboundary Migratory Species in North America
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Laura Lopez Hoffman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2021
* USD 849,999.00

Many migratory species provide benefits to humans, which are called ecosystem
services. An example of an ecosystem service provided by a migratory species is
the consumption of insect pests by bats, which minimizes crop damage and
agricultural losses. Another example is bird watching and hunting of pintail
ducks, which provides people with recreational opportunities. Migratory species
spend parts of the year across a geographic range, which often spans political
boundaries. Migratory species might provide more benefits to people in certain
regions than in others. Additionally, migratory species might receive greater
benefits from habitats in particular areas within their range than from others.
This could cause a mismatch between the areas where a species provides the
benefits and the areas from which it receives support. This mismatch is called a
spatial subsidy. Simply put, areas with habitat that provide the greatest
benefit to migratory species are subsidizing areas where people receive most of
the species' benefits. This can lead to an inequality - between people in areas
that subsidize the species versus people in areas that receive the benefits -
and to difficulties for wildlife management and habitat protection. This project
will examine the spatial subsidies of an exemplary migratory species: Northern
Pintail ducks (Anas acuta). Pintails are an important species for bird watching,
sports, and subsistence (food) hunting. Previous studies indicate that breeding
habitat in Canada and in the northern continental United States subsidize bird
watching and hunting of pintails in California and elsewhere. This suggests that
continued pintail hunting and recreational activities are dependent on the
conservation of the species' breeding habitats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop a model to calculate spatial subsidies in the coupled
natural-human systems of the migratory species: Northern Pintails. Researchers
will measure how modeled values of spatial subsidies may influence decision-
making related to migratory species in coupled systems in North America. This
model will integrate four components that feed into one another: (1) a Habitat
Distribution sub-model; (2) a Habitat Dependence sub-model; (3) an Ecosystem
Services sub-model, which (a) valuates ecosystem services, (b) assesses spatial
subsidies, and (c) provides decision-makers with modeled scenarios of impacts on
services and spatial subsidies to identify how they might alter land-use and
conservation actions in response, which is modeled in (4), the Drivers of Change
sub-model. Two drivers of change are considered: land-use change, and change in
the societal demand for their services. Finally, this project will also survey
agency and NGO decision-makers to determine the degree to which they might use
spatial subsidies information in resource management decisions, and conduct a
policy analysis of how the spatial subsidies concept might support the
objectives of international agreements on migratory species.