* 1518273
* Star Formation in Extreme Environments
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Jessica Lu, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 11/30/2017
* USD 344,857.00

The formation of stars is a fundamental astrophysical process that gives rise to
planetary systems, enriches interstellar gas, and affects the formation and
evolution of galaxies. Despite its importance, we still lack a predictive theory
of star formation that has been tested over a broad range of environments. To
test competing theories of star formation, we must extend beyond the
neighborhood of our Sun. In this program, the team will study how stars form in
extreme environments found in the Galaxy's most massive star clusters and at its
center. Studying these distant, crowded, and dusty young star clusters requires
high-fidelity images at infrared wavelengths. The team will precisely measure
each star's motion in the sky to separate stars in the cluster, which move
together, from contaminating field stars, which move more randomly. They will
compare the young stars in these extreme environments to those found in our
Sun's neighborhood, which will provide a deeper understanding of the physics of
how stars form. The Ph.D. students working on this research will also share
these and other results with undergraduate students in Hawaii by participating
in education training and a practical teaching experience that emphasizes
scientific inquiry and diverse learning styles.

This investigation will concentrate on a small sample of massive young clusters
throughout the Milky Way and determine how the properties of the stars and
clusters change in different environments. The team will use infrared
observations from the largest ground-based telescopes equipped with adaptive
optics and from the Hubble space telescope. They have developed a suite of
analysis tools that deliver some of the most precise star motions ever achieved
at infrared wavelengths, which is essential when studying these star clusters.
The team will measure the structure and dynamics of the clusters as well as the
distribution of star masses. They will also compare the clusters in our sample
with each other, with star clusters in the Sun's neighborhood, and with
theoretical simulations. Taken together, this study of massive young clusters
will provide powerful constraints on theories of star and cluster formation.
Graduate students working on this research will also participate in an intensive
professional development program through the Hawaii chapter of the Institute for
Scientist and Engineer Educators, where they will train in inquiry-based
teaching methods and diverse learning styles. They will gain practical
experience by teaching in Hawaii-based venues that target under-served groups,
including Native Hawaiians, at the undergraduate level. Both the scientific
results and new inquiry activities developed through this program will be
disseminated broadly to astronomers to multiply their impact.