* 1518518
* CNH-L: Complex Dynamics of Telecoupled Human and Natural Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Thomas Hertel, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,789,614.00

The globalization of trade in agricultural commodities is increasingly
connecting consumers and producers around the world. A growing fraction of
forest conversion and other land placed into agricultural production is
associated with commodities produced for global markets. Much of the demand for
food that was historically met by local agriculture is increasingly being met by
global trade; in the past three decades food exports have increased 10-fold.
This project will quantify and model this type of global scale connection that
links natural and human systems by studying how agricultural markets and land
use in China and Brazil are linked via commodity trade. The natural environment
is incorporated in this model in two ways: first, the local land use choices
affect soil quality and water, which in turn affects subsequent agricultural
choices; second, the expansion of agriculture into tropical forest has an effect
on global climate and biodiversity. The models produced by this project will
increase our understanding of how human and natural systems change in concert
even when the connections are over great distances (telecoupled). This project
is a first effort to quantify complex dynamics of distantly coupled agricultural
and economic systems by going beyond the traditional focus on a single system,
one-way impacts, or comparative analysis of systems. It represents an exciting
new frontier of research in coupled systems, with substantial contributions to
the theory, methods, and applications of telecoupled systems. The work is of
further importance in providing a broader view and new perspective on
international commodity trade, which is in the national interest, and in
training the next generation of scientists&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to quantify the telecoupling framework to address fundamental
questions about human and natural systems such as: What are the effects of
telecouplings on human-nature dynamics across scales in distant systems? How do
telecouplings and local couplings enhance or offset each other in terms of their
effects on human-nature dynamics? To address these questions and associated
hypotheses, the project will focus on major telecouplings involving the trade of
agricultural products (e.g., soybeans for food and animal feed) between Brazil
and China, two of the world's most important emerging economies. These two
countries constitute an excellent example of telecoupled systems, but little is
known about the effects of their rapidly increasing trade on human-nature
dynamics. By leveraging existing remote sensing and socioeconomic data and
collecting complementary new data, researchers will model complex dynamics and
relationships among key components of telecoupled systems. Analyses at the
international and national scales will be conducted with the widely used Global
Trade Analysis Project model. They will be complemented by in-depth studies at
the regional and local scales through ecological fieldwork and socioeconomic
surveys, as well as through developing and validating a telecoupled agent-based
model. These studies, spanning local to international scales, will be joined via
systems integration.