* 1518160
* The Tangled Signaling Pathway of a Bacterial Phytochrome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Katrina Forest, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2019
* USD 649,995.00

Phytochromes are light-responsive sensory molecules, but exactly how light is
perceived by bacteria and how that information is used to bring about adaptation
to changes in light levels is not well understood. This project will explore how
protein folding influences the signaling pathways of a soluble phytochrome.
Additionally, this project will investigate how other proteins (called
chaperones) facilitate the protein folding required for proper phytochrome
activity. These experiments promise to provide generally applicable insights
into phytochromes, and in addition phytochromes will be modified to create new
microscopic imaging tools which will permit biologists to peer into living
organisms to learn more about basic biological processes. The project includes
outreach activities that facilitate interaction between scientists and artists
to enhance science communication and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
objective of this project is to understand how the unusual knotted topology of
bacterial phytochrome determines the signaling properties and folding pathway of
this light-regulated histidine kinase. Phytochrome is one of few deeply knotted
proteins known, and the route to its figure-of-eight final topology is
completely unknown. To determine whether the knotted protein structure of
phytochrome and the catenated dimeric interface of its cognate response
regulator contribute to intra- and intermolecular signaling, the project will
utilize kinase, phosphotransferase, and phosphatase assays on native and
untangled (engineered) bacterial phytochromes and their cognate response
regulators. To determine how the folding pathway of knotted phytochrome is
dependent on characteristics of the proline-rich lasso loop the project will
investigate the effects of sequence and length variation in this loop on folding
of phytochromes in the presence and absence of a prolyl-isomerase containing
chaperone. To create small genetically encoded fluorophores with desirable near
infrared excitation maxima, the project will reverse engineer phytochrome by
removing domains required only for signal transduction while maintaining
elements required for stable folding and chromophore interaction.