* 1518824
* Online Resources for Educating Students about Ebola and Other Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Jacqueline Miller, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 01/31/2017
* USD 198,384.00

This project will develop a Web-based set of instructional materials and
resources that will use the recent Ebola outbreak as the overarching narrative
for educating middle and high school students about the disease, its causative
agent, how it is spread, and approaches for responding to it and controlling the
epidemic. Secondary school students will receive valuable information that they
need to think critically and with a strong knowledge base about the current
Ebola outbreak. The resources will strengthen their skills in accessing, making
sense of, and assessing the information they find and applying it to
understanding the implications of the outbreak to their own lives. The
instructional materials based on the Ebola outbreak will be used as a gateway to
developing similar materials for other emerging and re-emerging diseases. This
extension is critically important because the Ebola crisis will end, hopefully
soon, but the threat of epidemics and pandemics will continue.

The recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa has resulted in widespread concerns and
unfounded fears in this country. To avoid overreaction and inappropriate
responses to these epidemics, and also to ensure sensible preparation in the
event of a real threat, citizens must have a foundational knowledge about these
diseases to build upon. One effective way to address this lack of understanding
in the populace is to introduce students to the topic during their secondary
education. Most curricula and standards do not explicitly include this important
area of study even though students are generally fascinated by the topic and it
provides an engaging vehicle for learning fundamental concepts in biology.
Students need to understand what further information they need, to have the
evaluative skills to determine reliable information from misinformation, and to
know how to apply this information in determining what actions need to be taken.
This project will provide students with valuable information that they need to
think critically and with a strong knowledge base about the current Ebola
outbreak.