* 1518862
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Inequalities in Response to Disaster Recovery
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Ashleigh McKinzie, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 03/31/2017
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation uses qualitative methods to investigate how inequalities based
on race, class, gender and age are constituted in long-term recovery from
tornadoes that occurred in Joplin, Missouri and Tuscaloosa, Alabama in 2011.
This research has implications for disaster mitigation, making cities more
resilient after disaster, and the creation of better social policies. First,
since disasters are increasing globally this research will provide disaster
practitioners with information about long-term recovery and how recovery varies
by social groups. Second, because Joplin and Tuscaloosa responded to their
tornadoes in different ways, this dissertation compares how varying local
governmental responses influences long-term recovery. Third, based on our
findings, the investigators will recommend future policy directions for disaster
mitigation, prevention and resilience.

The dissertation project is a multi-sited qualitative study utilizing
participant observation, interviews and archival work. The investigators ask the
following research questions: 1) How have spaces inside Joplin and Tuscaloosa
been constructed in classed, gendered, and racialized ways, creating particular
privileges and vulnerabilities in processes of long-term recovery? 2a) What
resources were available to people in Joplin and Tuscaloosa after the tornadoes?
2b) How does this vary by location and what factors contribute to this
variation? Findings from this research can assist governmental and non-profit
disaster organizations providing aid and resources in long-term recovery in ways
that are sensitive to inequalities and cultural and geographic difference