* 1518345
* Gene regulation in response to heat stress
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Gross, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2019
* USD 531,510.00

This project will investigate the mechanisms that allow organisms to survive
after exposure to high temperatures. Using baker's yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae), experiments will focus on understanding how cells coordinate
genome-wide changes in gene expression following heat stress. Because the heat
stress response is evolutionarily conserved, research using yeast as the model
is expected to provide insights into the fundamental mechanisms employed in more
complex organisms. Additional broader impacts of this research include the
training of two graduate students and summer research opportunities for three
high school biology teachers from a school district with a large,
underrepresented minority population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic
regulation of stress-responsive genes is critical for viability of all
eukaryotes. In S. cerevisiae, the gene-specific and evolutionarily conserved
activator, Heat Shock Factor 1 (Hsf1), plays a central role in stimulating both
basal and induced transcription of HSP genes. These genes encode molecular
chaperones that are critical for maintaining protein homeostasis and in
combating proteotoxic stress. Whether Hsf1 is also responsible for the global
down-regulation of non-HSP gene expression following exposure to thermal stress
is unknown. Aim 1 employs chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with deep
sequencing (ChIP-seq) to investigate genome-wide occupancy of Hsf1 under both
non-stressful and stressful conditions, and determine the activator's role in
directing the genome-wide occupancy of Mediator, a central coactivator and
signal integrator of Pol II transcription. In addition, comparative dynamic
transcriptome analysis will be used to measure global transcription rates and
correlate these with genome-wide Hsf1, Mediator and Pol II occupancy. Aim 2
employs chromosome conformation capture techniques to characterize the in vivo
conformation and nuclear organization of Hsf1-regulated genes under both non-
inducing and heat shock-inducing conditions. A key goal is to solidify evidence
that HSP genes loop, 'crumple' (accordion-style) and coalesce into
transcriptionally active foci following exposure of cells to heat shock, and
determine the kinetics with which they form and dissipate looped DNA structures.
Additionally, through use of looping, crumpling and coalescence-deficient
mutants, the biological significance of these phenomena will be explored.
Results are expected to advance understanding of how gene regulatory changes
enable cell survival following heat stress.