* 1518939
* RAPID: Understanding the Evolution Patterns of the Ebola Outbreak in West-Africa and Supporting Real-Time Decision Making and Hypothesis Testing through Large Scale Simulations
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2014,11/30/2016
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2016
* USD 119,985.00

Global epidemic propagation occurs at multiple (local and global) scales:
individuals within a subpopulation may be infected through local contacts during
a local outbreak. These individuals then may carry the infection to a new region
of the world, starting a new outbreak. Thus, disease spread simulations require
data and models, including social contact networks, local and global mobility
patterns of individuals, transmission and recovery rates, and outbreak
conditions. While very powerful and highly modular and flexible epidemic spread
simulation software, such as GLEaM and STEM, exist, these simulation software
and existing models have been designed for highly communicable diseases, such as
influenza. In contrast, Ebola spread is driven by close contact via bodily
fluids in the community and transmission has been shown to be amplified in the
healthcare settings or as a result of local cultural practices and rituals (such
as burial practices that involve touching the body of the deceased). In contrast
to influenza and other respiratory diseases, the particular epidemiological
characteristics of Ebola including the high pathogenicity, disease-induced
population behavior changes and infectiousness at later stages of the disease
significantly affect the transmission dynamics. Existing models are yet to
consider these aspects into account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effectively managing
the current emergency through real-time and continuous decision making requires
computational models specifically tailored to the spatio-temporal dynamics of
Ebola and data- and model-driven computer simulations for its spreading. Tools
that help running and interpreting Ebola simulation ensembles (aligned with the
real-world observations) to generate timely actionable results are critically
needed. Given the urgency of this particular epidemic and the critical need for
the development of the necessary models and tools specific to Ebola, this
project will focus on Ebola transmission dynamics and control, specifically
targeting products and processes for this Ebola epidemic. There are two main
thrusts: Ebola specific disease simulation models, including specific
transmission patterns, local social and cultural variables and evolving
intervention strategies (including cost and constraints on the interventions)
and their side-effects; and tools for (a) executing large-scale Ebola simulation
ensembles under a large number of diverse hypotheses/scenarios and (b) analysis,
exploration, and visualization of Ebola simulation ensembles, including
estimating transmissibility of Ebola, forecasting the spatio-temporal spread of
Ebola at different spatial scales, assessing the cost and impact of
interventions. Epidemic simulations track 100s of inter-dependent parameters,
spanning multiple layers and geo-spatial frames, affected by complex dynamic
processes operating at different resolutions. Moreover, given the
unpredictability of the Ebola epidemic, decision makers need to generate
ensembles, with many thousands of simulations, each with different parameters
corresponding to different, but plausible, scenarios. These simulations need to
be continuously revised based on real-world data as the epidemic and
intervention mechanisms evolve. The research will result in novel algorithms and
tools (namely E2DMS) specially tailored for officials to continuously assess the
impacts of different intervention scenarios and revise estimates based on real
world data, at local and global scales, for the Ebola
epidemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed E2DMS will fill an important hole in
data-driven decision making during the Ebola emergency and, thus, will enable
applications and services with significant economic and health impact. The
results will translate into predictions of the Ebola epidemic?s characteristics,
including the duration and overall size, and help the global efforts to prevent
the disease from turning into a pandemic. The educational impact of the proposed
project will be on mentoring of a post-doctoral researcher and the incorporation
of research challenges and outcomes into undergraduate and graduate classes.