* 1518968
* I-Corps:  High - Reliability and Low - Cost Design of Electric Motor for Automotive Industry Application
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Seungdeog Choi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The recent need for clean energy and the decreasing availability of fossil fuels
have resulted in a noticeable progress in research and application of power
generation based on alternative energy sources. Electric Motors and Generators
are important components in the green technology, generating or consuming
majority of the electric energy from alternative energy sources, especially in
public transportation area including automotive industry and aerospace industry.
As the rare-earth-material-based three-phase electric machine has been popularly
applied to the public transportation systems (for power management, energy
storage, etc.) where safety is a priority, cost and reliability have also become
critical market issues. This I-Corps team's focus is, therefore, on the design
of high-reliability, low-cost electric machines that are fault-tolerant and free
of rare-earth materials to meet the needs of target market segmentation in
automotive industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target product will be a Rare-
earth material Free Multiphase Synchronous reluctance Motor (FMSM). Unlike the
conventional low-power machine, which is designed as a single- or three-phase
machine, the proposed multiphase motor is designed using a 5-phase architecture,
an optimal solution to provide the lowest cost and highest reliability among all
theoretically and practically available low-power machines in the market. The
proposed architecture also provides compact size and extended lifetime with
reduced electro-magnetic interferences (EMI). To further reduce manufacturing
costs, Rare-earth materials will be substituted by Ferrite materials. Ferrite
materials are abundant in nature and about 10 times cheaper than Rare-earth
materials. In addition, the output power will be generated based on an
innovative and alternative torque generation mechanism which will lead to
further reduced costs in material utilization while significantly simplifying
the design.