* 1518732
* SHF:Large:Collaborative Research: Inferring Software Specifications from Open Source Repositories by Leveraging Data and Collective Community Expertise
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Vasant Honavar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 319,511.00

Today individuals, society, and the nation critically depend on software to
manage critical infrastructures for power, banking and finance, air traffic
control, telecommunication, transportation, national defense, and healthcare.
Specifications are critical for communicating the intended behavior of software
systems to software developers and users and to make it possible for automated
tools to verify whether a given piece of software indeed behaves as intended.
Safety critical applications have traditionally enjoyed the benefits of such
specifications, but at a great cost. Because producing useful, non-trivial
specifications from scratch is too hard, time consuming, and requires expertise
that is not broadly available, such specifications are largely unavailable. The
lack of specifications for core libraries and widely used frameworks makes
specifying applications that use them even more difficult. The absence of
precise, comprehensible, and efficiently verifiable specifications is a major
hurdle to developing software systems that are reliable, secure, and easy to
maintain and reuse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together an
interdisciplinary team of researchers with complementary expertise in formal
methods, software engineering, machine learning and big data analytics to
develop automated or semi-automated methods for inferring the specifications
from code. The resulting methods and tools combine analytics over large open
source code repositories to augment and improve upon specifications by program
analysis-based specification inference through synergistic advances across both
these areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include:
transformative advances in specification inference and synthesis, with the
potential to dramatically reduce, the cost of developing and maintaining high
assurance software; enhanced interdisciplinary expertise at the intersection of
formal methods software engineering, and big data analytics; Contributions to
research-based training of a cadre of scientists and engineers with expertise in
high assurance software.