* 1518941
* NeTS: Large: Networked Markets: Theory and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* John Ledyard, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

From the internet to the electricity grid to the interconnections of banks,
networks are a pervasive feature of our world today. Their ubiquity has had a
fundamental impact on modern markets. Driven by advances in information
technology, modern marketplaces are becoming ever more dynamic, complex, and
interconnected. While markets used to be slow to evolve, have simple
institutions governing trade, and make finding the "right" trading partner a
daunting challenge; markets emerging today are typically complex platforms, with
a range of dynamic mechanisms for facilitating matches amongst participants.
This gives an unprecedented level of control over the design and operation of
markets, which has led to their incorporation as increasingly crucial components
of networked systems, e.g., dynamic real time pricing in cloud computing markets
and automated trading in financial markets. The changes in markets have also
fundamentally impacted information technology, especially in the context of
networked systems -- it is increasingly the case that networked systems that
used to be purely "engineered" are now being governed by a mixture of markets
and engineering, e.g., electricity markets are managed through a combination of
multiple markets at different timescales (day ahead, real-time, etc.) and fast-
time scale control systems to ensure stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus,
networks and markets are connected today more than ever, and so it is necessary
to study them as a unified whole rather than as individual fields. In
particular, the incorporation of markets into networked systems creates an
unavoidable interaction between "the engineer" and "the economist" in terms of
which aspects of the system are managed via control policies, protocols, etc.,
which aspects are managed via economic tools such as pricing, market design,
etc., and how the two interact. This is made even more challenging by the fact
that engineering choices have consequences for economic efficiency and vice
versa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers in this grant seeks to develop
theoretical foundations for the study of networked markets, and will focus on
three general themes: (i) the impact of connections between markets, (ii) the
impact of connections between participants of markets, and (iii) understanding
and controlling contagion in networked markets. These themes cut across many of
the challenges and opportunities surrounding networked markets, and a better
understanding of these issues is crucial for each of the five target
applications on which the research focuses: cloud computing markets, data
markets, electricity markets, matching markets (e.g. labor markets), and
financial markets. In particular, the results of the research in this grant will
provide new insights into the functioning of networked markets that can provide
benefits for both market operators/designers and market
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is highly interdisciplinary,
connecting computer science and economics and focusing on applications from
diverse areas in both engineered and social systems. As part of the grant, the
investigators are initiating a new PhD program on Computing and Mathematical
Sciences at Caltech, which focuses training students with cross-cutting
interdisciplinary interests at the interface of computing with science and
engineering. Additional outreach activities include yearly workshops with both
academic and industrial attendance. Further, the strong industry connections of
the investigators in each of the application areas highlight the potential for
the proposed research to make the transition from academia to practice.