* 1518503
* CNH-L: Coastal Processes and Human Response to Shoreline Change
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Di Jin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,799,958.00

A non-technical description of the project that eplains the significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastlines are influenced by a complex set of
physical processes. In addition, human response to coastal change is a result of
complicated and often interlocking decisions. This project will develop a set of
integrated models to better understand the dynamics of developed shoreline
evolution under different geologic settings, climatological variables such as
wave and storm influence, development scenarios, legal and regulatory regimes,
and strategies for coastal protection or response. The models of the long-term
dynamic interactions between development and coastal processes will be useful to
project how developed coastlines may respond to future alterations due to sea-
level rise, erosion, and inundation that are caused by changing climate
conditions. Two examples from Massachusetts and the New Jersey coasts are
selected as test cases since both have long histories of development and
attempts at coastal protection that span different geologic and storm climate
settings. The project will develop an ongoing short course that will inform
coastal land managers of the major findings and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will yield new tools and information
to improve knowledge of the alongshore-coupled interactions among the geological
framework, geomorphic processes, the economics of human shoreline protection
measures, and how developed shoreline dynamics may change due to climate-driven
exogenous effects, such as sea-level rise. Model results will be integrated
within a realistic policy framework to offer guidance on economically efficient
and sustainable ways to manage coastline resources at the scale of the littoral
cell. The work will advance the state of the art in morphodynamic models of
coastal evolution in response to climate change effects and the integration of
geologic models with those of economic consequences and human behavior. The
multi-disciplinary project team includes geomorphologists, policy and economic
scientists, and legal experts who have an established history of successful
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with integrated geo-economic models of coastal evolution
involving human interventions.