* 1518265
* Genetic Encoding of Tetrazine Amino Acids to Develop Ideal Bioorthogonal Ligations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Ryan Mehl, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 900,835.00

Biological processes function through extremely complex interactions of
macromolecules that take place over an enormous range of timescales and
molecular specificity. Controlled modification of biomolecules enables
scientists to explore living systems, engineer new biological functions and
generate new biomaterials. Currently the speed and selectivity of the reactions
that modify (label) proteins in living and non-living systems limit the ability
to study protein dynamics, processing and interactions as well as to engineer
novel protein function. Development of an ideal reaction for labeling proteins
that is selective in biological conditions and is fast enough to compete with
natural biological processes will overcome many of the current limitations.
Amino acids are building blocks of proteins and they are inserted in a precisely
defined sequence during protein synthesis. Thus, genetically encoding a modified
amino acid that contains the needed labeling reaction components and is
incorporated into a protein allows for site-specific modification of proteins
and enables many new research avenues and potential biotechnological
applications. In this project, a modified amino acid carrying a tetrazine group
(which meets the demands of an ideal labeling reaction) will be incorporated
into proteins. The speed and specificity of reaction of this tetrazine-protein
in both living and non-living systems permits coupling with a variety of markers
targeted for different selected functions. This platform for expansion of the
genetic code will be incorporated into undergraduate courses as an approach to
teaching chemical biology and to illustrate how engineering the chemical
modification of biopolymers is both possible and critical for understanding and
manipulating their function. An annual workshop will be held for high school
science teachers and researchers (undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate) to
learn genetic code expansion methodology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ideal
bioorthogonal ligation will be developed and key functional groups will be site-
specifically incorporated into proteins via genetic code expansion. Tetrazine
containing amino acids will be designed and synthesized to be highly reactive
with strained trans-cyclooctene functionalities bearing labels, but selective
unreactive with other cellular components. Tetrazine-amino acids will also be
genetically incorporated into eukaryotes and prokaryotes and characterized.
Tetrazine-protein stability and reaction rates will be measured for labeling and
dimerizing proteins in vivo at sub-stoichiometric concentrations of label. This
reaction has the potential to transform protein studies and protein engineering
because it will be quantitative in vivo on biological time scales of seconds to
minutes and at biological concentrations of tetrazine-protein and label. To
demonstrate the utility of this bioorthogonal labeling reaction in vivo, key
functions integral to two-component signaling systems will be switched on and
off with precise control to understand their mechanism of regulating
transcription.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.