* 1518529
* RAPID: Data-Based Spatiotemporal Models of Ebola Epidemics and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Yang Kuang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2017
* USD 152,976.00

DMS-1518529&lt;br/&gt;Kuang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Ebola epidemic in West
Africa continues to cause significant morbidity and mortality. The World Health
Organization declared the Ebola epidemic in West Africa a Public Health
Emergency of International Concern on 8 August 2014. As the epidemic continues
to spread at an alarming rate in some areas of West Africa, there is an urgent
need to develop, test, and calibrate novel mathematical models of Ebola
transmission and control with the goal of generating real-time, science-based
forecasts of the epidemic in West Africa in order to quantify the times,
locations, type and intensity of interventions that would be required to achieve
control. To this end, the investigators and their colleagues formulate and
validate models that can be used to predict the number and location of new
cases, in order to facilitate decision-making on the allocation of resources
that will allow timely medical treatment and isolation of the sick and to
implement effective and sensible travel controls. This project provides first-
hand educational experience in cross-disciplinary communication and exploration
and cutting-edge research opportunities for undergraduates and graduate
students. It also provides professional development for graduate students. The
investigators disseminate their findings to a diverse range of mathematicians,
modelers, and public health and biomedical researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The investigators divide the project efforts into three modeling tasks. At
first, they formulate dynamical models of the evolving infection reproduction
number, comparing how well a simple SI model and the logistic model fit past and
current real Ebola epidemics data. In this initial task, instead of treating the
whole population as susceptible, they treat the susceptible population size and
the final epidemics size as parameters and allow the reported data to inform
these parameter values. Subsequently, they present a novel delay differential
equation based modeling framework that allows models to treat susceptible
population size as a dynamical variable, which is highly correlated to current
infectious population size. More specifically, they initialize the susceptible
population size as zero instead of the current thinking that susceptible
population size equals the total population size initially. This is simply due
to the fact that individuals become susceptible to Ebola only if they had a
direct and close contact with infectious Ebola patients. In the second half of
this project, they formulate and validate partial differential equation-based
models in order to estimate the Ebola spread speed and to predict the locations
and numbers of new Ebola cases subject to various treatment options and travel
control policies. The project is supported by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences and the Division of Environmemtal Biology.