* 1518976
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Black, Brown or Asian? : Afro- and Indo-Caribbean Immigrants Encounter Race in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Andrew Abbott, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 12,000.00

Scholars have traditionally understood the American racial hierarchy through the
lens of the "Black-White" color line, reflecting the primacy of our most
historically consequential axis of racial distinction. However, the old Black-
White model is increasingly inadequate for understanding racial and ethnic
categories in the United States. The declining primacy of the Black-White model
of race relations highlights the urgent need for scholarship on relationships
between racial/ethnic minority groups. This project addresses this emerging need
by examining inter-minority stratification between those classified as Black and
those classified as Asian by taking advantage of the unique case of Afro and
Indo-Caribbean immigrants to the United States. Both groups share similar
cultural backgrounds while being classified in the United States into different
racial/ethnic groups. The analysis combines a quantitative study of the earnings
and residential locations of Afro and Asian Caribbean immigrants to the United
States with in-depth interviews of immigrants that seek to better understand
their own racial and ethnic identification in their adopted home country. This
project will enrich our understanding of how inter-minority relations will
likely to reshape 21st Century America's increasingly diverse, and rapidly
shifting racial and ethnic landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the case of
Afro- and Indo-Caribbean immigrants, this study thus examines: (1) How Black and
Asian phenotypes are being treated in the labor and housing market, controlling
for cultural characteristics and human capital (2) How culturally integrated
Black and Asian immigrants from the same sending societies react to American
racial categories, and (3) What factors predict the kinds of ethno-racial
choices that Afro- and Indo-Caribbeans make in response to US racial categories.
The first question assesses the effect of racial ascription on socio-economic
opportunity. The latter questions examine how racial identification may
recursively reshape the prevailing racial hierarchy. A mixed-methods approach is
used to answer these questions. Multivariate analyses of data from the American
Community Survey's Public Use Micro-Data Samples are used to compare structural
incorporation outcomes among Afro- and Indo-Caribbeans in the US. One year of
ethnographic observation, and data from 120 extended interviews are used to shed
light on how Afro- and Indo-Caribbean immigrants make ethno-racial choices in
response to the American racial context. Fieldwork will be conducted in New
York, which has long been the primary destination for Afro- and Indo-Caribbean
immigrants to the US, and which today still boasts America's largest Caribbean
populations. This study will shed valuable light on the evolving nature of
racial/ethnic relations in 21st Century America's increasingly diverse mosaic.