* 1518596
* The developmental genetic basis for evolutionary variation in the hominin shoulder
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Wall, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 216,919.00

Evolutionary changes in the anatomy of the shoulder (shoulder blade and upper
arm) are associated with some of the most important behavioral changes in modern
humans and our hominin ancestors, such as reduced time spent in trees, increased
tool use and manipulation, and incredibly accurate throwing. Considering much of
evolution occurs via changes in how genes are turned on/off in the developing
body, determining which genes and regulatory switches control shoulder
development is of critical importance for understanding the genetic basis of
skeletal shape and the sequence of events that has produced our unique
shoulders. This project investigates the developmental and genetic mechanisms
that control shoulder shape, by comparing shoulder shape in apes and humans,
conducting experiments that will identify genes that are active during shoulder
development, and analyzing these genetic data to reconstruct the unique
evolution of the human shoulder. Broader impacts include training of
underrepresented minority students, public science outreach through workshops
and museum exhibits, and findings that may be informative for biomedical studies
of shoulder dysfunction or disease.

The unique features of the human shoulder, consisting of the scapula and
proximal humerus, evolved from an ancestral hominoid pattern, but recent fossils
cast doubt as to the morphotype. In the human lineage, evolutionary shifts in
shoulder morphology are associated with some of the most important behavioral
changes in hominins, such as reduced arboreality, tool use and increased
manipulation, and accurate throwing. The human shoulder is under strong
developmental genetic programming in which key aspects of component positioning,
orientation, and shape emerge in utero. This early shape morphogenesis is
intriguing considering that the scapula arises from multiple cell populations,
which condense and fuse to form integrated, yet morphologically distinct, bony
elements, each of which is critical to adult function. Given this complexity,
which developmental and genetic mechanisms control shoulder shape? Considering
that much of phenotypic evolution occurs via changes in the non-coding
regulatory genome, determining which genes and regulatory switches (e.g.,
enhancers) control shoulder morphogenesis is of critical importance for
understanding the genetic basis of skeletal shape and for reconstructing the
sequence of mutational events that has produced the unique human shoulder
morphology. This proposal aims to illuminate developmental mechanisms
contributing to the evolution of the human shoulder girdle using: 1) Geometric
morphometrics including shape analyses and reconstructions of shoulder
morphospaces in order to quantify and model evolutionary trajectories in shape
variation in apes and humans; 2) RNA-seq and ChIP-seq experimental assays on
embryonic mouse shoulder tissues to identify both genes and regulatory elements,
respectively, that are differentially active in shoulder components; 3)
comparative genomics on functionally identified sequences to identify base-pair
differences between humans and chimps that contribute to shoulder variation; and
4) PAML likelihood ratio testing to identify phylogenetic timing of adaptive
selection on functional coding and non-coding sequences and test alternative
models of human shoulder evolution.