* 1518081
* Young Star Dynamical Mass Ratios and Masses
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Lisa Prato, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2020
* USD 380,138.00

Although Earth orbits a single star, most stars in our Galaxy are located in
binary or multiple systems - groups of two or more stars that are
gravitationally bound to each other. The time it takes the two stars in a binary
to complete one full orbit around each other can be anywhere from hours to days,
weeks, month, years, or millennia. The stars in the closest pairs with orbits
that take months or less, comprise a special category called "spectroscopic
binaries". They move so rapidly that it is possible to measure the velocities of
each star, and from the velocities we can determine the ratio of their masses.
Among very young, newly formed stars, these spectroscopic binaries provide a way
to measure the most fundamental stellar property, mass, during a poorly
understood period in the life-cycle of stars. This can help us calibrate the
relationships between fundamental stellar properties at a key epoch: the onset
of planet formation. In this program, the PI will observe a sample of 140
candidate young spectroscopic binaries to confirm their multiplicity and to
measure the mass ratios of the bona fide pairs. This research will be carried
out by the PI in collaboration with undergraduate and junior graduate students,
some of them from groups traditionally underrepresented in astronomy.

Measuring the mass ratios and masses of young stars is important for
understanding the physical processes of star and binary formation. Usually, this
is accomplished by comparing the locations of stars on an H-R diagram to
theoretical tracks of young star evolution. However, the wide variety of
available calculations predict a large range of possible stellar masses at young
ages. The PI's work in this area has helped to renew interest in improving these
models. In this program, she will observe a sample of 140 candidate young
spectroscopic binaries to confirm their multiplicity with multi-object visible
light spectroscopy on the MMT Telescope and to measure the mass ratios of the
bona fide pairs with 3 epochs of infrared spectroscopy using the Discovery
Channel Telescope.