* 1518630
* CHS: Large: Collaborative Research: TextureShop: Tools for the Composition and Display of Virtual Texture
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Roberta Klatzky, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2021
* USD 328,243.00

When we interact with the physical world touch is a vitally important sensory
channel, but when we interact with the digital world that is not yet the case.
Historically, this situation may have been principally due to inadequate tactile
displays, but that limitation is quickly disappearing. Increasingly, the
principal limitation is the lack of tactile content. The goal of this
collaborative research that involves scientists at three institutions is to
empower the content creator, by enabling people to perform the same sorts of
operations with tactile textures that they routinely perform with photographs.
Those operations include "capturing" a texture, building a mathematical
representation of it, creating and displaying synthetic versions that feel very
much like the original, enhancing it in various ways (e.g., making it rougher or
more velvety), and ultimately "composing" novel textures that nonetheless feel
realistic and credible. As a tangible step in this direction, an open source,
open hardware project begun under prior NSF support will be continued and
expanded. That project resulted in the distribution of surface haptic devices to
about a dozen different labs, leading to a variety of research studies. In this
project, a low-cost surface haptic display and a variety of applications and
software tools will be distributed to about 50 early adopters in the research
community. Those individuals will be engaged in this research (e.g., by helping
to "tag" various textures), and will be empowered to carry out their own
research. In addition, workshops will be organized at major human-computer
interaction conferences to support the growing surface haptics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is timely and compelling for a number
of reasons. One, scientific understanding of the physical and neuronal bases of
texture perception has advanced considerably in recent years. For instance, the
relationships between vibrations on the skin (produced when a finger slides
across a surface), spike timing in afferent neurons, and high-level percepts
such as recognition of a specific texture, have recently been elucidated. Two,
"surface haptic" technologies for displaying texture to the bare fingertips have
also advanced significantly and can now display complex stimuli across the full
bandwidth of tactile acuity. Three, the prevalence of touch screen interfaces
has created a plethora of applications such as children's e-books, interfaces
for the blind, games, and automobile control panels, which would be well-served
by high quality tactile content. The merit of this research is that it will
provide a principled foundation for both the creation and manipulation of that
content. Contributions will include: the development of a "tactile camera" that
is able to capture the relevant frictional and vibratory data from which
realistic textures can be recreated; a novel mathematical representation of the
salient aspects of texture as well as algorithms for synthesizing artificial
textures on the basis of that representation; a suite of techniques for
enhancing aspects of texture by direct operation on the mathematical
representation, interpolation between multiple textures, and interaction with
audio cues; and finally a set of tools for composing novel textures including
search, texture combination and scale transformation.