* 1518486
* CNH-L: The Coupled Dynamics of Human-Dryland River Systems: Linkages and Feedbacks Between Human and Environmental Drivers of Water Quality and Human Health
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2022
* Douglas Goodin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,834,999.00

A non-technical description of the project that explains its significance and
importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Declines in water quality and increased exposure
to infectious disease, particularly those that cause diarrhea, are recognized as
persistent global health threats, especially in water-scarce areas of the world.
In these dry regions, river floodplains are critical for human communities, but
these same areas are also extremely vulnerable to human impacts. This project
will use a multidisciplinary research approach to examine these linkages in
order to improve the management and forecasting of diarrheal disease in general
and particularly in vulnerable dryland systems. The project will serve as a
foundation for a multidisciplinary education program that will strengthen cross-
cultural understanding and leadership in coupled natural and human systems
research. This study brings direct benefits to society through the development
of knowledge and tools that will identify periods of increased risk of diarrheal
disease and degraded water quality allowing vulnerable communities in dryland
regions sufficient lead time to identify public health
preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three significant problems:
(1) basic knowledge of the coupled dynamics of fluvial processes and water
quality in drylands and the influence of anthropogenic and natural influences on
pathogen pollution and health; (2) sociocultural and economic variables that
influence waterborne disease dynamics and system feedbacks; and (3) appropriate
tools to monitor indicators of system change and intra-annual forecasting
ability. The project will examine the coupled natural human dynamics in dryland
river floodplains in southern Africa by using advanced sensing, molecular,
microbiological, and modeling tools that span multiple disciplines. The study
area spans part of Namibia and Botswana in a region where human diarrheal
disease outbreaks are coupled to fluvial processes and microbial water quality
dynamics. Empirical studies of this dryland river system will be integrated with
dynamical modeling of the environmental and human- system components of
diarrheal disease. Project outcomes will: i) provide robust empirical data; ii)
advance dryland fluvial, soil microbial, and socioeconomic theory and public
health policy; and iii) produce generic tools for managing and forecasting the
coupled dynamics of microbial water quality and health in other drylands
globally.