* 1518450
* Travel Support to Attend the 14th International Conference on Wind Engineering, Port Alegre, Brazil, June 21-26, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Partha Sarkar, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2017
* USD 24,600.00

The 14th International Conference on Wind Engineering, which will be held June
21 through 26, 2015, in Porto Alegre, Brazil, is an important international
conference that will attract key scientists, engineers, meteorologists,
architects, urban planners, and students around the world conducting research
and working in the wind engineering field. This international conference is held
every four years to share the latest developments in wind engineering research
and practice and foster international collaboration for addressing the complex
challenges of windstorm disaster resilience. The conference program will include
invited lectures and technical sessions on topics ranging from characterization
of windstorm hazards to understanding, modeling, and mitigating the impact of
these hazards on structures such as buildings and bridges. Annually, various
regions of the United States experience severe windstorms such as hurricanes and
tornadoes. Severe windstorm occurrences, such as the 2005 Hurricane Katrina, the
2011 Joplin, Missouri, and 2013 Moore, Oklahoma, tornadoes, and the 2012
Superstorm Sandy, have caused loss of life, widespread damage, and significant
economic losses. This conference is important to the United Sates as it will
enable U.S. wind engineering researchers to meet with international colleagues,
share their research findings, and discuss strategies for mitigating windstorm
risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support travel and meeting expenses
for up to twelve early career engineering faculty and graduate students from the
United States conducting wind engineering research to attend this conference and
present their research findings. A selection committee and process will be
established to recruit and select the U.S. participants, with an emphasis on
recruiting individuals from underrepresented groups in engineering. Support for
students will increase student participation in the conference and in the wind
engineering field. Students from many countries will attend the meeting, and the
U.S. student participants will benefit from the international exchange, the
opportunity to learn about state-of-the-art research and practice in wind
engineering, and interactions with senior researchers in their area of
expertise. Support, such as through this travel grant, to early career faculty
and graduate students will help build the next generation of wind engineers in
the United States.