* 1518967
* String Theory, Particle Physics and Model Building
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Sebastian Franco, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sebastian Franco at the
City College of the City University of New York.

The two pillars of our current understanding of the universe, Quantum Mechanics
and General Relativity, are mutually incompatible. String theory reconciles
them, unifying all fundamental interactions in nature, including gravity, in a
quantum theory. Fundamental physics is going through an era of exceptional
developments, both at the experimental and theoretical fronts. Ongoing
experiments are probing the basic structure of nature along a multitude of
complementary directions, from the cosmological to the intensity frontiers. The
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) has recently discovered the Higgs boson, the last
missing piece of the Standard Model of particle physics, and is vigorously
testing several of its possible extensions. As part of his proposed research,
Professor Franco will undertake a comprehensive investigation of the connection
between string-theory models and our world. He will also study several new
possibilities for physics beyond the Standard Model, with an emphasis on models
with ingredients that appear generically in string theory or with a radical
departure from conventional scenarios. As such, the proposed research program
will help preserve the United States' long-standing status at the cutting edge
of string phenomenology. This proposal also has a significant broader-impact
component. One of its salient elements is the creation of the "From the Collider
to the Classroom" program, in which active physicists will present their
research to high school teachers. The PI will actively engage undergraduate and
graduate students as well as postdoctoral associates in his research, training
them in research methods in theoretical physics. He also plans to introduce key
improvements to the undergraduate research program at CCNY aimed at developing
high-impact practices leading to deep approaches to learning. Finally, the PI
will continue and strengthen his ongoing interdisciplinary collaborations
bringing together the physics and mathematics communities.

More technically, key objectives of this proposal are: a systematic derivation
of precise features of the Standard Model, such as its flavor structure in local
Type IIB string-theory constructions and comparison with experiments; the
development and implementation of new algorithms for a large-scale computer
search of these models; the study of favorable scenarios in which characteristic
features of string theory can lead to recognizable imprints accessible to
experiments; a thorough investigation of a wide range of new supersymmetry-
breaking and mediation scenarios and their implications for the LHC, and the
development of new tools for studying global aspects of string compactifications
and their incidence in experimentally measureable quantities.