* 1518663
* Can group living and the influence of Allee Effects explain infectious disease vulnerability in social species? Emergence of M. mungi in the cooperative breeding banded mongoose
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Walters, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,976,872.00

Many wildlife species are social and live in groups, which provides benefits
critical to survival. Group living and cooperation between individuals improve
group performance by enhancing reproduction, improving foraging success, and
increasing the ability to defend against predators. However, it is also known
that the relative size of the group matters. If the number of individuals in a
group decreases, the benefits also may decrease, potentially threatening group
persistence. This phenomenon is referred to as the Allee effect: a population or
group is at an increased risk of extinction when the number or density of
individuals falls below a certain threshold due to either ecological or genetic
factors (or a combination of the two). On the other hand, increased populations
and increased population densities also can be problematic because they enhance
group vulnerability to infectious disease. Allee effects have been widely
studied and are known to have important implications for wildlife ecology but
the connection between Allee effects and disease emergence is much less well
understood. Understanding how group size and Allee effects drive infectious
disease interactions is critical, however, to the conservation and management of
endangered social species as well as to the control of emerging diseases that
infect group-living species and threaten both human and animal health. In the
research funded by this award, Dr. Kathleen Alexander (Virginia Polytechnic
Institute State University) and her team will take an innovative approach to
address this critical knowledge gap. They will integrate empirical field studies
with mathematical modeling to investigate and identify principles and processes
that influence disease transmission in group-living species. They also will
establish international scientific networks linked to a comprehensive
postdoctoral and graduate student-training program to produce multidisciplinary
scientists with skills in international emerging infectious disease research, an
area of increasing need. Other education components of the project include a
structured K-7 educational program to foster interest and increase understanding
of infectious disease ecology in children in the study region. The research
project will also establish a foundation to foster collaborative learning
between Botswana youth and undergraduate minority students in the United through
interactive lectures and contemporary learning media including podcasts and
social media. This program will link students from Botswana, where infectious
disease deaths from HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis are common, and the United States
where pandemic infectious disease is rarely experienced. Students will explore
disease causation and control on a broad level with a focus on the common global
need. This approach is directed at strengthening cross-cultural understanding
and international leadership capacity in minority-driven scientific discovery in
the ecology of emerging infectious disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the
connection between Allee effects and infectious disease emergence, Alexander and
her team will build on their long-term study of banded mongoose (Mungos mungo)
in northern Botswana. The highly social banded mongoose is threatened with a
novel, emerging tuberculosis (TB) pathogen, Mycobacterium mungi. This pathogen
is closely related to the human TB pathogen, M. africanum, and causes high
levels of mortality among banded mongoose, threatening the persistence of
smaller social groups. The research team will take an integrated methodological
approach that links molecular genetic studies of the host and pathogen with
population biology and behavioral ecology studies of mongoose social groups that
occur across both protected and unprotected areas of the landscape. They will
use this empirical study system to investigate and identify dominant factors,
processes, and thresholds that determine the outcome of the interaction between
infectious disease and Allee effects. Research results will be used to develop a
conceptual framework and advance knowledge and theory that can be used to
determine if and when Allee effects should be included in models of infectious
disease in group-living species and how these interaction should be
computationally characterized. Results will be important to the management of
social wildlife species involved in transmission of infectious diseases of
importance to both animal and public health as well as to the conservation of
endangered group-living species.