* 1518541
* CNH-S: The New 100th Meridian: Urban Water Resiliency in a Climatic and Demographic Hot Spot
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Kevin Wagner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,923.00

John Wesley Powell, famed American explorer and first U.S. Geological Survey
director, popularized the 100th Meridian as the climatic boundary between the
humid east and the semi-arid west - the geographic origin of the western United
States. There is good agreement among climate models indicating a warmer and
probable drier future for central Texas. As such, the transitional boundary
between the humid east and semiarid west is shifting eastward from the 100th
Meridian. The major cities of San Antonio, Austin, Dallas, Fort Worth, and the
Rio Grande Valley are located just east of the 100th Meridian, and rank among
the fastest growing regions in the U.S. The state is projected to double in
population by the year 2065. The central Texas corridor's position near the
climatic boundary makes it particularly sensitive to changes in temperature and
precipitation. Couple climate change with rapid population and economic growth,
and man-made forces become an important driver of future water scarcity in times
of drought. It is because of these twin drivers of climate change and
population/economic growth that the central Texas corridor can be viewed as a
sentinel community; that is, the changes that are currently underway in the
region may predict trends for other parts of the U.S. Thus, research will be
conducted on climate, population, urbanization and water resources in this
region, as it is a valuable proving ground for new techniques and strategies to
address water scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research comprises: 1)
Identifying the Grand Challenges for understanding Texas water resiliency; 2)
comparison of 21st century climate model projections at high spatial resolution
and improving our understanding of the mechanisms that drive drought in Texas;
3) development of scenarios of demographic changes and regional development for
the 21st century in Texas; and 4) integration of the above into a regional
evaluation of future water resiliency for the state. New research activities
will bring together researchers from complementary disciplines to initiate
collaborations and synthesize research activities. The overarching goal of this
research is to build knowledge regarding the factors that will impact future
water resiliency in the rapidly changing human and natural systems of Texas,
which will have applicability to other regions for which significant population
growth and changing water availability are projected.