* 1518555
* CNH-L: Processes and Factors Affecting Humans and Wildlife As Coupled Systems Across a Sociocultural Gradient
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,11/30/2020
* Brenda McCowan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2020
* USD 1,136,338.00

Human-wildlife conflict is a global phenomenon, with species that more readily
adapt to human-modified environments directly competing with people for food and
space. Scientists recognize the need to assess conflict between humans and
wildlife as dynamic coupled-systems in order to unravel how such interactions
reciprocally impact both natural ecology and human socioeconomic sustainability.
This interdisciplinary research project will use network-based quantitative
tools to assess interactions and conflict between humans and nonhuman primates
(macaques) as well as their feedback effects on human sociopolitical conflict
and primate social relationships. The project will provide new perspectives
regarding the generalizability of coupled-systems frameworks to a range of
human-wildlife conflict interfaces. It will provide new insights regarding the
causal mechanisms and processes driving human-primate conflict by systematically
detecting direct and indirect patterns that represent the inherent complexity of
these coupled systems. It will be one of the first studies to simultaneously
assess multiple human-wildlife systems using a strong comparative, coupled
natural and human system-based framework employing data-driven, highly
quantitative approaches. Although focusing on conflicts between people and
macaques in a set of foreign locales, it will provide new perspectives to
analyze the sometimes-conflict-based interactions between the humans and other
forms of wildlife in a broad range of locales, such as human-bear conflicts in
both recreational and developed parts of the U.S. as well as human-coyote and
human-raccoon conflicts in American metropolitan settings. The project will
provide new perspectives on ways to adapt to and manage human-wildlife
interaction. The project will provide international, interdisciplinary education
and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as well as
post-doctoral researchers.

The investigators will assess conflicts between humans and macaques in southern
and southeastern Asia as dynamically functioning, self-sustaining coupled
systems. They will examine how certain combinations of attributes and features
(such as human socioeconomic status, human population densities, macaque home
range use, and the boldness of macaque personalities) influences the nature,
frequency, and diversity of interactions and conflict between humans and
macaques. The investigators will assess how these interactions affect dominance
behavior through the imposition of time-constraints on macaques. They will
evaluate how these interactions influence human social conflict management as
reflected in damage-related transaction costs, and they will examine which
aspects of these coupled-systems co-vary within and across human and wildlife
systems. The investigators will conduct a three-year study of six human-macaque
systems at three locations in the Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka regions of
India and the Selangor region of Malaysia. They will conduct intensive field-
based data collection, including behavioral event sampling of human-macaque
interface interactions, behavioral focal animal sampling to record macaque
dominance behavior, and GPS coordinates and questionnaire-administered sampling
of human attitudes, beliefs, and experiences to gauge human social conflict. The
investigators will use both standard regression models and self-developed
network approaches to examine the directional flow of dominance information in
macaque social networks. They will employ data cloud geometry to identify
higher-order clustering in human geospatial proximity, and they examine patterns
in the links between human and macaque systems by using multi-dimensional
regression to test specific predictions related to the project's aims. This
project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
(CNH) Program.