* 1518026
* Collaborative Research:  Using paleogenomic data to decipher genomic effects of European Colonization on indigenous North Americans
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Ripan Malhi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 176,102.00

This project uses recent advances in genetics to compare living Native American
peoples with individuals from their ancestral groups. Genetic information
(ancient DNA) will be extracted from human skeletal remains from the time period
prior to the arrival of Europeans in North America, enabling investigation of
changes in the genome that have resulted from European colonialism. By use of a
comparative method involving both modern and ancient DNA, the process of
intermixing between indigenous peoples and European colonists will be uncovered.
In addition, regions of the human genome associated with European-borne disease
and other environmental impacts of colonialism on indigenous peoples will be
investigated. Coordinated with the research, there will be an intensive one-week
workshop during which Native American community members and students will
receive hands-on training in molecular biology and bioinformatics as well as
leadership training to increase diversity in the field of genomics and related
sciences. The project also promotes interdisciplinary graduate training at the
intersection of anthropology and genomics.

The main objective of this project is to use genomic technology and population-
genetic advances to study the genomic and evolutionary effects of European
colonization on indigenous peoples of the Americas. An innovative study design
will be employed, pairing ancient pre-European contact and modern populations
from geographic regions in North America. For each individual, the full exome
and flanking regions, including >60,000,000 base pairs, will be analyzed.
Comparative analysis of paired populations will provide a basis for examining
shared and distinctive aspects of the history of European colonization across
regions, with an emphasis on inferring the history of admixture and natural
selection. The project focuses on the amount of non-indigenous ancestry in each
group and the properties of admixture events that contributed non-indigenous
ancestry to Native American communities. European colonists changed the social
and natural environments of the Americas, and as a result, selective forces
might have rapidly changed the frequency of genetic variants between paired
ancient and modern indigenous populations of a geographic region. The study will
employ multiple approaches to examine regions of the genome that were subject to
selective pressures during the period of European colonialism. Results from this
study will be used as a model to infer evolutionary effects of European
colonization and to provide a novel approach to investigating this global
historical event. Moreover, results concerning ancient populations will also be
used to better understand the early demographic history of the Native Americans,
as such data are not influenced by the effects of European colonization. The
project will continue the successful Summer Internship for Native Americans in
Genomics (SING) program and enhance its impact by creating a SING alumni
conference that will include a public event with a focus on presentations of
social and ethical aspects of genomic research with indigenous communities, as
well as a one-day workshop to examine issues related to genomic research and
indigenous communities. The long-term goal is to increase the number of Native
Americans serving as leaders in careers involving the sciences and to provide
opportunities for Native American autonomy in the use of genomics as a tool for
revitalization. Lastly, as part of this project, two anthropology Ph.D. students
will be trained in genomics. As the importance of an interdisciplinary approach
to research increases, students who integrate both social and life sciences will
become equipped to secure future careers in the field.