* 1518563
* CNH-L: Adaptive Coupling of Human Environment Linkages in Response to Globally Driven Changes in Subsistence in Rural Alaska
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2015,05/31/2021
* Todd Brinkman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,525,274.00

An active and productive subsistence lifestyle is nutritionally and culturally
critical to rural communities in Alaska, yet changes in climate and rising
energy costs are challenging rural residents' ability to conduct subsistence
activities. Changes in climate will alter ecosystem structure and function,
affecting the distribution of subsistence resources and access to the areas
where resources are harvested. High fuel costs (e.g., heating, transportation)
have forced rural households to make economic sacrifices to maintain and use
equipment needed for subsistence. To address these issues, this project will: 1)
document specific impacts that environmental change and energy costs are having
on subsistence, 2) identify and link characteristics of the human (e.g., policy,
household economics) and natural (e.g., climate patterns, landscape change)
system that influence vulnerability to impacts, 3) evaluate the effectiveness of
current responses to impacts, and 4) enhance communication networks among
communities and researchers to foster future adaptation to globally-driven
changes. Rather than considering global-change adaptation as a set of discrete
actions, this research will treat actions as feedback loops that link social and
ecological components at community and regional scales and will test the
hypothesis that ineffective adaptation to global change results in part from
weak or missing feedbacks. The project involves collaboration with local
communities as well as with federal, state, and tribal organizations in Alaska
to develop and enhance networks that invent, test, and share adaptations at
regional and larger scales. It will enhance capacity to adapt to environmental
change in Alaska by engaging community leaders and training graduate students,
many of whom are Alaska Natives, in an interdisciplinary research process. Of
the 14-member project team, 21% are Alaska Native, 50% are women, and 43% are
early-career scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel
framework (adaptive coupling) to study adaptation in social-ecological systems.
It will integrates vulnerability and resilience science in a systems context.
Rather than considering global-change adaptation as a set of discrete actions,
it treats these as feedback loops that link social-ecological components at
community and regional scales. The project will test the hypothesis that
ineffective adaptation to global change results in part from weak or missing
feedbacks from impacts on communities back to the local drivers or factors
mediating community sensitivity to these drivers. The investigators seek to
understand reasons for weak or missing feedbacks. The research will contribute
to theory by integrating qualitative insights from the social sciences
(especially related to political ecology and adaptive and collaborative
capacities) with more quantitative information from ecology, hydrology, and
economics within a systems framework. The dynamics and pathways by which
adaptation scales from individual communities to a region will be investigated.
In contrast to the literature on top-down diffusion of innovation from agencies
to local entities, the investigators will focus on the grassroots emergence of
novelty and factors that influence its regional diffusion. The focus on the
interface between theory and practical application of knowledge in local
communities has the potential to transform the western linear (loading dock)
model of science to a more iterative adaptive approach that recognizes the
intellectual value of local knowledge and the importance of real-world
application as a learning laboratory.