* 1518366
* CNH-S: Linkages Among Farmer Decision Making, Beneficial Bird Species, and Pest Management in Fruit-Growing Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Philip Howard, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 498,650.00

Understanding how ecosystems function and provide important services for humans
is one of the great ecological challenges of the 21st century. This research
examines how predator species contribute to reducing crop losses in agricultural
ecosystems by consumption of crop-eating species, thereby providing an important
ecosystem service that increases crop productivity. By learning how to enhance
the abundance and activity of predators, agricultural productivity and
environmental quality should improve. Strengthening this type of ecosystem
service is increasingly important given evidence of negative effects of chemical
pest management and consumer preferences for food produced with fewer chemical
inputs. This project investigates whether predatory bird populations increase
when researchers provide nest boxes in fruit-growing regions and whether the
predatory birds in turn reduce crop damage by consuming crop-eating insects,
rodents, and birds. Further, the project investigates factors that potentially
influence fruit growers' decisions about the use of predator nest boxes,
including economic and consumer-preference considerations. The work will result
in greater knowledge about the contexts under which humans can enhance ecosystem
service delivery. It will provide information about factors that influence fruit
grower adoption of management strategies of crop-eating species. Finally, it
will document the value of nest-box programs to the conservation of predatory
bird species.

This research focuses on the American kestrel, Falco sparverius, a falcon whose
prey species damage cherries, blueberries, and other fruits. The work addresses
two hypotheses: 1) resource subsidies in the form of nest boxes for kestrels
reduce prey activity and abundance and, thus, reduce damage to cultivated fruit
and 2) the economics of fruit production, consumer preferences for particular
pest management techniques, and kestrel conservation will influence grower
decisions about installing nest boxes, and produce positive feedbacks on the
growth of nest-box programs in agricultural regions. Researchers will survey
abundance and activity of kestrels and crop-eating species, as well as fruit
damage, in landscapes with and without kestrels using nest boxes. They will
calculate costs and benefits to individual growers and regional economies of
utilizing predator nest boxes in fruit-producing regions. The project will use a
national survey of fruit growers and in-person interviews, along with modeling
approaches, to investigate factors that influence grower adoption of predator
nest boxes as a pest management practice. By integrating information from
ecology, economics, and food systems sociology, the project will improve
understanding of linkages between natural predator-prey effects, the degree to
which humans can manipulate such effects through providing resources to
predators, and the potential for factors other than economic ones to influence
grower decisions about agricultural practices.