* 1518142
* The Completion of DNA Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Justin Courcelle, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2020
* USD 460,000.00

The mechanism by which chromosome replication is accurately completed is not
well understood. To maintain genomic integrity during replication, cells must
have an ability to recognize replicated regions, limit the ongoing replication
process, and join converging daughter strands at the precise point at which the
DNA sequence has doubled. Despite these complexities, this process occurs with
remarkable efficiency (occurring thousands of times per division in human cells)
and is fundamental to the accurate duplication of the genome. It appears to be a
common point of deregulation in many cancer cells and is deliberately targeted
for inactivation by viruses to induce the lytic phase of replication (wherein
the virus multiplies rapidly). This project will determine how cells sense
replicated regions and accurately complete the proess at the precise doubling
point in the model organisms, Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Students trained during this project will be qualified for careers in research,
biotechnology and medicine in both academia and industry. The project will also
expand the number of undergraduates who participate in research experiences at
research centers in the region and expand the math and science opportunities for
K-8 students in the public school system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion of
replication in E. coli appears to involve a transient over-replication of the
region where forks converge before the excess regions are incised, resected, and
joined. By monitoring the copy number of DNA sequences where completion occurs
in E. coli, the research will identify mutants that have an impaired ability to
accurately complete replication. Using plasmid minichromosomes, a combination of
2D and 1D agarose gel analysis will then be used to identify the structural
intermediates that arise during the completion of replication in both wild type
and mutant cells. Finally, the research will determine if the completion
mechanism is conserved in eukaryotes, by examining the homologous mutants in
yeast to identify whether similar abnormalities on eukaryotic chromosomes are
observed where replication forks converge.