* 1518280
* RCN: Arabidopsis Research and Training for the 21st century (ART-21)
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2024
* Siobhan Brady, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2024
* USD 599,930.00

This Research Coordination Network will support a suite of enabling research and
training activities for the Arabidopsis and broader plant science communities.
The research goals of the network are to enable fundamental discovery research
and development of emerging technologies in Arabidopsis for translation to
research in crop plants. The training goals are to educate plant biologists at
the intersections of quantitative and computational biology for careers both
inside and outside academia. Linking the research and training efforts will be
activities aimed at increasing the visibility and participation of under-
represented groups in plant research. Outcomes will include development of
summary analyses and recommendations to define needs, challenges, and possible
new directions for Arabidopsis research and training in the 21st century.
Information and resources developed through network activities will be
disseminated through a dedicated webpage hosted by the North American
Arabidopsis Steering Committee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the next five
International Conferences on Arabidopsis Research as organizing venues, the
coordinators and steering committee of this RCN will address three objectives:
1) to identify emerging technologies where using Arabidopsis as a model organism
will provide fundamental discoveries and enable translational research in crop
species, as recommended in the recently published decadal vision for plant
science, "Unleashing a Decade of Innovation in Plant Science;" 2) to enhance
interdisciplinary training of scientists for academia and extra-academic
careers; and 3) to increase diversity of Arabidopsis research scientists using
targeted mechanisms. To achieve the goals, a set of interconnected activities
will emphasize network building through surveys and follow-up focus group
meetings, community workshops, and publication of white papers to disseminate
findings. Strategic incorporation of leadership roles for minority and early-
career scientists in the network activities will promote and increase diversity
in the Arabidopsis community.