* 1518058
* Modeling the Plant Immune Signaling Network
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Fumiaki Katagiri, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 700,000.00

Plant disease is a major cause of crop loss every year. Plants have developed a
complex immune signaling network to counter attacks by disease-causing microbes.
This project will develop computer models of the plant immune system based on
genes expressed in response to pathogen challenge in the model plant,
Arabidopsis thaliana. This information will be used to develop experimental and
theoretical approaches suitable for understanding this network. These computer
models have the advantage of allowing rapid exploration of the plant's immune
system response under various conditions which are not practical to investigate
by actual biological experimentation. In this project post-doctoral researchers
and graduate students will obtain interdisciplinary training in systems biology
and computer modeling. Part of this research will be driven by data generated by
teams of undergraduate students in a program that engages biology undergraduate
students who typically do not participate in science research. A protocol to
extend this club-style, research-driven biology education platform to other
institutions will be established in collaboration with a primarily undergraduate
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant immune signaling network is a large,
complex network with unusual emergent properties. The network is under constant
attack by diverse pathogens that evolve much faster than plants. A plant, unlike
an animal, does not have an adaptive immune system, and it must rely on the
emergent network properties of its immune signaling network to successfully
defend itself. In this project, computer models of the pathogen-triggered immune
signaling network will be expanded to facilitate identification of emergent
properties of the immune system. Modeling capabilities will be expanded on two
fronts. In Aim 1 a fully dynamic differential equation-based model of pathogen
triggered immunity will be built and tested. This model will be used for large-
scale in silico experiments to identify potential immune engineering targets. In
Aim 2 the pathogen triggered immunity model will be extended to explain
spatially heterogeneous situations, which commonly occur in nature. To support
this modeling effort, data will be collected from leaves with spatial genetic
variation generated by laser heat-inducible recombination. The model will be
used to predict cell-to-cell signal flows, such as those mediated by the
diffusible primary immune hormones salicylate and jasmonate, and the model
predictions will be experimentally tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported jointly by programs in Systems and Synthetic Biology (Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences) and Symbiosis, Defense and Self-Recognition
(Division of Integrative Organismal Systems).