* 1518361
* CNH-L: Resilience and Adaptive Capacity of Small-Scale Fishing Communities and Coastal Marine Ecosystems to Environmental and Economic Variability
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Heather Leslie, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,790,687.00

Fisheries are an important source of food and income for approximately 520
million people globally. Small-scale fisheries, in particular, are incredibly
important; they employ more than 90 percent of the world's approximately 35
million capture fishermen worldwide, and contribute over half of the world's
marine and inland fish catch, nearly all of which is used for direct human
consumption. Small-scale fisheries shape coastal cultures, economies, and
ecosystems. Yet knowledge of small-scale fisheries is notoriously poor, in part
because they often are marginalized within their own communities and nations.
With the increasing emphasis on reconciling food security and other development
aims with environmental conservation, integrated understanding of small-scale
fisheries is more critical than ever. This research project will develop
fundamental knowledge of human-environment interactions in coastal marine
systems, and help inform the development and evaluation of innovative small-
scale fisheries management strategies. Specifically, this research will examine
how environmental and economic variability and institutional diversity shape the
resilience and adaptive capacity of the coupled natural and human systems
associated with the small-scale fisheries.

This work will focus on the reciprocal interactions between the ecosystems and
institutions associated with small-scale fisheries in the Mexican state of Baja
California Sur (BCS). BCS is an ideal model system in which to investigate these
human-ecosystem dynamics, given its variability of institutional, economic, and
ecological contexts. For most fishermen in BCS, access to necessary capital
inputs (boats, gear, etc.) is achieved either through membership in a fishing-
cooperative or via a relationship with a patron. Both empirical evidence and
theory suggest that fisheries dominated by cooperatives may contribute to
improved ecosystem and human wellbeing outcomes, relative to those dominated by
patron-client relationships. But the mechanisms underlying these differences and
how they may contribute to resilience of human and natural systems to
environmental and economic variability are not well understood, nor have they
been well tested empirically. This work will address these gaps by integrating
field and synthetic investigations at the scale of individual fishing
communities throughout BCS. This work will generate new social and ecological
data including information on fish abundances and distributions, indicators of
ecological resilience and ecosystem health, information on fishermen activities
and community characteristics, indicators of institutional resilience, and
indicators of individual and community well-being. The project will also create
targeted dynamic models of key human-environment interactions that will address
core issues in coupled human-natural system science, ecology, economics, and
common-pools resources studies.