* 1518376
* CNH-L: Linking Ecosystem Services and Governance of Water Resources in Urbanized Landscapes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Adam Henry, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,798,784.00

Over half of the world's population lives in cities and urban growth is
accelerating. Water-limited arid and semiarid cities are experiencing
disproportionate increases in population and land transformation worldwide,
increasing stress on water resources and altering natural hydrological systems.
Cities face significant challenges in providing clean water for municipal and
industrial uses and in managing the environmental water quality and flooding
risks that accompany urbanization. The growth of cities will require a
continuing investment in infrastructure and in new strategies to adapt to water
resource limitations. In the face of demographic and global change, the
sustainability of water resources in arid and semiarid cities will be a key
challenge. Addressing this challenge will require improved understanding of how
water availability and distribution changes with urbanization, and how these
changes affect ecosystem service provision and policy responses. Policy and
governance decisions aimed at enhancing ecosystem services related to water
resources need to be based on scientific evidence to be effective. However,
better science does not necessarily lead to better governance; there remains a
gap between scientific knowledge and the actions taken as a result of this
knowledge. The objective of this project is to improve understanding of the
linkages between ecosystem services and governance of water resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the natural and human components
of semi-arid cities in the US Southwest in order to determine if various
attributes of these urbanized systems encourage learning and action that lead to
more sustainable outcomes. This research will draw on theoretical frameworks
that explicitly link ecological structure and function to ecosystem services to
information flows to decision making. Specifically, four key questions will be
addressed: (a) How does the frequency, intensity and redistribution of rainfall
and runoff influence the eco-hydrologic response of arid and semi-arid urbanized
systems and result in emergent ecosystem services? (b) How do human system
conditions affect city-level learning about actions that influence ecosystem
service provision? (c) How do natural system conditions influence social
networks, understanding, and decision-making about water management and
infrastructure? And (d) What actions have been taken, in terms of alterations to
the built environment, that influence the effect of the built environment on
natural system processes? These questions will be answered through a set of
field, survey, lab, workshop, and synthetic experiments. Specifically a suite of
research sites will be established in Tucson, Sierra Vista, and Yuma, Arizona
that will allow investigations from the 1 ha/individual to the 100,000
ha/regional scales. Natural system investigations will focus on how eco-
hydrologic processes integrate from the point to large catchment scale and
characterize ecosystem services. The social dimensions of this project will
focus on the policy and governance sectors to understand learning, decision-
making and action at the municipal scale and importantly across social and
bioclimatic regions. This work will integrate across natural and human systems
by examining how scientific information about ecosystem services develops into
decision making and by investigating how policy interventions impact ecosystem
services.