* 1518742
* Fundamental Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Alexander Vilenkin, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Vilenkin at Tufts
University.

The theory of cosmic inflation, which was proposed as a speculative hypothesis
35 years ago, has by now accumulated substantial observational support and has
become the leading cosmological paradigm. This theory has also led to a major
change in our global view of the universe. According to the new worldview, much
of the volume in the universe is in the state of explosive inflationary
expansion. We live in a "bubble" where inflation has ended, but it will never
end in the entire universe. The total volume of inflating regions continues to
grow, and other bubbles with diverse properties are constantly being formed. The
major goal of the proposed research is to learn how this "multiverse" scenario
can be tested observationally and to investigate its implications for the
beginning of the universe. The multiverse worldview has far-reaching
implications beyond physics. It provides a dramatically new perspective on the
global structure of the universe and on our place in it. Research in this area
thus advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one
of its most fundamental directions: the understanding of the properties of the
universe. Professor Vilenkin will also involve graduate students and postdocs in
his research, and thereby provide critical training for junior physicists
beginning research in this field. He will continue his efforts to communicate
the ideas of modern cosmology to the general public, in the form of public
lectures, popular articles, and interviews for radio and TV. He will also write
a textbook, emphasizing the new worldview, based on his undergraduate cosmology
course, which is aimed at students with no preparation in science.

More technically, Professor Vilenkin will investigate the possibility of a
direct test of the multiverse scenario by observing collisions of our bubble
with other bubbles, or with topological defects that could nucleate in the
inflating background. Possible observational effects of such collisions will be
studied using both analytic and numerical methods. A complementary approach is
to analyze the statistical properties of the multiverse and use them to derive
predictions for the observed values of the constants of Nature in our bubble.
This approach will be pursued, with the main focus on the statistics of
different states in the multiverse and of the transition rates between them. The
general problem of making predictions in the multiverse, known as the measure
problem, will also be addressed.