* 1518794
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role Of Ritual In Household And Societal Solidarity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Takeshi Inomata, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Jessica MacLellan, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Arizona, will
investigate the role of household rituals in the development of ancient Maya
civilization. This project will provide empirical evidence to address broad
questions about the roles of households and ritual in social and political
change around the world, particularly in non-Western societies. Many scholars
have shown that public rituals are key to the integration of communities and the
emergence of kingship in early states. Some argue that such rituals are based on
pre-existing domestic practices, but in the case of the earliest Maya
communities, the nature of the relationship between domestic and public remains
unclear. MacLellan's research will illuminate the social processes involved in
the transition to a sedentary, agriculture-based lifestyle and in the subsequent
emergence of a complex civilization. Related studies in the Maya area have
focused on smaller sites, later time periods, and other regions, and therefore
on different social processes. MacLellan's work will provide a new,
complementary perspective on the role of household activities in the development
of socio-political hierarchies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MacLellan's research is
part of the Ceibal-Petexbat√∫n Archaeological Project, an international
collaboration directed by Dr. Takeshi Inomata and Dr. Daniela Triadan, also of
the University of Arizona. The site of Ceibal, in Guatemala, was founded as a
public ceremonial center surprisingly early - around the time sedentary villages
and ceramics began to appear in the Maya lowlands (about 1000 BC). Ceibal
therefore presents a rare opportunity to investigate how changes in ritual
practices relate to important socio-political transformations, beginning around
the transition to agriculture. MacLellan has conducted preliminary
investigations at the Karinel Group, an early residential area. Through further,
carefully targeted excavations at the Karinel Group and subsequent laboratory
analyses, MacLellan will evaluate three specific questions in order to determine
how shifts in household ritual affected the broader society at Ceibal: 1) When
did people at Ceibal began living in permanent, formal groups of structures, and
did a more mobile lifestyle continue after the site's public plaza was
constructed?; 2) During which time periods did domestic rituals resemble public
rituals conducted in the Central Plaza?; and 3) Did domestic rituals involving
the bones of ancestors predate and facilitate the development of socio-political
hierarchies? MacLellan will establish a clear, refined chronology of the Karinel
Group through ceramic analysis and radiocarbon dating in order to answer these
questions. This chronology will serve as important comparative data for other
Mesoamerican archaeologists. The Ceibal project will employ many local Maya and
Hispanic laborers. Through interactions with nearby communities, the researchers
will discourage looting, deforestation, and other destructive activities at
archaeological sites in the region. The project will also train several
Guatemalan students in field and laboratory methods, thereby shaping and
supporting the next generation of Guatemalan archaeologists.