* 1518001
* Inference of Markovian Properties of Molecular Sequences Using Shotgun Reads and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jed Fuhrman, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 600,000.00

High throughput next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies generate enormous
amounts of fragmented genome sequences, revolutionizing genetic and genomics
research. Thousands of individual genomes and metagenomes consisting of natural
mixtures of individual organisms from various environments have been sequenced
using NGS. These developments play essential roles in understanding the genetic
basis of complex diseases, the effects of environment on public health, the
impacts of environmental changes such as global warming and pollution on the
environments, and the detection of pathogens including viruses. Development of
analytical methods to make full use of NGS data is essential in advancing public
health, improving the environment, and strengthening national security. Although
significant progress has been made in the analysis of NGS data, there are still
wide gaps between the current available analytical tools and the full potential
that can be achieved through the analysis of NGS data. This research project
aims to further advance recently-developed statistical and computational methods
for the comparison of genomes and metagenomes using NGS reads, without the need
for assembly into genomes, avoiding many pitfalls that make assembly
problematic. The research will make the computational tools more efficient and
powerful and will employ them to analyze metagenomic data to study the effects
of environmental factors on marine microbial communities. Both the algorithms
and results will be disseminated through the web. The results from this study
will be important for both genomics and metagenomics studies under a variety of
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, statistical and computational
methods for the inference of Markovian properties of molecular sequences based
on NGS short reads will be developed and the methods will then be used to study
the relationships among individual genomes and metagenomic samples. Firstly,
methods to estimate the order and the transition probability matrix and their
asymptotic distributions will be developed. Methods to infer variable length
Markov chains (VLMC) will also be developed. Secondly, new alignment-free
statistics taking into account the Markov chain (MC) properties of the sequences
will be developed to study the relationships among genome sequences. Iterative
approaches for choosing the word length will be developed. Thirdly, Markov chain
models derived from NGS reads will be used to identify species or strains in
metagenomic communities and to compare metagenomic samples based on the MC
models. Finally, a suite of computer algorithms related to the inference of MCs
based on NGS reads and applications to genome and metagenomic data analysis will
be developed. The broad impacts of the project include computational tools for
genome and metagenome comparison based on NGS data together with software
packages for public usage, graduate and undergraduate training across multiple
disciplines of statistics and biology, and outreach lectures for K-12 teachers
and students.