* 1518873
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Health-Promoting Community Organizations in Urban Neighborhoods
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 6,334.00

Racial residential segregation is a significant and persistent aspect of the
American urban landscape even decades after de jure segregation was made
illegal. While segregation has declined modestly over time for Black Americans,
the immense growth of other racial and ethnic minority groups since the 1960s
has complicated this issue and revealed new patterns and trends in the urban
racial makeup of the United States. Prior research has linked residential
segregation to a variety of social problems, including poor health across the
life course. Yet the mechanisms that produce such an association are poorly
understood. This project will examine one such potential mechanism, the
distribution of community organizational resources and how residents of such
communities utilize those resources. This study proposes that minority
segregated communities may have diminished access to community organizational
resources and that this differential access may contribute to differences in
health statuses across communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With these
considerations in mind the project addresses the question of how racial/ethnic
residential segregation is related to health outcomes for minority communities
in the United States. The PI's will examine the question nationally, using
Census data sources and the American Community Survey, as well as locally
through a specialized survey of the Phoenix metropolitan area, the 2013 Phoenix
Caregiver Satisfaction Survey. These data sources are paired with a
comprehensive database of local community-serving organizations from another
ongoing research project by the PI's. Both data sources are used in an analysis
of family access to health care resources, how that access is patterned by what
is available in local communities, and how this in turn impacts long term
health. In addition to the contributions to the academic literature, the project
has practical implications for policy makers and public health practitioners.