* 1518848
* Workshop: Interactions between Indoor and Atmospheric Chemistry. France, Mid-May 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Glenn Morrison, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2017
* USD 58,635.00

1518848&lt;br/&gt;Morrison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop
is to outline a research plan to effectively and efficiently improve the
understanding of indoor air chemistry. The science of indoor air chemistry is
several decades old, but remains in its infancy. The much more mature science of
atmospheric (outdoor) chemistry can be leveraged to rapidly advance knowledge in
the indoor environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will result in the
first of its kind: a focused collaboration of international outdoor and indoor
scientists and engineers with a resulting plan of action for research on indoor
chemistry. This workshop brings together 50 atmospheric and indoor air chemistry
researchers to present and discuss contemporary research in both fields, pose
and answer key research questions and define future indoor air chemistry
research objectives. A primary outcome of the 2-day workshop will be one or more
documents outlining the major questions, research objectives and research
solutions that are identified during workshop sessions. Where possible, these
documents will be turned into publishable manuscripts in the form of regular
journal articles or editorials. The PIs anticipate that the workshop will set
the stage for future workshops and that the outcomes of this workshop will help
define the direction of indoor chemistry research in the near future.