* 1518379
* CAREER: Chemoselective Tools for Exploration of Natural Product Chemical Space
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Erin Carlson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 396,969.00

With the support of a CAREER award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
at the National Science Foundation, Professor Erin Carlson of Indiana University
will lead a research program that will focus on the development and application
of chemoselective methods for the exploration of natural product chemical space.
Continued investigation of natural products is essential for the discovery of
small molecules to probe biological processes, as therapeutic leads, and to
identify new molecular architectures for synthetic and biosynthetic studies.
Current isolation strategies facilitate enrichment based on a restricted set of
mechanisms that are dependent upon physical properties such as solubility or
size. Generation of a method that separates compounds by a unique and
complementary mechanism, such as functional group composition, would represent a
major advance in the field and is a major goal of the proposed research.
Preliminary work in Professor Carlson's lab has resulted in the generation of a
tagging strategy for the enrichment of alcohol-containing natural products and
confirmed the ability of this method to facilitate detection of low abundance
species. This award will enable pursuit of tagging strategies for additional
functional group classes and application of these tools to the exploration of
myriad natural products sources resulting in the discovery of new natural
products and novel chemical scaffolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award to
Professor Carlson of Indiana University will result in a number of broader
impacts. Of particular emphasis will be the utilization of natural products as a
platform to ignite an interest in and appreciation for chemistry, especially in
girls and young women. Girls often do not feel a connection with science - they
lack an understanding of how it is useful or relevant to their lives and cannot
relate to the people they perceive as being scientists. Interest in science
needs to be generated and nurtured to encourage girls to continue with science
education. The PI will develop an outreach program called Natural Products and
Lighting the Fire of Curiosity to ignite an interest in science in local
elementary and middle school aged girls. This program will introduce students to
natural products, focusing on compounds produced by plants. The outreach
materials generated will be broadly disseminated via the internet to enable
teachers worldwide to utilize these resources. To date, this program has been
shared with over 125 students and is now published as an official activity
available to Girl Scout troops throughout southern Indiana. Natural products
will also be used as inspiration for the development of laboratory curriculum at
Indiana University that more closely resemble genuine research experiences.
Inquiry-based modules will be devised and included in both introductory and
advanced organic laboratories.