* 1518681
* Effects of temperature on vector-borne disease transmission: integrating theory with empirical data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Erin Mordecai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,402,276.00

Understanding how temperature affects disease-causing organisms and the
mosquitoes that carry them is critical for predicting and responding to future
changes in disease risk. Many of the world's most devastating and neglected
infectious diseases require mosquitoes and other insects for transmission
between people. Malaria kills over 650,000 people each year, mostly children in
sub-Saharan Africa, and pathogens like West Nile virus, dengue virus, and
chikungunya virus are on the rise in both North America and the tropics.
Mosquitoes and the pathogens they carry are sensitive to the environment, so
changes in climate, particularly temperature, affect disease risk both in the
tropics and in temperate areas. This award supports research to measure the
effect of temperature on 13 different pathogens that use mosquitoes and flies
for transmission, and the capacity for two common mosquitoes in the Americas to
adapt to different temperature conditions. In addition, this work will support
STEM education through training in science and math with a focus on under-
represented groups, and will contribute publicly available data that can be used
by other researchers and public health professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop a general framework for predicting the
temperature sensitivity of vector transmission. This work addresses three main
questions: (1) How does vector-borne pathogen transmission respond to
temperature? (2) How important is the influence of temperature, relative to
other factors, on transmission in the field? (3) Can such transmission adapt to
local temperature regimes? The research will develop temperature-sensitive
transmission models and fit them with data from the existing literature for 13
vector-borne diseases: vivax malaria, trypanosomiasis, dengue, chikungunya,
yellow fever, West Nile, Eastern equine encephalitis, Western equine
encephalitis, St. Louis encephalitis, Rift Valley fever, Ockelbo (Sindbis)
disease, Ross River fever, and bluetongue. Laboratory experiments will measure
local thermal adaptation of Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus mosquitoes, which
transmit dengue and other viruses, from across their geographic and temperature
ranges. In tandem, the research will develop and test theory on how vectors and
parasites respond to temperature based on theory from physiological ecology. New
local-scale data collected in Ecuador on transmission risk, dengue cases,
climate, and other social and economic factors will be used to validate the
model predictions. Complementing these local-scale data, the research will
develop a global database on field transmission from the existing literature,
along with climatic and socioeconomic information. Together, these field data
will test the accuracy of the transmission models and assess the relative
importance of temperature for transmission at scales from neighborhood to
continent.