* 1518844
* SHF: Large: Gradual Typing Across the Spectrum
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Matthias Felleisen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2019
* USD 2,300,195.00

Title: SHF: Large: Gradual Typing Across the Spectrum

The ``Gradual Typing Across the Spectrum'' project addresses an urgent, emergent
need at the intersection of software maintenance and programming language
research. Over the past 20 years, working software engineers have embraced so-
called scripting languages for a variety of tasks. They routinely use JavaScript
for interactive web pages, Ruby on Rails for server-side software, Python for
data science, and so on. Software engineers choose these languages because they
make prototyping easy, and before the engineers realize it, these prototypes
evolve into large, working systems and escape into the real world. Like all
software, these systems need to be maintained---mistakes must be fixed, their
performance requires improvement, security gaps call for fixes, their
functionality needs to be enhanced---but scripting languages render maintenance
difficult. The intellectual merits of this project are to address all aspects of
this real-world software engineering problem. In turn, the project's broader
significance and importance are the deployment of new technologies to assist the
programmer who maintains code in scripting languages, the creation of novel
technologies that preserve the advantages of these scripting frameworks, and the
development of curricular materials that prepares the next generation of
students for working within these frameworks.

A few years ago, the PIs launched programming language research efforts to
address this problem. They diagnosed the lack of sound types in scripting
languages as one of the major factors. With types in conventional programming
languages, programmers concisely communicate design information to future
maintenance workers; soundness ensures the types are consistent with the rest of
the program. In response, the PIs explored the idea of gradual typing, that is,
the creation of a typed sister language (one per scripting language) so that
(maintenance) programmers can incrementally equip systems with type annotations.
Unfortunately, these efforts have diverged over the years and would benefit from
systematic cross-pollination.

With support from this grant, the PIs will systematically explore the spectrum
of their gradual typing system with a three-pronged effort. First, they will
investigate how to replicate results from one project in another. Second, they
will jointly develop an evaluation framework for gradual typing projects with
the goal of diagnosing gaps in the efforts and needs for additional research.
Third, they will explore the creation of new scripting languages that benefit
from the insights of gradual typing research.