* 1518382
* BALSims:  a Spectral Synthesis Approach to Understanding Broad Absorption  Line Quasar Outflows
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Karen Leighly, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2019
* USD 269,644.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. One important aspect of understanding galaxy formation and evolution
is to study supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies and how these
black holes interact with their host galaxies. Observational evidence suggests
that black holes and galaxies evolve together. This evidence includes the
tightness of the correlation between the black hole mass and galaxy bulge
properties and the similar history of black hole growth and star formation. This
evidence is supported by theoretical arguments. Black holes in their active
phase emit more than enough energy to unbind the host galaxies' bulge, and in
their non-active phase should be present in the centers of most present-day
galaxies. As a consequence, many models for galaxy formation include a
unspecified process by which a fraction of the energy released in the region
surrounding the black hole contributes to the galaxy formation environment. This
interaction is generically known as "feedback," and the mechanism by which the
black hole acts on the host galaxy remains a mystery. This project uses a novel
spectral synthesis and statistical approach to build the tools needed to
constrain the key parameter characterizing one type of
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the project activities will directly
contribute to the training of young scientists, including undergraduate
students, in techniques of spectral and statistical analysis. The PI will
develop and teach a course, directed toward advanced undergraduate and graduate
students, on machine learning and statistical methods, some of which will be
used in this project. The PI will bring the results of this research to the
citizens of Oklahoma through participation in the OU speakers
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will constrain the key
parameter characterizing quasar mode feedback: the ratio of the kinetic
luminosity to bolometric luminosity, in the SDSS broad absorption line quasars
as a whole. In addition, the carefully-phased research program addresses related
scientific questions at each check point. These include the location and nature
of feedback interactions, a search for and evaluation of absorption-line
spectral diagnostics, and constraints of key outflow physical parameters,
including column density, ionization parameter, and covering
fraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will yield insights into
the physics of quasar outflows, and measurements of key parameters that will be
valuable to a wide variety of researchers. These include scientists who are
interested in on-going interactions potentially occurring in infrared-loud
quasars, data analysts who use spectral diagnostics to infer physical conditions
from spectra of individual objects, and theorists who need observational
constraints to develop their hydromagnetic wind models, as well as providing an
assessment of the viability of quasar-mode feedback for galaxy evolution models.