* 1518204
* Opportunistic complexation and mesoscopic aggregates in protein solutions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2020
* Peter Vekilov, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2020
* USD 631,769.00

Title: Opportunistic complexation and mesoscopic aggregates in protein
solution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein aggregation is a central problem of
biophysics and other life sciences. This investigation focuses on a particularly
puzzling type of protein aggregation during which protein-rich inclusions form
in protein solutions. These inclusions are a micron or less in size and have
been called the "mesoscopic clusters". Despite their small volume, the clusters
are essential nucleation sites for ordered protein solids such as crystals and
sickle cell anemia fibers. The mesoscopic clusters are also at odds with
standard notions of thermodynamics, which dictates that such clusters should be
either much larger or should not exist at all. Understanding the molecular
origin of the mesoscopic clusters will resolve a major fundamental question of
thermodynamics. This research will test the hypothesis that the mesoscopic
clusters are caused by formation of long-lived complexes made up of individual
protein molecules. A combination of advanced experimental techniques,
theoretical modeling, and computer simulations will be employed to test this
hypothesis. Understanding protein aggregation has implications in all facets of
biology as well as on biotechnology and health. At the core of the broader
impact activities is training of graduate, undergraduate, and, in particular,
high school students. The project is a multidisciplinary study that spans many
topics in physics, chemistry, and biology and represents a great platform for
further academic endeavors of the involved students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
microscopic hypothesis underlying the proposed work is that the mesoscopic
clusters stem from the formation of transient protein-containing complexes. The
complexes are stabilized at high protein densities. In contrast with the bulk
solution, the complexes are the dominant protein-containing species inside the
clusters. In a steady-state cluster, the influx of protein in the form of
monomers is exactly balanced by the outflow of protein in the form of complexes.
The nature of the complex depends on whether the protein is monomeric, as is
lysozyme, or oligomeric, as is hemoglobin, ordinarily a tetrameric protein. The
investigators in this study hypothesize that for typically monomeric proteins,
complex formation is accompanied by partial protein unfolding and, possibly,
domain swapping. In the case of oligomeric proteins, the complexes are oligomers
that contain an untypical number of individual monomers. A core aspect of the
hypothesis is that the complexes are opportunistic; they represent untypical
ways to transiently bind individual protein molecules together. The research
team will establish the identity and mechanisms of the complexation using a
combination of physicochemical and biochemical experimental techniques (dynamic
light scattering, Brownian microscopy, mass spectroscopy, amide exchange NMR,
sheer flow) and theoretical tools (molecular modeling employing coarse-grained
energy functions and the classical density functional theory). They will test
whether the clusters are truly steady-state objects and explore the possibility
that cluster formation has a slow, irreversible component. This part of the
proposed study may answer the question whether clusters ripen according to an
Ostwald-like scenario, or a different mechanism is involved.