* 1518779
* TWC: Large: Collaborative: The Science and Applications of Crypto-Currency
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Emin Sirer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Crypto-currencies and smart contracts are a new wave of disruptive technology
that will shape the future of money and financial transactions. Today, crypto-
currencies are a billion-dollar market, and hundreds of companies are entering
this space, promising exciting new markets and eco-systems. Unfortunately, usage
of crypto-currencies outstrips our understanding. Currently most crypto
currencies rely on heuristic designs without a solid appreciation of the
necessary security properties, or any formal basis upon which strong assurance
of such properties might be achieved.

This work aims to establish a rigorous scientific foundation for crypto-
currencies. To achieve this, this work blends cryptography, game theory,
programming languages, and systems security techniques. Expected outcomes
include new crypto-currency designs with provable security properties,
financially enforceable cryptographic protocols whose security properties are
backed by enforceable payments in case of a breach, smart contract systems that
are easy to program and formally verifiable, as well as high-assurance systems
for storing and handling high-value crypto-currencies and transactions. The
project will provide solutions to some of the most difficult and important
technical questions surrounding the current digital-money revolution. The
investigators will organize a crypto-currency speaker series that will bring
together technologists, economists, social scientists, and policy-makers to
foster collaborations that will shape the future of digital currencies.