* 1518523
* TWC: TTP Option: Large: Collaborative: Towards a Science of Censorship Resistance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jedidiah Crandall, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 377,782.00

The proliferation and increasing sophistication of censorship warrants
continuing efforts to develop tools to evade it. Yet, designing effective
mechanisms for censorship resistance ultimately depends on accurate models of
the capabilities of censors, as well as how those capabilities will likely
evolve. In contrast to more established disciplines within security, censorship
resistance is relatively nascent, not yet having solid foundations for
understanding censor capabilities or evaluating the effectiveness of evasion
technologies. Consequently, the censorship resistance tools that researchers
develop may ultimately fail to serve the needs of citizens who need them to
communicate. Designers of these tools need a principled foundation for reasoning
about design choices and tradeoffs.

To provide such a foundation, this project develops a science of censorship
resistance: principled approaches to understanding the nature of censorship and
the best ways to facilitate desired outcomes. The approach draws upon empirical
studies of censorship as the foundation for models and abstractions to allow us
to reason about the censorship-resistant technologies from first principles. The
project aims to characterize and model censorship activities ranging from
blocked search results to interference with international network traffic. The
research develops theoretical models of censorship; reconciles these with large-
scale empirical measurements; and uses these observations to design censorship-
resistance tools to deploy in practice, as both components of Tor and standalone
systems.