* 1518261
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Identifying Mechanisms for Environmental Adaptation in  Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Nitin Baliga, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 929,994.00

This collaborative project engages researchers in the US (Institute for Systems
Biology) and the UK (University of Birmingham) to enhance understanding of how
gene regulation has evolved and functions across a group of related but
nevertheless diverse microorganisms. Knowledge of how CMNR bacteria
(Corynebacterium, Mycobacterium, Nocardia and Rhodococcus) adapt to new
environments will be used to improve their use in remediating pollutants,
producing bioenergy, and improving public health. CMNR bacteria inhabit soils,
cooperate with plants, and include microbes and pathogens that are of great
interest to many industries. The investigators in this project will examine the
hypothesis that the diversity of habitats colonized by this group of bacteria is
rooted in their ability to adapt to new environments by altering the arrangement
of complex fat molecules in their cell envelope. The research will also expand
the high school educational curriculum developed by the US team, which uses a
systematic approach to explore the global issue of food security. Activities
will be incorporated that model natural food production systems and that use
network models to study ecosystem dynamics, functioning, and resilience. The
curriculum will be aligned with the goals of the Next Generation Science
Standards (US) and National Curriculum (UK). The curriculum will be widely
disseminated to classrooms in the US and UK through a widely accessed education
website. The computational tools and experimental methods to be developed will
be useful to the broad research community and will be made available as well-
documented, open-source resources.

CMNR bacteria adapt to diverse habitats by using paralogous enzymes in different
combinations to selectively catabolize different substrates and alter the
composition of their cell envelope. To elucidate this combinatorial strategy of
CMNR bacteria, the underlying conditionally active gene regulatory networks
within Mycobacterium smegmatis will be reverse engineered using a systems
biology approach. Comparative analysis across all CMNR bacterial genomes will
facilitate inference of the gene regulatory networks and also aid in elucidating
the evolutionarily conserved and unique features of the networks. Further, genes
and interactions within sub-networks that effect specific changes in cell
envelope composition will be identified by correlating changes in modular
architecture of the M. smegmatis model during growth transitions between varying
substrates and environmental conditions. Model predictions will be tested by
analyzing consequences of specific gene deletions on cell envelope composition
of representative CMNR bacteria under relevant conditions. This project will
generate innovative approaches to construct and analyze a gene regulatory
network model across related, but distinct, microorganisms.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.