* 1518171
* A scaffolding protein is a multivalent hub for organizing bacterial cytoplasm
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Rongsong Liu, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2019
* USD 625,462.00

Despite being the simplest organisms on our planet, bacteria exemplify a
universal feature of life: they are exquisitely organized. Amazingly, the
mixture of many thousands of different proteins in a bacterial cell is a self-
organizing system. This is accomplished by the production of molecular
scaffolds, which are large, three-dimensional, porous networks that attach to
specific target proteins and group them into cooperative networks. The placement
of these scaffolds at defined locations within the cell provides a basic form of
bacterial anatomy. Although bacterial scaffolds have major influences on cell
physiology, relatively little is known about their structure and function, and a
major goal of this project is to understand scaffolds and their interactions
with target proteins at a molecular level. A second goal is to understand how
scaffold networks are different among related species that exhibit large
variations in cell anatomy. This will provide novel insight on how the
plasticity of scaffold networks facilitates the evolution of new bacterial
species. The concept of exquisite organization within cells relates directly to
the broader impacts of the project, which will come from the construction of a
visually stunning interactive microscope exhibit that will be viewed by
thousands of young children at the Children's Museum of Cheyenne, Wyoming.

Many bacteria become organized by assembling polymeric protein scaffolds that
recruit groups of regulatory proteins into cooperative networks. Although these
scaffolds have major influences on bacterial physiology and cell organization,
relatively little is known about their structure and function. This project
addresses this significant knowledge gap with the following specific aims: (i)
Identify the direct binding partners of a scaffolding protein, called PopZ, in
the species Caulobacter crescentus, and characterize the binding interfaces at a
molecular level. This will be the first comprehensive study of a bacterial
scaffold interface, with mutational analyses that will provide a precise level
of detail. (ii) Understand how the three-dimensional structure of the PopZ
scaffold influences network assembly and the kinetic properties of the PopZ-
binding proteins moving within it. This will be the first study to relate the
three-dimensional geometry of the scaffold to its function within the cell, and
will include novel mathematical models of particle movements based on
empirically determined biophysical parameters. (iii) Connect changes in the PopZ
amino acid sequence to changes in cell organization during the evolution of new
species. This will be the first study to compare PopZ networks between species
that have large differences in sub-cellular organization, and will test the
hypothesis that scaffold networks provide a relatively promiscuous binding
surface that facilitates evolutionary change. This project also emphasizes
broader impacts that extend beyond basic science. In creating a unique and
interactive live cell microscopy exhibit at the Children's Museum of Cheyenne,
the investigators will inspire future generations of scientists by impressing
them with the inherent beauty of sub-cellular organization.