* 1518455
* CNH-L: Coupled Social and Ecological Consequences of Conservation Easements
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Mickey Lauria, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 850,000.00

A private land conservation tool, conservation easements, have become widely
used in the United States over the past thirty years, and their popularity may
correspond to tax laws creating incentives for private land conservation in the
public interest. This research project will examine how shifting dynamics
between conservation easement holders, easement donors/sellers, regional land
use pressures, and connections to conserved lands are affecting the spatial
pattern, public benefit and ecological integrity of conservation easements in
different regions of the United States. These dynamics will be examined at the
fine scale; national and regional policy structures will be linked at the land
parcel-level. How public input during the conservation easement process affects
the spatial use of easements, as well as the neighborhood effects of easements
on adjacent and county-level land costs, will be analyzed. Results from this
research will be useful to land use planners, both public and private, who will
benefit from a better understanding of the conveyance process and the
environmental outcomes. Students will be trained in database creation and
assessment, strengthening the nation's scientific workforce.

Employing multivariate, spatial overlay, and time-series analyses, the
relationship between political and legal factors and conservation easement
propagation will be examined. Regional spatial datasets will be combined with
the results from county-level easement donor surveys and both fine and coarse
filter ecological integrity approaches to assess whether conservation easements
whose purpose is to maintain biological integrity have a higher likelihood of
contributing to reserve networks in their spatial arrangement than do other
conservation easements. Whether this is more likely to occur in areas with
public oversight in the easement placement process will be determined. How the
environmental outcomes affect the easement decision process will be addressed.
Theory will be advanced by examining the geographic effect of the easement tool,
and how social factors may influence its use, in a single spatial and
quantitative framework. Broader impacts will include better understanding of the
complete conservation easement process for planners and land owners and the
training of undergraduate and graduate students.