* 1518316
* Regulation of Gene Expression by a Glycolytic Transcription Factor
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Tracy Johnson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2019
* USD 840,000.00

Proper expression of genetic information is crucial to every function performed
by cells. This project addresses a fundamental question about gene expression.
Namely, how are the different processes that regulate gene expression
coordinated and how does this coordination change the biological function of
cells? This project will also implement effective approaches for broadening
participation of underrepresented students in STEM. These approaches leverage
the skills and experiences acquired from a long history of previous education
and outreach endeavors at the K-12 and undergraduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each step in gene expression from the synthesis of
messenger RNAs to their extensive processing is a potential target for
regulation. Although each of these regulatory steps has been historically
studied as a biochemically distinct process, in recent years it has become clear
that they are highly interconnected and coordinated, and that this coordination
is an essential feature of gene regulation. However, identifying and
characterizing the functions of the factors that coordinate these reactions has
remained a difficult challenge. The research described here highlights the
unexpected role for the yeast cap binding complex (CBC) in nearly every step of
gene regulation. Remarkably, one of the genes whose expression is regulated by
the CBC, GCR1, controls the synthesis of about 75% of the messenger RNAs in
actively growing cells. This proposal leverages GCR1 as a tool to (1) provide a
window into mechanisms of coordinated regulation of transcription and RNA
processing and the effect of this coordination on cell function and (2)
understand CBC functions in gene regulation. The project has the following
independent objectives: Objective 1: Determine how GCR1 is regulated and how
Gcr1p isoforms allow cells to respond to nutrient depletion. Objective 2:
Determine the role of the Cap Binding Complex in Gcr1 regulation. Objective 3:
Determine how the CBC affects chromatin modification and co-transcriptional
splicing genome-wide using a combination of genetics and next generation
sequencing approaches.