* 1518611
* Consequences of Anthropogenic Resources for the Cross-Scale Dynamics of an Enteric Pathogen in an Avian Host
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2022
* Jeffrey Hepinstall-Cymerman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2022
* USD 2,163,753.00

Urbanization is expanding at a global scale, with two-thirds of the world's
people expected to reside in cities in the next 40 years. Urbanization causes
many wildlife species to decline, but some species capitalize on new resources,
especially food, provided by humans in urban and suburban habitats. Shifts in
wildlife ecology in response to intentional (e.g., bird feeders) or accidental
(e.g., garbage) feeding by humans can alter their exposure and susceptibility to
infectious diseases. This can happen when human-provided food causes wildlife to
gather at high densities and mix with species they naturally would not contact,
increasing their exposure to pathogens. Supplemental feeding could also affect
an animal's ability to fight infection by boosting body condition and immune
defense; alternatively, human-altered diets might change the makeup of their gut
bacteria and increase their, susceptibility to infection. This research project
directly examines whether food provided to wildlife changes their interactions
with pathogens, from the colonization of individual hosts to disease spread
across the landscape, with associated disease risks for humans. The researchers
will focus on interactions between the gut pathogen Salmonella and White Ibis in
South Florida; these wading birds have recently shifted from feeding in natural
wetlands to urban parks, where they subsist on leftover food and handouts from
people. The researchers will use experiments, field observations and radio-
tracking technology to investigate how urban diet influences Salmonella
infection through changes in condition and immune defense of individual birds,
and movement and flocking behaviors of White Ibis across different sites and
habitat types. Mathematical models will be developed to forecast the spread of
infection in relation to human feeding in urban parks. Through the high
visibility and public appeal of urban White Ibises, the researchers will involve
citizen scientist volunteers in reporting their observations, and will engage in
outreach efforts to educate the public on the health-related effects of feeding
wildlife. This interdisciplinary project will also provide numerous
opportunities for training undergraduates, graduate students, and research
professionals, including individuals from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents the most comprehensive
study to date of how wildlife responses to changing food resources in human-
dominated habitats influence their interactions with infectious diseases.
Activities integrate field studies, captive challenge experiments and
mathematical modeling to address three questions: (i) How does provisioning
influence pathogen susceptibility, shedding, and impacts on individual hosts?
(ii) How does provisioning influence local-scale contacts and transmission
dynamics? and (iii) How does provisioning alter host movements, pathogen
transmission and impacts at the landscape level? The first question will be
answered by quantifying individual-level diet, immune defense, pathogen shedding
and indicators of condition/health in urban and natural habitats. The
researchers will further test whether gastrointestinal microbiota depend on diet
and habitat type through work with wild and captive birds. The second question
will be addressed through measures of host contact, including flock size and
species composition in urban and natural habitats, and by measuring the
prevalence and genotypes of Salmonella. The third question will be addressed by
using geospatial tracking technology and citizen science reporting to
characterize the movements of ibises, and identify ecological correlates of
habitat use and infection metrics. Field and experimental work will directly
inform a mathematical model that links diet to pathogen spread, to predict
changes in infection prevalence and impacts. This modeling framework can be
applied more broadly to understand how other wildlife species and their
pathogens might respond to future urbanization and associated shifts in food
resources.