* 1518083
* COMBINED SINGLE MOLECULE AND IN-CELL APPROACHES TO UNDERSTAND DYNEIN-MEDIATED MITOTIC CHECKPOINT SILENCING
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Steven Markus, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2019
* USD 715,548.00

Cell division is one of the most fundamental processes of all life. Various
molecular processes converge during cell division to ensure that it takes place
with a high level of accuracy and fidelity. For instance, the genetic
information contained with the chromosomes is faithfully divided between mother
and daughter cells during each round of cell division or mitosis such that
mistakes are very rarely made. The machinery that ensures high-fidelity
chromosome inheritance from mother to daughter cells includes a highly elaborate
assemblage of filamentous structures called microtubules, and large complex
structures assembled upon the chromosomes called kinetochores. Proper division
of the genetic material requires that each kinetochore make a proper and stable
attachment to microtubules prior to the end of mitosis. Interestingly,
kinetochores monitor and regulate their own attachment status; however, how the
attachment status of each kinetochore is relayed to the machinery that initiates
exit from mitosis is unknown. This project aims to determine how a molecular
motor protein called dynein affects and facilitates proper division of the
genetic material during mitosis. The results from this project will have
significant impact on our understanding of cell division, and the various
underlying processes that are tightly regulated and highly orchestrated to
perform this critical biological function reproducibly and with high fidelity.
In addition, this project will impact the scientific literacy of the community
through the implementation of an undergraduate course, and also by teaching
elementary students about cell division, and the scientific method.

In this project, the investigator will examine how cells accurately and reliably
segregate their genetic material during cell division. To prevent errors during
chromatid separation during mitosis, cells employ a fail-safe mechanism called
the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), which prevents mitotic progression until
all chromosomes have established proper kinetochore-microtubule attachments. In
this project, investigators will probe the role of the microtubule motor protein
dynein in the transport (SAC) proteins away from kinetochores, thereby silencing
the inhibitory signal, and allowing the initiation of anaphase and progression
through mitosis. A combination of in vitro and in-cell approaches will be
employed to understand the role for dynein in this process, and to understand
how microtubule attachment status is translated into activation of dynein-
mediated SAC protein eviction from kinetochores. These studies will be
transformative because they will answer key questions regarding the SAC by
implementing a newly developed single molecule approach in which kinetochore
dynein activity is reconstituted in vitro. By combining this in vitro approach
with in-cell high- and super-resolution fluorescence microscopy, the following
key unanswered questions in cell biology will be addressed: (1) What is the role
of dynein in eviction of SAC effectors from attached kinetochores? (2) What is
the biological signal that initiates dyneinmediated eviction of SAC effectors
from attached kinetochores? This project will lead to a greater understanding of
the control of cell division while training diverse students in basic sciences
and providing outreach to K-12 students.