* 1518006
* G-quadruples Topology-selective Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Herman Sintim, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2019
* USD 625,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Drs. Edwin Lewis from Mississippi State University and
Herman Sintim from the University of Maryland to develop new chemical probes for
the study of G-quadruplex biology in complex biological environments.
G-quadruplexes, uniquely folded non-helical structures formed by short guanine
rich sequences in DNA or RNA, have been implicated in the regulation of a number
of important life processes, from gene expression and mRNA splicing, to
chromosome maintenance, cell proliferation, and viral life cycles. The
development of chemical probes having very high affinity for G-quadruplex DNA
over double stranded helical DNA, and having the ability to select for specific
G-quadruplex folding topologies represents a new direction in biochemistry and
molecular biology. The design of the new chemical probes, their synthesis and
the biophysical characterization of the probe/G-quadruplex complexes in vitro
and in vivo will provide opportunities for graduate students and advanced
undergraduates to acquire a diverse set of specialized skills in new compound
synthesis and in the use of spectroscopic, microcalorimetric, NMR, mass
spectrometry, and molecular biology methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is designed to address the central issue in the in vivo study of G-quadruplex
biology; the lack of selective probes that can discriminate between: a) abundant
duplex nucleic acids and much less abundant G-quadruplexes; b) DNA
G-quadruplexes and RNA G-quadruplexes; c) and among several G-quadruplex
topologies or conformers. In addition to these unresolved selectivity issues,
most G-quadruplex ligands that have been developed to date have only moderate
binding affinities with only a handful of G-quadruplex ligands exhibiting
nanomolar Kd values. The principal investigators, recently made a surprising
discovery that diminazene (DMZ), a drug that is used in veterinary medicine and
believed to act via binding to the minor groove of AT-rich duplexes with a Kd of
about 1 micromolar, binds to selected G-quadruplexes with Kds of about 1
nanomolar - the strongest affinity reported so far for a G-quadruplex chemical
probe. Based on this discovery, this project will undertake the development of
new G-quadruplex chemical probes based on the DMZ scaffold. Various biophysical
tools will be employed to study the selectivity of the new chemical probes for
different G-quadruplex topologies (e.g. parallel vs. antiparallel, and small
loop vs. large loop G-quadruplexes) and types (DNA vs. RNA). The interactions of
nucleic acid binding proteins with various probe-stabilized G-quadruplex
structures will also be investigated in this project. Information developed in
this study is expected to provide tools to study the role of G-quadruplex
nucleic acid structures in a number of cellular processes.