* 1518346
* Understanding Ebola Virus Disease
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Mark Bloom, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 01/31/2016
* USD 197,495.00

This project will develop and disseminate an online educational resource called
Understanding Ebola Virus Disease (UEVD). The objective is to provide users with
an interactive learning experience that helps them acquire a basic understanding
of factors that influence infection, transmission, and management of Ebola virus
disease. Irrational fears about the current Ebola outbreak argue for the
development of educational resources that can help people better understand the
biology of viruses. The UEVD materials will include a knowledge pretest and
posttest. These tests will allow the researchers to identify misconceptions
users have about virus infection, and Ebola disease in particular, and enable
them to assess how well the UEVD materials address these misconceptions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of the UEVD resource is an interactive model of
virus infection. Users can manipulate four to six variables that relate to
important concepts associated with viral infection and spread. The virus
interactive will focus on the susceptibility of the target population, the
transmissibility of the virus, virulence factors, and disease spread. Users will
be able to put the biology of the Ebola virus into perspective by comparing and
contrasting it to other types of viruses such as measles and influenza. The goal
of this educational resource is to help users acquire a basic understanding of
virulence factors and transmissibility so that they can appreciate the risks of
virus infection more objectively. Armed with such knowledge, users may be less
fearful of rare infections like Ebola and more concerned with common infections
like influenza, which kills tens of thousands of people annually in the United
States. An informed public is also more likely to treat people coping with viral
diseases with empathy and compassion.