* 1518999
* RAPID: Hierarchical Carbon Adsorbent for Cytokines Removal from Blood  of the Ebola Virus Disease Patients
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2015
* Yury Gogotsi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 100,000.00

PI: Mochalin, Vadym Proposal Number: 1518999

The devastating effects of the Ebola virus in humans are largely related to
overproduction of pro-inflammatory proteins, called cytokines, which are
responsible for fatal clinical symptoms of the Ebola disease: inflammation,
fever, massive internal hemorrhage, and catastrophic thrombosis around the body.
Quick removal of pro-inflammatory cytokines from blood by adsorption is
essential to mitigate these severe clinical symptoms while the immune system
prepares to eliminate the virus. The adsorption of cytokines is complicated by
their large variations in molecular size and shape, some being small and
elongated, others large and more globular, so when a mix of these molecules is
present, larger molecules quickly stick to the outer surface of the adsorbent
blocking access to the smaller pores for smaller molecules, significantly
reducing available surface. The solution is to create adsorbents with
hierarchical pore structure, containing large and small pores which fit all
possible sizes and shapes of cytokines. These hierarchical carbon adsorbents
will be synthesized from polymer precursors and optimized for specific, quick,
and complete removal of cytokines from blood of the Ebola virus disease
patients. The proposed research will allow the development of a range of carbon
materials featuring precisely controlled pore size, pore volume, pore shape,
surface area, and surface chemistry. The developed materials will find broader
applications in biotechnology, bioengineering, medicine, water purification, and
cosmetics. Medical applications of selective protein adsorption, including
removal of wastes or toxins from blood of patients with kidney disease or liver
failure, may particularly benefit from this research. This award is being made
jointly by two Programs: (1) Chemical and Biological Separations, (2) Biomedical
Engineering, both in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems Division in the Engineering Directorate.

The proposed research is focused on investigation of the effects of pore size,
shape, and surface termination in hierarchical mesoporous carbons on adsorption
and intraporous diffusion of cytokines. Based on this knowledge, hierarchical
porous carbon adsorbents will be synthesized and tailored for quick removal of a
mix of cytokines specific for the Ebola virus disease. The performance of the
developed hierarchical carbon adsorbents will be demonstrated on blood plasma
samples spiked with cytokine cocktails in compositions and concentrations
typical for those in patients with the Ebola virus disease. The adsorbents will
be synthesized from silicon containing polymer-derived ceramics with subsequent
removal of silicon by high temperature chlorination. This process allows for
full control of pore size and shape through variations of precursor composition,
chlorination temperature and time, and has been demonstrated to produce
hierarchical porosity with subnanometer control of the pore size. Adsorption of
cytokines from blood plasma will then be measured by the enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. To increase their affinity to cytokines, surface chemistry
of the synthesized adsorbents will be modified by oxidation in air or carbon
dioxide, reduction in hydrogen, and treatment in ammonia gas. At the end of the
experimental program, mesoporous carbon adsorbents with a hierarchical pore
structure and large particle size will be developed for quick and complete
removal of cytokines from blood of the Ebola virus disease patients by
extracorporeal perfusion. The proposed treatments will reduce mortality,
accelerate recovery and, when used in conjunction with emerging methods and
supporting care, will minimize long-term damage to the patient.