* 1518865
* CSR: CHS: Large: Wearable Cognitive Assistance
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Roberta Klatzky, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,847,787.00

This research explores the deep technical challenges of a new class of computing
systems that integrate a wearable device (such as Google Glass) with cloud-based
processing to guide a user step by step through a complex task. Although easy to
describe, many challenges in computer systems, computer vision and human-
computer interaction must be overcome for this concept to become reality. Human
cognition is a remarkable feat of real-time processing. It involves the
synthesis of outputs from real-time analytics on multiple sensor stream inputs.
An assistive system amplifies human cognition with compute-intensive processing
that is so responsive that it fits into the inner loop of the human cognitive
workflow. In its most general form, cognitive assistance is a very broad and
ambitious concept that could be applied to virtually all facets of everyday
life. As a pioneering effort, this research is more narrowly focused on user
assistance for well-defined tasks that require specialized knowledge and/or
skills, and for which task state and task-relevant actions are fully accessible
to computer vision algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is organized
into four broad thrusts. The first thrust decouples and cleanly separates low-
level mobile computing and cloud computing issues such as resource management,
network latency, placement, provisioning, scalability, and load balancing from
the task-centric foci of the other tasks. The second thrust focuses on the
computer vision research necessary to address the challenges of wearable
cognitive assistance. Vision is the dominant sensing modality for the kinds of
tasks addressed in this research, but the validation experiments will include
proof-of-concept use of other sensing modalities such as audio and location. The
third thrust focuses on task description, tracking, sequencing and user
guidance. Its goal is to create a set of generalizable principles and tools that
can be applied to a wide range of tasks. Matching task assistance to task
demands and user capabilities will be integral to this thrust. The fourth thrust
involves continuous integration of research from the first three thrusts and
applies it towards end-to-end validation on a series of tasks of increasing
sophistication and difficulty. This thrust involves close collaboration with
industry partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance computer
science by producing scientific insights, algorithms, system designs,
implementation techniques, and experimental validations at the intersection of
computer systems (including mobile computing, cloud computing, virtual machines,
operating systems, wireless networking, and sensor networks), vision
technologies (including computer vision and machine learning), and human-
computer interaction. More broadly, society will benefit from wearable cognitive
application in areas such as health care training, industrial troubleshooting
and consumer product assembly. From an educational viewpoint, this research
offers many unique opportunities to train graduate and undergraduate students on
how to approach problems from a broad cross-disciplinary viewpoint.