* 1518471
* CNH-S: Poverty Traps and Mangrove Ecosystem Services in Coastal Tanzania
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Victor Rivera-Monroy, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

More than 35% of mangrove areas worldwide have been degraded or lost entirely in
the past 20 years, and this degradation has significant consequences for human
wellbeing. Mangroves provide a number of ecosystem services that are
particularly beneficial to low-income coastal communities. However, dependence
on natural resources can lead to environmental degradation. Despite the
importance of this interaction, there is a significant gap in understanding the
relationship between mangrove ecosystem services and poverty traps, mechanisms
that cause poverty to persist, in low income coastal communities. This
interdisciplinary research is a first step toward advancing our understanding of
ecosystem services through the lens of poverty traps. It empirically
investigates important feedback loops, drivers and other mechanisms that link
poverty traps and mangrove ecosystems at multiple spatial and temporal scales.
This project will inform stakeholders involved in coastal resource management
and poverty alleviation how changes in mangrove ecosystem services are
associated with poverty and vice versa, and examine new approaches to break the
vicious cycle of resource degradation and poverty. The findings can potentially
be extended to efforts to sustain ecosystem services provided by other natural
resources in developing economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted in rural coastal Tanzania where degradation of mangrove resources and
persistent poverty continue to be significant challenges. An interdisciplinary
research team with expertise in economics, ecology, hydrology, climatology, and
system modeling will undertake a two-year study to conceptualize and provide
empirical evidence for the feedback loops, drivers, and thresholds existing
within and across natural and human systems for multiple ecogeomorphological and
poverty conditions. The researchers will collect and use a wide range of
ecological and socioeconomic data by synchronizing the temporal and spatial
scales at four sites. Four ecosystem services of mangrove forests that are
likely interlinked with poverty will be examined: (a) goods extracted (fuel
wood, building poles, and charcoal), (b) fish and shrimp habitats, (c) coastal
protection, and (d) prospects for carbon storage (as a net carbon sink),which
will be assessed as a potential source of revenue to break poverty-environment
traps. The ecological processes of mangrove ecosystem functions and their
services, as well as the decision rules related to natural resource use,
management, and livelihood inferred from empirical evidence will then be used to
build an agent-based model to scale up to a regional level. This approach will
help identify system-wide effects under alternative scenarios and simulate
directions in which the coupled systems can evolve to benefit both the
environment and coastal communities.