* 1518127
* Asteroid Belt History through a Calibrated Survey of Asteroid Families
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Kevin Walsh, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 09/30/2019
* USD 303,045.00

One of the fundamental questions scientists are trying to address is "what is
the history of our Solar System?" Recent discoveries of the enormous variety of
planetary systems around stars beyond the Sun have only increased our curiosity
about our own planetary system and why it appears the way it does. One of the
key tools to study the entire history of our Solar System is its Asteroid Belt,
since that traces the migration of the giant planets, as well as epochs of major
change and collisions, and it contains samples from nearly the entire suite of
Solar System material from its very beginning. This project will attempt to
better identify families of asteroids that record the history of catastrophic
asteroid collisions.

The project team will capitalize on the experience of one of the Co-PIs with
developing visualizations by developing a visualization product specifically
with planetariums in mind. The visualization product they intend to produce will
be called "When Asteroids Collide" and will engagingly visualize the structure
and compositional make-up of the Asteroid Belt and its evolution in time. It
will highlight the creation and evolution of families across the asteroid belt
and throughout time and help explain complicated asteroid dynamics. The
visualization will be circulated through the network of planetariums that have
already reached out to Co-PI, as well as through the online and film festival
avenues that he has used successfully to share his work with very broad
audiences.

The census of known asteroid families is clearly incomplete as a function of
time, across all types of asteroids, and across all regions of the Asteroid
Belt. This project would calibrate the project team's current techniques to
understand their detection biases, and to develop new techniques to better
extract and characterize these families in current and future datasets. It will
be accomplished by building a calibration testbed using synthetic families
implanted in current asteroid datasets to calibrate asteroid family detection
tools, building new family detection tools utilizing the orbital elements and
the known size-dependent Yarkovsky spreading of as a function of size,
calibrating old and new tools and using them to create a de-biased census of the
asteroid belt families as a function of their age, size and physical properties.