* 1518140
* I-Corps:  Feasibility Study for Commercializing a Domain-Specific Big Data Analytics Cloud Software Stack
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,12/31/2016
* Lei Huang, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

In the so-called big data era, the data in many companies are becoming too big
to be processed and stored by traditional computing platforms. There are urgent
needs to address the challenge from ever-increasing big data facing these
industries, especially for small companies and contractors who do not have large
scale computing infrastructure. Those big companies that have the large scale
computing infrastructure, are currently using the traditional High Performance
Computing (HPC) techniques to handle the big data requirements. However, the
traditional HPC techniques were designed to process computation intensive works,
instead of data-intensive jobs. Moreover, the traditional HPC requires deep
knowledge and expertise in HPC architectures and uses low-level parallel
programming models, which typically create an obstacle for the regular users and
domain experts to utilize HPC infrastructure directly. This I-Corps team
proposes the cloud computing technique that provides a cost-effective solution
to address the computation and storage requirements, which is especially useful
to small companies and startups.

This project is to explore the commercialization opportunities for a software
stack that stores, processes and analyzes big volume of data in a variety of
domains, including petroleum seismic data, medical images, retails, energy and
more. Besides the scalable performance and fault-tolerance features provided by
the software stack, it also provides high-level programming templates, workflow
and a domain specific language to simplify the usage of large scale computing
platforms. The proposed cloud-based software stack will deliver a customized
computing platform service via a user-friendly web interface that is designed to
fill the gap between the big data analytics platforms and the customer?s
requirements in a variety of domains. The targeted users are data scientists,
analysts, researchers and developers in the petroleum, medical and other
industrial domains dealing with big volume of data.