* 1518723
* SHF: Large: Collaborative Research: Molecular computing for the real world
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Sergei Rudchenko, Hospital For Special Surgery
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,001.00

Molecular computing is a promising computational paradigm in which computational
functions are evaluated at the nanoscale, with potential applications in smart
molecular diagnostics and therapeutics. A molecular computing system comprises
biomolecules, such as DNA strands, which have been designed to detect certain
input molecules by binding to them and subsequently to undergo programmed
sequences of chemical reactions that serve to compute a logical function based
on the observed pattern of input molecules. For example, a molecular system that
requires both of its two inputs to be present simultaneously in order to
generate an output signal would be referred to as computing a logical "AND"
function on the two inputs. However, despite recent advances in the field,
prospects for direct application of these techniques to solve real-world
problems are limited by the lack of robust interfaces between molecular
computers and biological and chemical systems. This project will address this
limitation by targeting two specific application domains: wide-spectrum chemical
sensing and cell surface analysis using molecular logic cascades. The state of
the art in molecular computer design, modeling, and implementation will be
advanced by an interdisciplinary combination of research by computer scientists,
bioengineers, chemists, and computer engineers, and successful completion of the
proposed activity will be a significant step towards routine deployment of
molecular computers to address real-world problems in chemical and biological
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, molecular circuit architectures
that process sensor inputs from chemical sensors and cell-surface analysis
reactions will be designed, modeled, and implemented in the laboratory. This
will require specific advances in the isolation of aptamers (DNA sequences that
exhibit particular binding affinity to one or more target non-nucleic acid
molecules) and in their integration into molecular computing systems. In this
context, the aptamer will serve as an interface that allows a rationally-
designed DNA-based molecular computing system to use small molecules as input
signals. Furthermore, computational modeling and simulation will be used to
predict and optimize interactions between DNA aptamers and a range of binding
targets, and to choose optimal aptamer combinations to produce cross-reactive
multi-sensor arrays capable of discriminating between target ligands by
effectively projecting the signal into a multi-dimensional aptamer response
space. Furthermore, advanced molecular circuit architectures capable of
adaptive, bio-inspired behavior, such as dynamic learning and adaptation, will
be designed, with a view to future experimental implementations of these
features in large-scale molecular computers. This will include research on
highly recurrent, bio-inspired information processing networks to extract
meaningful responses from potentially non-specific aptamer-based sensors.