* 1518741
* TWC: TTP Option: Large: Collaborative: Internet-Wide Vulnerability Measurement, Assessment, and Notification
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Michael Bailey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to reduce the impact of software vulnerabilities in Internet-
connected systems by developing data-driven techniques for vulnerability
measurement, assessment, and notification. Recent advances in Internet-wide
scanning make it possible to conduct network surveys of the full public IPv4
address space in minutes. These advances, in turn, offer the promise of truly
effective community responses: when new vulnerabilities are announced, the
Internet security community can comprehensively identify the systems that suffer
from these vulnerabilities and automatically take steps to help affected system
operators correct the problems. This project seeks to directly impact the
availability and reliability of the Internet and provide the security community
with tools, platforms, and comprehensive vulnerability measurement
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this vision, this project develops new
techniques for vulnerability measurement, including creating improved security
measurement techniques that function at global scale, in the presence of
heterogeneous network systems, and in a timely, accurate, complete, and ethical
manner. The investigators create new vulnerability assessment methods that lower
the barriers faced by researchers seeking to access and analyze vulnerability
measurement data, in order to maximize security benefits. The project explores
new notification mechanisms that achieve targeted and effective notification of
affected organizations, and that can be delivered and acted upon quickly in
response to the emergence of new threats.