* 1518306
* RUI: Mechanisms of Microbial Elemental Sulfur Reduction at the Community, Cellular and Enzymatic Levels
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Andre Cavalcanti, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 10/31/2020
* USD 515,012.00

Beneath the surface of the earth are microbial communities that live independent
from the sun-driven surface and are sealed off from the atmosphere's oxygen.
Because the subsurface is shut off from oxygen in the atmosphere, these microbes
need to find alternative compounds to "breathe" (reduction), in order to carry
out the energetic cycles necessary to drive life. Sulfur and oxygen share many
characteristics, including their ability to serve as "breathable" compounds. To
better understand sulfur reduction, this project will incorporate different
studies that will look at sulfur chemistry; protein biochemistry; and the
genetics of sulfur-based "breathing" (respiration) in a hot, petroleum-rich
subsurface environment. Together, these studies will help with understanding how
these living systems are able to develop deep in the earth, how life might have
evolved on the early oxygen-free earth, and even how life might evolve in other
places in the universe. Undergraduate researchers will conduct the studies, with
experienced undergraduates mentoring young researchers through successful
programs designed for the retention of underrepresented and lower income
students in science; therefore creating a stronger multicultural scientific
teaching and research community. These studies will also be integrated into
undergraduate courses in Microbial Ecology and Bioinformatics, in which data
obtained in the Microbial Ecology laboratory experiments will be analyzed by the
students in the Bioinformatics course.

Sulfur-based respiration is suggested to have been one of the earliest energy
conserving pathways for life on earth. It remains important to the sulfur and
elemental cycles in the atmosphere, oceans, sediments, and deep subsurface. It
is also of specific interest in petrochemical and other fields due to the
extremely corrosive and toxic effect of microbially-produced sulfides. It is not
at all clear which forms of sulfur contribute to the metabolism mechanisms of
microbial sulfur respiration in situ, or how these enzymes mechanistically carry
out this transformation. The relative levels of sulfur-reducing enzymes and
microbes in many environments remain unknown. These overarching questions will
be approached by focusing on a specific environment - a deep, hot, hydrocarbon-
rich reservoir - and by integrating studies: (1) at the level of the microbial
community by characterizing the microbes in the deep, hot subsurface environment
and identifying sulfur-reducing microbes and enzymes through metagenomics and
metatranscriptomics; (2) at the enzymatic level by determining the mechanisms of
sulfur-reducing enzymes by kinetic and structural techniques; and (3) at the
geochemical level by using cyclic voltammetry to determine the chemical
speciation of sulfur in situ and during reduction by microbes and enzymes. A
transformative aspect of this work is a way in which cyclic voltammetry will be
used to obtain a "snapshot" of the entire range of sulfur species present during
the reduction of sulfur by enzymes, isolated microbial species, and microbial
populations. This work will also provide a view of the sulfur chemical species
present in deep subsurface fluids in situ. Having a clear picture of sulfur
metabolism in the deep subsurface will broaden our understanding of
biogeochemical sulfur cycling, life in extreme environments, and evolutionary
processes. It has been estimated that the subsurface environment contains 40-60%
of the bacterial cells on earth, accounting for at least one third of the
earth's carbon biomass. However, because of its hidden nature, this huge
reservoir of biodiversity has only begun to be explored.