* 1518110
* Collaborative Research: GEOTRACES Pacific Section: The Geochemistry of Size-fractionated Suspended Particles Collected by In-situ Filtration
* GEO,OCE
* 11/06/2014,02/28/2017
* Phoebe Lam, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2017
* USD 203,412.00

Particles play essential roles in the cycling and distribution of trace elements
and isotopes (TEI). For instance scavenging onto particles and removal by
particle export is a major sink for many TEIs. However the driving factors
affecting the spatial extent and temporal variability of TEI scavenging remain
largely unknown. The U.S. GEOTRACES East Pacific Zonal Transect between Peru and
Tahiti will cross three biogeochemically important areas, setting the stage for
researchers to constrain unknowns surrounding particle scavenging.

Scientists from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities will address fundamental questions on the location of
particle formation, particle-dissolved species interactions, dominant particle
phases, and the evolution of particle phases during transport. As regards
particle phases, the researchers will measure particulate organic carbon (POC),
calcium carbonate, opal, lithogenics, and oxyhydroxides, as well as the trace
element compositions of size fractionated particles covering three distinct
zones: large lateral productivity gradients, a major oxygen deficient zone off
the coast of Peru, and a world renowned hydrothermal plume emanating from the
southern East Pacific Rise. Furthermore, since previous results suggest particle
type affects scavenging, investigators will specifically measure acid-leachable
trace metals, particle concentration, and major particle composition. These
combined measurements will allow them to disentangle the relative importance of
hydrothermal particles, benthic nepheloid layers, and high productivity margins
for scavenging of TEIs. The cruise transect will also offer unique opportunities
to examine the speciation of Fe and POC in hydrothermal particles away from the
vent field and the effects of aggregation and POC coatings on TEI partitioning.

As regards broader impacts, the researchers plan to create an educational module
on particulate trace metals in the ocean which would become part of a five part
GEOTRACES webinar series developed by Dr. Benjamin Twining at the Bigelow
Laboratory for Ocean Sciences in collaboration with the Center for Ocean
Sciences Education Excellence-Ocean Systems at the University of Maine. One
graduate student from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and one graduate
student from the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, would be supported and
trained as part of this project. In addition, an undergraduate student would
participate in the research during the summer month as part of the Woods Hole
Diversity Initiative Partnership in Education program.