* 1519169
* Workshop on Storm Tracks, Jets, and their Modes of Variability in Switzerland; August 24-28, 2015
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Tiffany Shaw, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This workshop will review recent advances on the dynamics of storm tracks, jets
and their modes of variability and to address key questions related to the
regional response to climate change. The conference will focus on areas of
research in which recent progress has been notable, along with emerging themes:
characterization of storm track response to climate change, model hierarchies of
the storm tracks, model biases, low-frequency variability, coupling to the
cryosphere, ocean, stratosphere and tropics, coupling with moisture and clouds
and connection to extreme events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Storm tracks and jets,
together with their modes of variability, affect the regional distribution of
precipitation, temperature, and wind in the midlatitudes of both hemispheres.
One of the most pressing questions regarding the impacts of climate change
concerns how storm tracks will change. While comprehensive climate models
predict a poleward shift of the zonal-mean midlatitude westerlies in response to
global warming, observational evidence is mixed, and such a shift does not
necessarily occur regionally, particularly in the Northern Hemisphere. The
importance of understanding the dynamics and robustness of the regional response
cannot be understated. It requires a better understanding of the conditions
setting the time-mean structure of the storm tracks and jets, their low-
frequency variability, and the role of boundary conditions (cryosphere, ocean,
stratosphere, and tropics). The resulting changes to climate and weather (e.g.,
likelihood of extreme events) are also affected by coupling with moisture and
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in Grindelwald,
Switzerland 24-28 August 2015. NSF funds will support travel costs for
approximately 6 early career scientists from the U.S.