* 1519035
* RAPID: Capturing the physics of mountain uplift near the South Alpine Fault New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Roger Bilham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2015
* USD 31,500.00

Although mountains are commonly considered fixtures in the landscape, at
geological time-scales they are transient phenomena that exist only where the
competing processes of rock uplift and erosion are almost exactly balanced.
Where uplift exceeds erosion the height of mountains increase. Without uplift a
mountain range will eventually be eroded to gentle hills, and eventually to a
flat plain. Three types of processes can account for the rise of rocks within a
mountain range. The first is caused by squeezing a rock, akin to squeezing a
rubber eraser horizontally whose surface will rise in proportion to the amount
of horizontal contraction. The second is caused by horizontal slip toward a
subsurface ramp, a thrust fault, which is similar to rock rising on an elevator
powered by plate tectonics. The third process causes rocks to rise in response
to the incision of valleys and the removal of rock by rivers. This rise (known
as isostasy) is similar to the rise of an iceberg from the sea as its exposed
surface is melted by warm air. Each of these processes results in the rise of
rocks, but the mass lost in each case is different. By measuring the rise of the
rocks and the associated mass change in a mountain range one can distinguish
between these three mechanisms. The rise of a mountain summit can easily be
measured using GPS methods. The reduction of mass in a mountain range can be
measured with a gravity meter. The PI measured both in the southern Alps of New
Zealand in January 2000 but to determine the answer a second measurement is
need. GPS measurements indicate the height has increased by about 80 mm in the
past 15 years. In January 2015 the PI shall for the first time measure the
reduction of gravity using the NSF absolute gravimeter. Unless an earthquake
intervenes, the mechanisms that cause the high elevations of mountains in the
southern Alps of New Zealand will be revealed. Should an earthquake occur before
the measurements are undertaken, however, the answer may be rendered ambiguous
by mass movements accompanying the landslides triggered by severe shaking. For
this reason it is urgent to have this NSF RAPID award and make a timely
measurement in the southern Alps of New Zealand.

In 2000, NSF funded 16 measurements of absolute value of gravity in New Zealand,
mostly near the Southern Alps to investigate the physics of interseismic
mountain uplift using a combination of gravity (which is sensitive to local
density variations) and GPS (which is not). The FG5 gravimeter is uniquely
drift-free since it measures the acceleration of a freely falling mirror in a
vacuum to an accuracy of 10^-11 using an atomic clock and a stabilized laser.
Proposed mountain building mechanisms (Poissons-ratio uplift, listric fault
slip, or erosion-induced isostatic uplift) are associated with different ratios
of uplift to gravity decrease. Now, 15 years later, 8 cm of uplift has occurred
and the PI plans to take the same gravimeter to the same summit points to
determine the associated lowering in gravity. The accuracy of the gravimeter is
1 µGal, and the decrease in gravity should be about 27 µGal- a significant
signal-to-noise ratio. Urgency is associated with the measurements in that
should a local earthquake occur, as it did near the Christchurch measurements,
landslides may render the gravity signal ambiguous. The Alpine fault is in fact
many decades past its median recurrence interval and the probability of rupture
in a Mw>8 earthquake is sufficiently high that a device to capture its slip
velocity operated in the next few years has a significant chance of doing so.
Although the propagation velocity of a rupture can easily be quantified from
seismometers (2.5-3.5 km/s) the sliding velocity of the surface fault
(0.1-10m/s) has hitherto never been measured. During the gravity measurements
suitable locations to install two rupture meters will be identified. Each
consists of a graphite rod anchored obliquely across the fault, that pulls a
wire from a rotating drum during fault slip. Its measurement range is 13 m, its
resolution is 0.1 mm, its sampling rate is 1 s and the systems can run
indefinitely on solar panels.