* 1519158
* EAGER: Pilot Studies for Representing and Archiving Integrative Structural Models of Macromolecular Machines and Supporting Data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Helen Berman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

New techniques have emerged that allow the determination of the three
dimensional structures of very large macromolecular assemblies. These larger
biological systems play key roles in basic molecular biology, photosynthesis,
nanotechnology, and health. Rather than relying on a single technique, the three
dimensional structures of these molecular machines are being determined by
integrating results from many different kinds of experiments using computational
methods. In order to allow these integrative, or hybrid, models to enable future
research by the broad community of scientists and also provide for the
development of new educational platforms, it is essential to develop a way to
archive these data and make them easily accessible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several steps are necessary to achieve this goal. Current
archiving of macromolecular structures depends on the fixed spatial positions of
atoms; therefore the existing representation of these models must be extended to
include both non-atomistic and spatio-temporal models. A new infrastructure will
be developed that allows for the federation of different experimental
repositories hosting data sets contributing to these integrative models. Once
this infrastructure is developed, it will be necessary to prototype a system for
depositing and archiving these new integrative models and supporting data.