* 1519026
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Designing Collaboration Networks to Optimize Collective Problem Solving
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Damon Centola, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2016
* USD 11,912.00

This project examines how the structure of collaboration networks affects the
success of collective problem solving. Although intuition would suggest that
networks which support the efficient diffusion of information perform better as
a collectivity, theoretical work has proposed an inverse relationship between
network efficiency and success in problem solving. In other words, it posits
that less efficient communication networks may promote more effective problem
solving because people need to search independently for solutions to problems.
The increased diversity of the information might improve the chances that the
group will find a better solution before arriving at a consensus. Attempts to
evaluate this theory empirically have been inconclusive due to limitations of
their scale and design. Using novel online resources, both observational and
experimental, this research studies the effects of network efficiency on
collective problem solving within large empirical communication networks. This
project has implications for enhancing collaboration networks in research and
education, and for designing efficient team structures in science and industry.

This project will provide insight into how the structure of collaboration
networks among scientific researchers can influence the rate and quality of
innovation. It will identify the ways that distributed, online collaboration
networks can be designed to provide policymakers and industry managers with new
strategies for improving groups and for enhancing problem solving capacities.