* 1519401
* Collaborative Research: The role of calcifying algae as a determinant of rocky intertidal macrophyte community structure at a meta-ecosystem scale
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2016
* Karina Nielsen, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Environmental stress models have recently been modified to incorporate the
influence of facilitation to join negative effects such as predation,
competition, and abiotic stress as determinants of community structure.
Nevertheless, our empirical understanding of the processes that regulate the
expression of facilitation effects across systems and the potential for
facilitation to amplify or dampen the ecological consequences of climate change
remains limited. This project focuses on facilitation dynamics in the broader
meta-ecosystem concept, which hypothesizes that variation among communities
depends not only on locally-varying species interactions and impacts of abiotic
factors such as environmental stress and physical disturbance but also on
regionally- and globally-varying ecosystem processes such as dispersal and flows
of materials such as nutrients and carbon. The investigators will study the
influence of a potentially critical facilitative interaction between coralline
algal turfs and canopy-forming macrophytes including kelps and surfgrass in a
rocky intertidal meta-ecosystem. The research will be conducted in a climate
change context, with a focus on how the macrophyte-coralline interaction is
influenced by ocean conditions, including factors driven by variable upwelling
(temperature, nutrients, phytoplankton abundance, and light) and increases in
ocean acidification, which vary in a mosaic pattern along the coast of the
northern California Current (NCC) in Oregon and northern California.

The goal of the project is to test the hypothesis that the coralline turf-
macrophyte canopy interaction is a cardinal interaction in the determination of
low rocky intertidal community structure, and that disruption of this
interaction would dramatically alter the structure and function of this kelp-
and surfgrass-dominated assemblage. The project will take advantage of, and
enhance, a research platform established across 17 sites spanning ~800 km in the
NCC coastal meta-ecosystem with prior NSF funding that will at each site: (1)
quantify ocean conditions, including temperature, nutrients, phytoplankton,
light (PAR), and carbonate chemistry to document the response of community
structure oceanographic variation across a meta ecosystem mosaic; (2) carry out
field experiments testing the nature of the interaction between coralline algal
turfs (primarily Corallina vancouveriensis) and dominant canopy species, the
kelp Saccharina sessile and the surfgrass Phyllospadix scouleri; and (3) carry
out laboratory experiments focusing on the mechanism of the interaction,
specifically testing the effects of carbonate chemistry, light, temperature, and
nutrients. Component (1) will employ both remote sensors deployed in the
intertidal (fluorometers, thermal sensors, PAR sensors, and a recently developed
pH sensor) and direct sampling (nutrients, phytoplankton, pCO2, and pH) to
quantify the in situ exposure regime of benthic primary producers to resources,
energy, and environmental stress across spatial scales. These metrics will be
combined with a newly developed index for quantifying local-scale variation in
upwelling intensity to characterize the linkages between climate forcing and
ecosystem state. Coupling oceanography with our field and laboratory experiments
will provide unique and valuable insights into how the current state of rocky
intertidal ecosystems is likely to be altered in the future.

Intellectual Merit. The project will contribute one of the first studies to test
the community consequences of varying upwelling and CO2 across an ecosystem
scale. How these factors alter the direct and indirect interactions of key
species is of fundamental importance in our efforts to learn how field
ecosystems will respond to climate change. Such knowledge is crucial to our
efforts to manage and conserve marine communities facing human-induced variation
in climate.

Broader Impacts. The project will integrate research and education in a variety
of ways. Three of the PIs (Hacker, Menge, Nielsen) have undergraduate and
graduate teaching responsibilities, which involve instruction and training in
marine ecology. Each makes a major effort to foster the participation of
underrepresented groups in lab and field activities. Nielsen's position at SSU,
a four-year undergraduate institution with few funded research programs, offers
a rare chance for SSU undergraduates to participate in a first-rate research
experience. All PIs are engaged in regional planning for marine protected areas.
Finally, the work will provide insight into the consequences of predicted
changes in coastal oceanic regions due to human activity and resulting climate
change, thereby giving the research societal significance. The PIs will work
with a policy and outreach program to communicate the research beyond academic
circles to the wider public and stakeholders.