* 1519846
* SBIR Phase I:  Runtime Verification for Automobiles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Grigore Rosu, Runtime Verification, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will offer the automotive industry
higher reliability from the software systems powering automobiles, by enabling
runtime monitoring while providing the maximum possible correctness guarantees
for the generated monitors. Cars will be safer and more rigorously assured. This
project will address a slew of recent problems with software failures, security
compromises, and other unintentional software behaviors that occur inevitably as
systems become more complex, potentially saving lives and making millions of
vehicles safer, easier to upgrade, and better tested. The commercial value
follows the need of manufacturers to retain the basic vehicle safety guarantees
while pursuing the commercial necessities of competing on complex software-
driven features, ultimately minimizing software development costs and expensive
car recalls. The enhanced scientific and technological understanding from this
technology will come as it is deployed in the field, giving manufacturers an
impetus to formalize and standardize existing requirements, bolstering their
understanding of the software systems in the car. The technology will also
foster the formalization of both open and proprietary specifications, further
increasing the understanding of complex automotive systems by facilitating
complete analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will for the first time explore the application of
provably correct runtime verification software to real-time systems. An
efficient and certifying framework allowing for the expression of a diverse
range of specifications will enable applications of runtime verification in
automobiles, aeronautics, and beyond. One research objective is to develop a
system that can monitor any safety property, generating high-performance C code
capable of running on virtually any hardware. This will combine efficient
monitoring with maximal formal guarantees in terms of correctness. Formal
verification was previously realized only for mathematical models of monitors,
or in systems with very low expressiveness. A second research objective is to
study the applicability of runtime verification by collecting properties from
automotive industry standards, evaluating the complexity of specifying the
properties, the possibility of recovering from detected violations, and the
performance requirements of the resulting monitors. It is anticipated that
hundreds or even thousands of such properties will be monitored simultaneously.