* 1519021
* Montana Workshop on Uncertainty Quantification, June 2015; The University of Montana, Missoula, MT
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Johnathan Bardsley, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 19,465.00

Montana Workshop on Uncertainty Quantification, University of Montana, June
24-26, 2015&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developments in high-performance computing in
the last decade have enabled tremendous advances in applied mathematics and
physics, in large part because today's computers allow scientists to solve
problems that couldn't before even be attempted. Many of the fields that are
advancing the most quickly impact Americans' daily lives, including radiation
detection interrogation and analysis techniques for national security science,
medical advances through new imaging techniques, and weather modeling and
prediction. In the science of the 21st-century, solving difficult problems is
not enough; scientists must also make statistically justifiable statements about
the uncertainties in their solutions. Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) is a
burgeoning field that sits at the interface of computation, applied mathematics,
physics, and statistics, and its goal is to extend and develop statistical
methods to assign meaningful error bars and uncertainty estimates to the
solutions of computationally challenging applied mathematics and physics
problems. The Montana Workshop on Uncertainty Quantification will gather top
experts and talented young researchers in the field to the University of Montana
to develop and disseminate the latest theory, techniques, and applications of
uncertainty quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty quantification (UQ)
denotes the science of incorporating statistical methods into the problem of
fitting physics-based mathematical models to physical systems, with the ultimate
goal of obtaining theoretically justifiable error bars for model predictions and
for estimates of model parameters. A few of the physical systems that will be
discussed in the Montana Workshop on Uncertainty Quantification (MUQ) are high
energy radiography in the security sciences, interferometry, data assimilation
in weather modeling, astronomical imaging, medical imaging, process tomography,
and control theory. Most of these applications are so-called inverse problems,
which involve the estimation of parameters in a mathematical model of a physical
system from finite dimensional measurements of output from that system. The
unknown parameters are typically high-dimensional, resulting in an over-
parameterized statistical model and hence high uncertainties in model
predictions and in estimates of model parameters. Since such problems pose a
particular challenge for traditional statistical techniques, the practice of UQ
for inverse problems provides a rich source of new and important research
problems in UQ and, as such, is one of the primary focuses of MUQ. The class of
applications and research problems covered by the workshop will be broad, from
the very applied (e.g., estimating object densities from real data in high-
energy radiography experiments) to the very theoretical (e.g., an analysis of a
specific Bayesian approach for solving an inverse problem in the function space
setting). In this workshop, researchers specializing in theory, computation, and
applications will come together to share the latest techniques and advances in
UQ. More details about the workshop can be found at
http://www.math.umt.edu/bardsley/MUQ/MUQ.html.