* 1519459
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient Hydraulic Fracturing through Fracture Manipulation in Highly Heterogeneous Rock Formations for Enhanced Energy Production with Environmental Sustainability
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Sidney Green, Sid Green, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to greatly improve the efficiency of hydraulic
fracturing oil/gas wells in tight shale reservoirs and other highly
heterogeneous oil/gas producing formations. Such increase in efficiency will
drastically reduce the quantity of fracture water required for the same oil/gas
production. This will yield reduced overall hydraulic fracturing effort for the
same recovery of oil/gas, thereby much reducing the environmental impact and
providing improved economics. The innovation will allow fracture growth
manipulation to allow cutting across discontinuities such as bed/layer
interfaces in some cases or to stop at an interface to limit fracture height
growth in other cases. Commercialization of the concept using new fracturing
fluids and pumping techniques offers a large market opportunity for the several
hundred billion dollars annual market. Increased recovery from these low fluid
mobility formations is critical for sustaining the continued move toward energy
independence, for maintaining the significant economic development being
provided to the Nation, and for reducing the carbon footprint associated with
recovering gas from these formations. Additionally, this work will extend the
scientific understanding of fluid driven fracture propagation, particularly in
highly heterogeneous materials. The technology for true fracture manipulation is
novel and offers the potential for a large step change.

The objectives of this Phase I research project are to establish priorities for
key parameters for new fracturing fluids and fracturing techniques that have
been developed that would manipulate the fracture propagation in a desirable
manner. This will be accomplished by approximate modeling of hydraulic fracture
propagation used for horizontal well completions, and validating with simple
laboratory tests. The research will include calculations in a practical manner
of the transient fluid-driven fracture propagation considering the reservoir
rock fabric. The calculations will vary key fracturing fluid properties, and
based on the calculations laboratory tests will be conducted to validate
predictions. The fracturing fluid properties change will be accomplished by
fluid variation and by pumping/injection schedule variations. Manipulating the
fracture propagation by using the fracturing fluid properties in collaboration
with the reservoir rock fabric is unique. In some cases the intent is to cause
the fracture to step across a plane of weakness to proceed into another 'layer'.
In other cases it is desirable to cause the fracture to step-over and branch to
create a more complex fracture network. Still in other cases, it is desirable to
limit the fracture extension by stopping at an interface and thus maintaining
fracture height containment.