* 1519971
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Generation of As-Built BIM Models Using a Single Video Camera
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Habib Fathi, Pointivo, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to transform commercial construction through
the democratization of scanning and automation of Building Information Modeling
(BIM). Constant design and change management is a unique challenge that is
costing the US construction industry billions of dollars annually. BIM allows
significant reduction of these costs by facilitating an early analysis and
decision-making process. The existing manual as-built BIM modeling technologies
are only viable for large-scale commercial construction projects because the
process is too laborious and expensive; in small projects, the projected savings
hardly justify adopting the process. The proposed Scan-to-BIM technology has the
potential to eliminate these barriers. Its ease-of-use, reduced file size, and
automated object detection enable more scans and create more robust data models,
unlocking the latent potential of the BIM process. Enormous value could be
generated due to streamlining and data management capabilities that are offered
by the technology in the form of accelerated project schedules, reduced number
of requests for information and change orders, and timely identified design
clashes. This paves the way to increasing the competitiveness of the US
construction industry, by enabling new services that support automatic BIM
modeling and effective infrastructure management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate the
technical and commercial feasibility of an automatic solution for the Scan-to-
BIM problem in the construction industry. Scan-to-BIM refers to 3D scanning of a
physical structure (in the form of a dense point cloud) and converting the raw
spatial data into an object-oriented, semantically-rich model. Although there
are a few technologies that aim to facilitate this process, the 3D modeling
component remains primarily a manual and time-consuming task. When using the
proposed technology, if proved to be feasible, a non-technical worker videotapes
the target structure. The video is automatically sent to a server for
processing. A unique videogrammetric framework reconstructs the 3D geometry of
the structure. This generates a dense point cloud, an edge cloud, and a line
cloud (which are still raw but more meaningful spatial data). It then extracts
object hypotheses from key frames and spatial data in the form of observations.
Afterwards, it optimizes a joint probability distribution function and infers a
3D layout. The outcome is an object-oriented 3D representation of the structure
with embedded geometrical attributes and property sets. This advances the state-
of-the-art in robust intelligence, particularly the interpretation of complex,
unstructured data.