* 1519083
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Molecular Architecture and Dynamics of  Phenylalanine Biosynthesis in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Natalia Doudareva, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 800,000.00

The amino acid phenylalanine is the precursor for the synthesis of >8000
phenolic compounds in plants, which have profound impacts on plant growth,
development, reproduction and defense. Phenylalanine serves as a precursor for
numerous plant natural products that are widely used in medicine and as food
supplements. This project will characterize a new pathway for phenylalanie
synthesis in the plant cytostol determine the contribution of this pathway to
the total phenylalanine production. The results will significantly contribute to
the fundamental knowledge of a major plant metabolic network and provide a
better understanding of aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. Such information will
allow rational metabolic engineering of phenylalanine levels for production of
important phenylalanine-derived compounds to improve agronomic traits, biofuel
production, palatability of produce, and commercial value of ornamentals. The
plannned research will provide multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and
graduate students. The educational program will also introduce students from a
local middle school to STEM-based research through direct classroom interactions
and facilitating laboratory exercises where students generate and test
hypotheses.

It has long been accepted that aromatic amino acid biosynthesis occurs
exclusively in plastids where it is subject to complex feedback regulation both
at the entry point into the network and at the committed steps towards
individual amino acids. The recent finding that phenylalanine is also formed in
the cytosol raises new questions about how plants regulate carbon flux
distribution between the parallel pathways. This project will employ an
integrative strategy comprised of genetics, molecular biology, metabolic
profiling, protein and membrane biochemistry, stable-isotope labeling, and
metabolic flux analysis to determine if (i) plants contain a complete cytosolic
pathway, (ii) this route is subject to less stringent feedback regulation, and
(iii) the flux through this pathway increases when the demand for phenylalanine
production and consumption increases. Petunia flowers, which are amenable to
genetic alterations without deleterious effects to plant vitality, and are rich
in phenylalanine and phenylalanine-derived volatiles, will be used as a model
system. Specifically, this project will uncover the pathway structure and the
molecular players of the cytosolic phenylalanine biosynthesis. Moreover, the
project will reveal the capacity and relative contribution of the cytosolic
route to overall production of phenylalanine.