* 1519915
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless pill bottle with dose-time reminders and a monitoring system which prompt patients to take medication as directed
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Mark Burrows, DoseCue, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve human health through improved
medication taking. While medications can provide significant improvements to
human health, they can only do so if taken properly. Many consumers however
often fail to take their medications correctly. By providing health networks a
simple, cost-effective approach to medication taking oversight, focused
improvement in patient adherence will directly result in fewer hospitalizations,
better sustained health and improved long-term outcomes. By moving the burden of
adherence monitoring away from the patient, expensive yet effective
interventional practices can be focused only on those patients who actually need
help, when they need it. This will both reduce labor costs and improve revenue
potential for outpatient-services health networks. The product is based upon a
straightforward, electronic dose-reminder and monitor system to improve and
encourage self-management of medication taking while being supported by data-
directed healthcare interventions. The system?s wireless data transmission
allows for real-time measurement and intervention using objective medication-
taking information, a process that is currently unavailable to healthcare
systems and will reduce the billions of dollars spent annually in avoidable
hospitalizations due to poor medication taking.

The proposed project will focus on developing a complete, wireless, medication
adherence and monitoring system. Non-adherence has been shown to lead to $100
billion in avoidable hospitalizations each year with an estimated total cost of
non-adherence to be as high as $290 billion a year. Only 50% to 60% of patients
adhere to their medication regimens as directed. Existing adherence systems are
not solving the problem because they are expensive to implement, require unique
equipment or communication technology, requires the patient to remember and
input their adherence data, fails to provide actionable information in time to
be useful and doesn't provide a long term view of patient adherence, amongst
other factors. The project's research objectives are to fully develop the
circuitry, data bridging device and programming system for a Bluetooth low
energy based adherence monitoring system. The system components will then be
tested in a commercial and at-home setting that will mimic real-world use and
implementation. System performance and functional characteristics will be
recorded and optimized. We anticipate that the completed project will provide
for a fully functional, medication adherence system that can be implemented for
both clinical study and commercial evaluation of patient medication taking.