* 1519246
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Boundaries and Local Resource Access in Gentrifying Neighborhoods.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Katherine Fallon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 11,809.00

How do neighborhood residents experience social isolation and socioeconomic
diversity in gentrifying neighborhoods? Studies of neighborhoods have
historically explored socioeconomic diversity between segregated and homogeneous
neighborhoods, finding local context impacts individual outcomes, such as
educational attainment. However, gentrifying cities are experiencing an increase
in density and population change, such that diversity is increasing within
neighborhoods. This dissertation examines how access to and use of local
resources changes for residents as population and neighborhood context gentrify.

Using place-based interviews paired with geo-spatial data on daily mobility
patterns conducted in the gentrifying neighborhood of Crown Heights, Brooklyn I
explore how socioeconomic diversity is constructed and experienced by residents,
specifically asking: (1) how do residents perceive and negotiate access to and
ownership over local resources, such as grocery stores and health services? (2)
How do perceptions of access and ownership intersect with tenure, race, class,
gender, and age status of residents? and (3) How does this access to local
resources impact material inequality and daily travel time? The gentrification
of American cities is producing growing socioeconomic diversity in places that
have formerly been much more homogeneous, and this project seeks to understand
how that diversity is experienced and dealt with at the local level.