* 1519151
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Son Preference and Sex Selection in Post-Soviet Azerbaijan
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Philip Gorski, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 8,966.00

Imbalanced sex ratios at birth are a long-standing social problem. An excess of
male births not only signals a deep devaluation of women, but it can distort
population dynamics for subsequent generations. Prenatal selection of boys
requires modern medical technologies such as ultrasound. Still, sex ratios at
birth have become skewed in parts of the developing world with no documented
history of postnatal discrimination against girls. Why? The purpose of this
research is to document how expecting parents viewed the potential benefits and
disadvantages of raising sons and daughters, how couples first learned about the
availability of sex selection technologies, and how they navigated family
planning decisions. The findings of this case study will help us understand the
various mechanisms through which prenatal sex selection gains traction. Findings
will be disseminated among academics and stakeholders who are invested in
generating policies that address imbalanced sex ratios at
birth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use qualitative methods to learn
about parents? Sex preferences for children and attitudes toward sex selection.
Spouses will be interviewed separately and together as a couple. As demographers
project that the diffusion of ultrasound technology will facilitate sex
selective practices across the developing world, this study will highlight the
moral terrain that individuals navigate before they accept prenatal sex
selection as a viable family planning option.