* 1519058
* RAPID-GOALI: Development of a Field-Deployable Net-Zero Water Wash Station for Remote Ebola Decontamination
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* James Englehardt, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 01/31/2017
* USD 182,994.00

1519058&lt;br/&gt;Englehardt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: RAPID-GOALI:
Development of a Field-Deployable Net-Zero Water Wash Station for Remote Ebola
Decontamination&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A field-deployable, clean-water wash
station emerged as a priority for Ebola response. The PI's group has recently
demonstrated low-energy, low-emission, net-zero water reuse, converting
comingled black and grey water to drinking water at a university residence hall.
While such technology has not been feasible for remote field deployment due to
operational complexity and energy demand, the advent of new, energy-efficient,
low-maintenance, small, light microplasma ozone generation modules along with
the emerging UV-ozone advanced oxidation make such a vision possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current advanced oxidation and membrane filtration
technologies require chemical dosing or other operationally-intensive
procedures, and/or disposal of a concentrate stream, making remote deployment
impractical. However, emerging UV-ozone advanced oxidation technology, coupled
with new, low-energy, low-maintenance microplasma ozone generation modules,
offers promise of clean water production anywhere, at any time. Therefore,
design principles for chemical? and maintenance-free remote production of clean
water, with annual lamp replacement, occasional rainwater makeup, and no human
wastewater contact will be developed. Principles will include the integration
and sizing of UV-ozone, microplasma ozone generation, and low-maintenance
separations, mixing, and hydraulic technologies. Knowledge of kinetics and
mechanisms of UV-ozone soap/foam mineralization, and the critical science of
microbial and Ebola viral inactivation, will be advanced. This project, will
develop a field-deployable, UV-microplasma-ozone net-zero water wash station
(NZWWS) for Ebola decontamination. Tasks include industry-collaborative design
and prototype construction using technology and equipment from the PI's current
NSF Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation project. Kinetic tests of
soap/foam mineralization; and viral inactivation using Bacillus thuringensis
spores, MS2 bacteriophage, and Cystoviridae as Ebolavirus surrogates by current
EPA collaborators. Spartan Environmental Technologies, LLC expects to be in a
position to manufacture units by late 2015. The project will include two
industry seminars, and continued scientific training of under-represented
populations, part of a team of 70 students to date, including 34 female, 1
African-American, and 14 Hispanic undergraduates and high school interns.
Graduate students will supervise 1-4 ten-week high-school internships, over
summer 2015. Finally, two students of CAE 542 Environmental Health and two
students of CAE 540 Environmental Chemistry will collaborate on a term project
involving kinetic testing of the operating prototype.