* 1519292
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Public Provision of Healthcare Under Changing Conditions in North and South America
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Janet Shim, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2016
* USD 12,000.00

Contested forms of health care or diagnosis inevitably involve deliberations
about proper definition and treatment, and these debates are all the more
polarized where public funding is concerned. Activists and health care providers
comprise two central groups with a stake in how certain forms of care are
included or excluded from public coverage. Taking a comparative approach, this
dissertation examines how health care providers and social movement activists in
the U.S. and Argentina conceptualize the public provision of contested forms of
health care. Addressing the example of transgender health care (a highly
contested and emergent field of practice) it asks how two different approaches
to public coverage for transgender health care have unfolded in New York City
and in Buenos Aires. Both cities are host to health care providers and social
movement activists who characterize themselves as leaders in transgender health.

The project will examine how health care providers and social movement activists
in these places work to define or redefine diagnoses and how they navigate
systems of public coverage for transgender health care. The data collection
involves interviews with 60 to 90 healthcare providers, patients, and social
movement actors in New York City and Buenos Aires, combined with a content
analysis of relvant documents and legislation associated with transgender
healthcare at both sites. A secondary analysis will also examine the current
revision of the World Health Organization's International Classification of
Diseases, in which a number of older diagnoses are being reworked, replaced, and
redefined. A working group of global experts, including individuals from
Argentina and the U.S., are proposing major changes to diagnoses associated with
transgender health care, and transnational activist networks are also providing
ongoing feedback. In analyzing these processes, this dissertation also asks how
multiple transnational actors with ranging expertise coordinate or conflict in
the process of diagnostic revision. This project stands to improve the well-
being of individuals in society by revealing how health care providers and
activists shape public policy and definitions of diagnostic classifications.