* 1519117
* Micro-Plasmas Through Porous Media
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* John Foster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 405,000.00

Porous media may be thought of as material that is essentially transparent to
fluid flow (e.g. gas or liquid). The internal surface area of such materials is
substantial, making the material excellent for chemical processing applications.
Porous media play an important role in modern society with applications ranging
from water filtration, such as activated charcoal filters, to air filtration.
Indeed, a catalytic converter exploits porous media's high surface area to
volume ratio to achieve high emission reduction efficiency in automobile
exhausts. New and emerging applications of porous media include fuel cells and
clean combustion. Porous media combustion in particular takes place in the
pores. The energy released there elevates the medium temperature so that
injected fuel automatically ignites upon entry. This technology has the
potential to reduce auto emissions and significantly increase fuel efficiency by
enabling very lean fuel burns. The introduction of small amounts of ionized gas,
a micro-plasma, inside the pores can further reduce ignition temperature thereby
allowing for further increases in efficiency. Additionally, reactive micro-
plasmas produced in the pores have the potential to decompose toxic combustion
byproducts as well as to clean the pores to greatly improve service lifetime.
Currently, the micro-plasma production in porous media is not well understood.
This effort aims to improve the understanding and optimize the production of
micro-plasmas in porous media by using a combination of experiments and
simulations. The goal of the effort is to bridge the gap between scientific
understanding of plasma production in porous media and actual applications. The
understanding obtained from this effort contributes to the development and
realization of clean burning, highly efficient, low emission automobiles,
advanced fuel cells and advanced industrial smoke stack scrubbers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental understanding of the physical conditions
that lead to interconnected plasma propagation from pore to pore is necessary
before one can credibly control and thus exploit micro-plasmas in porous media
(MPPM). We expect that a combination of diffusive transport between pores and
plasma avalanche within the pores, augmented by surface charging and radiation
transport, play key roles in establishing plasma interconnectivity between
adjacent pores. However there is now little experimental or theoretical
confirmation of these or other theories. In this research project, we will
investigate the basic properties of atmospheric pressure plasmas propagating
into and through porous media in chemically reacting environments. The goals are
to improve our understanding of plasma-surface interactions, which lead to MPPM,
through a collaborative investigation combining comprehensive experimental
measurements and first-principles, fluid, hybrid and kinetic modeling. Two
configurations will be studied. The first is a structured porous material
represented by a pack-bed reactor consisting of dielectric beads or rods having
a controlled radius, permittivity, conductivity and layout placed between metal
electrodes. The second configuration will be a truly randomly structured porous
material, ceramic and/or metal foam, as is commercially available. The project
also includes a K-12 outreach effort targeting low-income students. The effort
aims to introduce the students to plasma science and the emerging field of
plasma-aided combustion through both hands on experiments and science lesson
modules.