* 1519679
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure:  Experimental Facility with Large Wave Flume and Directional Wave Basin
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Daniel Cox, Oregon State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2020
* USD 3,823,079.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards research community with
access to research infrastructure that will include earthquake and wind
engineering experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure, computational modeling
and simulation tools, and research data, as well as education and community
outreach activities. NHERI will be comprised of separate awards for a Network
Coordination Office, Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center, and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response
research facility. Awards made for NHERI will contribute to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program. NHERI continues NSF's emphasis on earthquake
engineering research infrastructure previously supported under the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation as part of NEHRP, but
now broadens that support to include wind engineering research infrastructure.
NHERI has the broad goal of supporting research that will improve the resilience
and sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as buildings and other
structures, underground structures, levees, and critical lifelines, against the
natural hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order to reduce loss of life,
damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI resources will be available
on the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NHERI Experimental
Facilities will provide access to their experimental resources, user services,
and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education
awards. This award will support a NHERI Experimental Facility at Oregon State
University with two major experimental resources, a large wave flume (LWF) and a
directional wave basin (DWB), for conducting fundamental research to understand
and reduce risks to civil infrastructure from windstorm surge and tsunami
hazards. Hurricanes and other coastal windstorms are extreme hazards with
elevated surge and waves, high winds, and intense rains that threaten near-coast
structures and critical lifelines. A grand challenge in hurricane research is to
understand the overland flow hazard and the subsequent loads and structural
responses. Sustainable hurricane hazard mitigation strategies for resilient
coastal communities will need to consider transformative natural and nature-
based solutions, including the role of beaches, dunes, and coastal vegetation in
mitigating coastal hazards. Tsunamis can be triggered by seismic events and
landslides. A grand challenge in tsunami inundation research is to increase life
safety and community resilience in the event of a near-field tsunami, where
evacuation plans must be rapidly executed. Horizontal evacuation strategies must
consider the maximum extent of the inundation to improve community planning and
the location of critical facilities. Vertical evacuation strategies must
consider design of structures to withstand both the strong ground motion of the
earthquake followed quickly by the tsunami inundation forces, including debris
effects. Sustainable tsunami mitigation strategies must consider the role of the
coastal greenbelt, including beaches and dunes, in reducing the hazards of
tsunami inundation. Research conducted at this facility could enable
breakthrough discoveries that increase community resilience to coastal
windstorms and tsunamis and provide new mitigation strategies that will increase
system robustness and future adaptation strategies that will improve the rate of
the post-disaster recovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the LWF and the DWB can
be used for the study of hydraulic-structure-sediment phenomena, such as tsunami
and hurricane inundation dynamics in constructed and natural environments;
tsunami and hurricane wave forces on near-coast civil infrastructure; and
tsunami and hurricane surge interaction with sediments causing erosion and
localized scour. The LWF and DWB are capable of generating long-period waves for
tsunami research and short-crested waves for hurricane wave research. The LWF is
a two-dimensional representation of the coast (looking directly out to sea),
eliminating the complexity of longshore currents and wave direction, and
allowing a cross-section of test specimens to be studied at a large scale. The
LWF can allow geometric scaling from approximately 1:50 scale to model the
roughness effects of the constructed and natural environments of a coastal
community to 1:1 (prototype) scale to model wave-structure interaction of
building subassemblies, native sediments for beaches and dunes, and live coastal
vegetation. The DWB increases the system complexity to three dimensions by
extending laterally. This is necessary when studying complex harbors and coastal
communities, and when wave direction is important. The DWB generally requires a
decrease in scale by a factor of five. In addition to these two resources, the
facility will provide standard and state-of-the-art instrumentation to assess
wave conditions, velocity, and response variables such as stress, strain, load,
and sediment transport (scour and erosion). The facility will conduct two
workshops for prospective users in year one and annual workshops in each
subsequent year, and will host visiting scholars and Research Experiences for
Undergraduate students.