* 1519606
* High-order Calculations for Top Quark and Higgs Production
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nikolaos Kidonakis, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Nikolaos Kidonakis at
Kennesaw State University.

The research project of Professor Kidonakis concerns elementary particle physics
that is relevant to the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which is the highest-energy
particle collider in the world. By colliding protons against each other at high
energies at the LHC, physicists expect to learn about the fundamental particles
of matter and their interactions at higher energies and smaller distances than
have ever been previously explored. The top quark is the most massive
fundamental particle that has been discovered, it has many unique properties,
and thus it is a central part of the physics program at the LHC. The Higgs boson
is the particle responsible for mass generation, its discovery at the LHC was a
major discovery in physics, and the further elucidation of its properties is a
high priority. In his research, Professor Kidonakis aims to develop theoretical
methods to make precise predictions for processes at the LHC. In particular,
Professor Kidonakis will improve theoretical predictions for top-quark
production as well as for Higgs production by performing state-of-the-art
calculations. As a result, the project research will advance the national
interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental
directions: the discovery and understanding of elementary particles and new
physical laws. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts. Professor Kidonakis will involve students in his research, and thereby
provide critical training for junior physicists beginning research in this
field. He also intends to give public lectures on his research results, and
introduce material into course curricula that emerge from his research.

More technically, the objective of the proposed research of Professor Kidonakis
is to calculate higher-order perturbative corrections to improve theoretical
predictions for top-quark production and Higgs production in the Standard Model
and in models of new physics. High-order corrections, including collinear, soft-
gluon, and subleading logarithmic corrections, will be calculated for
differential and total cross sections. The inclusion of these corrections is
necessary to improve the accuracy of theoretical predictions by reducing
uncertainty due to scale variation. Differential distributions are very
important because they are sensitive to new physics. These calculations will be
performed both for Standard-Model processes and for processes beyond the
Standard Model, such as in supersymmetric models or models with flavor-changing
neutral currents. The results of the project will be crucial in making state-of-
the-art predictions for benchmark processes and for the interpretation of data
from the LHC. The research findings will be widely disseminated through
publication in refereed journals and presentations at international conferences
and workshops, and through contacts with experimenters at the LHC.