* 1519557
* RAPID: Disentangling the sedimentary storm signal in coastal submarine caves and ponds in Bermuda with implications for the entire North Atlantic Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Peter Van Hengstum, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2015
* USD 24,993.00

Uncertainty in the timing of major storm events in the Atlantic Ocean, some of
which have devastating impacts on infrastructure along the east coast of the
United States, is a major hindrance in our ability to adequately understand,
plan, and possibly mitigate the negative effects of future major storm events
especially now that the ocean is documented to be warming and sea level along
the east coast is documented to be rising. Much of what we know about the
prehistoric record of ocean storm events, like hurricanes or like Super Storm
Sandy, come from the sedimentary record in coastal lakes, lagoons, and other
places where sediments are transported and deposited. Due to erosion by
subsequent events or the mixing of sediments by organisms that live in coastal
regions or in the sediments themselves, sometimes these records are hard to date
and read due to disruption of characteristic sedimentary features or chemical
indicators, like organic detritus and chemical or physical indicators of the
timing of the deposit. As a result, this research, funded by a RAPID award,
seeks to take samples from ponds and submarine caves on the island of Bermuda to
examine fresh, unaltered sedimentary deposits left by category 3 Hurricane
Gonzalo which struck the island on October 18, 2014 causing hundreds of millions
of dollars in damage. This award funds the research of two early career faculty
members, one from Texas A&M University and one from the University of Southern
Mississippi to collect cores of fresh sedimentary material on Bermuda that is
related to Hurricane Gonzalo and analyze samples using various isotopes (13C,
7Be, 137Cs) that will allow the determination of the origin of any organic
matter and allow the deposits to be accurately dated. The study will also
measure various sediment physical properties (e.g., particle size, weight
percent organic matter) and carry out X-ray Fluoresence (XRF) scanning of the
cores, which will enable studies of sedimentary structures that indicate the
rates and processes of sediment deposition. Results of the investigation will be
compared to older sedimentary records collected by these investigators in the
same locations over the past six years. The fresh sediments will be used to help
calibrate the older records and help the investigators distinguish between
simple storminess records and major hurricane events.

Broader impacts of the work are significant. Societal impacts include an
improvement of our understanding of the timing and intensity of mid-Atlantic
storm and hurricane records, a number of which originate in the tropics; travel
north over the ocean; and then curve eastward wreaking major damage on western
Europe coastal and inland communities. The research also has the potential to
resolve the disparity of interpretations of prehistoric Bermudian storm records,
which are important for understanding tropical hurricane frequency that impacts
communities and infrastructure on the US eastern seaboard. Additional impacts
include the funding of two early career scientists, one of whom is at an
institution in an EPSCoR state (Mississippi). There will also be training of
undergraduate and graduate students, some of whom are from a gender under-
represented in the geological science. These students will be engaged in
analyzing samples and comparing them with previously collected sedimentary
records. In addition, the lead investigator will organize a local symposium in
Bermuda to engage local stakeholders in the research program.