* 1519141
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Patterns of Incorporation for Unaccompanied Migrant Youth
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Pierrette Hondagneu-Sotelo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2016
* USD 11,128.00

This dissertation investigates the scope of unaccompanied Central American
youth's participation in family, work, school and the local community. I seek to
understand the ways in which youth define and perceive social membership and
belonging and therefore experience incorporation in the US. I will interview
youth and young adults who arrived in the US as unaccompanied minors with the
intention of working to support families that continue to live abroad. As the
first sociological study to consider the integration experiences of
unaccompanied Central American youth workers, this research has theoretical and
empirical implications for the study of unauthorized youth integration, the life
course, and the burgeoning literature on unaccompanied minor migration
experiences. This research is also uniquely poised to speak to the social
incorporation of other marginalized youth groups, including homeless and foster
youth in the US. Focusing on how unaccompanied youth define, perceive, and
experience incorporation and belonging, this study expands assimilation and
citizenship deservingness models that shape our understanding of immigrant youth
incorporation as a way to guide future immigration research as well as immigrant
integration policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretically, this dissertation
project asks: do unaccompanied Central American youth experience downward
mobility as segmented assimilation predicts or do they develop alternative
spaces and narratives that foster incorporation and belonging despite their
social and economic marginalization? I formulate a theoretical framework that
considers assimilation and citizenship theory from a subject-centered approach
that highlights how youth perceive, define, and measure incorporation and
belonging. I employ multiple methods and data sources including in-depth, semi-
structured interviews and participant and non-participant observation with
unaccompanied Central American youth in Los Angeles. Using the American
Community Survey, I also include a demographic snapshot of native and foreign-
born children living in the United Sates, California, and Los Angeles who are
unrelated to other householders to conceptualize patterns of incorporation of
marginalized youth nationally. This study aims to build upon and extend current
assimilation theories of immigrant incorporation while providing substantive
empirical data and implications regarding experiences of unaccompanied youth in
the immigration pipeline.