* 1519253
* 2015 Wind Energy Research Workshop, Mid-October 2015 in Lowell, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2016
* James Sherwood, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 24,997.00

Proposal Number: 1519253&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Massachusetts
Lowell&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: David Willis&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2015 Wind
Energy Research Workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind energy is a natural resource
for the clean and sustainable production of electricity. The 2015 Wind Energy
Research Workshop, hosted by the University of Massachusetts at Lowell (UNL),
will be held on the UNL campus in mid-October of 2015. Approximately 175
workshop participants, consisting of faculty and students, researchers from
national laboratories, representatives from industry, and government officials
from state and federal agencies, will create a diverse audience with the
collective wealth of knowledge to identify relevant research opportunities need
to drive the continued commercial development of wind energy in the United
States. The two-day workshop will include keynote lectures, invited
presentations, posters, exhibits, field trips, and panels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2015 Wind Energy Research Workshop presenters,
discussion leaders, and participants will engage in four activities: 1) Identify
research gaps that currently exist in the wind industry, 2) determine future
research directions that will provide immediate and long-term benefits to the
Nation?s ability to harness wind energy, 3) exchange information via several
panel sessions with distinguished and knowledgeable speakers, and 4) educate the
wind-energy community about the relevant issues that need to be addressed to
reduce the cost of wind energy. Breakout sessions will include the following
topics: wind turbine manufacturing, structural health monitoring &amp;
diagnostics, composite materials, wind resource characterization &amp; sensing,
computational modeling, and energy storage, smart grid &amp; transmission. The
workshop will disseminate material and knowledge by publishing a report
containing all publicly released presentations, and will highlight the outcomes
in each focus area. A website will be created to post the presentation slides
along with videos taken of the panel sessions.