* 1519089
* I-Corps L:  Science Education for New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER)
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2016
* William David Burns, HARRISBURG UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Educators or administrators invested in improving student outcomes in STEM, are
constantly looking for proven, evidence-based, trusted sources worthy of their
time and investment. They are aware of pedagogical advancements and are willing
to do the work necessary to implement innovative practices. However, at many
institutions, the financial climate and lack of professional development funding
evidences the need for lower cost, yet high quality experiences and materials.
For those who have no support, or must attend a disciplinary meeting instead
with their limited allowance, webinars and e-friendly publications specifically
provide accessible options to support their own professional development. This
includes full-time faculty and the growing number of adjuncts. This proposal
extends the benefits of a proven strategy by utilizing new technological
platforms to promote broader adoption, increase equitable access, and promote
program availability. Widely available and interactive webinars provide people
with limited time or funds the opportunity to connect with experts from around
the country for a reasonable cost and on a specific topic of need. Expanded
applications of the proposed approach (Science Education for New Civic
Engagements and Responsibilities) will lead to an exponentially larger number of
students with strong scientific and quantitative literacy and more practitioners
aware of an approach that responds to the challenges they face
daily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2001 the Science Education for New Civic
Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER) project and the National Center for
Science and Civic Engagement has developed and disseminated a range of
educational products and professional development programs that support the
improvement of formal and informal science education, including over 50 course
models, "backgrounder" essays, peer-reviewed articles, residential and non-
residential institutes and workshops, and a signature assessment tool (the
SENCER SALG-Student Assessment of Learning Gains). All publications are
currently digitized, tagged and searchable, and included in a web-accessed
"digital library." In the project's most recent iteration new products are in
development, including a webinar series, a series of workshops for faculty and
administrators, a SENCER handbook, and course modules called "pearls of
practice." This team believes that several of these products have commercial
potential, either as benefits of a paid membership, and/or for individual
download and sale.