* 1519116
* IBSS: Agent-Based Model of the Role of Perceptions in Income Tax Evasion
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Raffaele Vardavas, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2018
* USD 605,844.00

This interdisciplinary research project will advance basic understanding of how
tax compliance behavior emerges by focusing on how perceptions of risk and tax
fairness form, how these perceptions spread through a social network, and the
interplay caused by the complex feedback loops among individual behaviors and
population-level outcomes. The project also will address how audit, penalty, and
taxation policies, and changes in those policies, influence perceptions and
ultimately reduce tax evasion. The project will provide new insights regarding
how tax compliance behavior is modified by the perceived aggregated compliance
and on how behavior and the perceived aggregated compliance depend on social
network structure over which perceptions of taxation spreads. The project will
demonstrate the utility of the use of agent-based modeling for research on
interactions between individuals and governments as well as how data from the
American Life Panel collected by Rand Corporation can be employed to address
problems like this. The analysis also will have practical utility, because it
will shed light on why certain countries with high taxation levels, such as
Scandinavian nations, can maintain high levels of tax compliance while other
countries with lower taxation levels may have high levels of tax evasion as is
the case in Greece and Italy. Project findings therefore should help nations
like the United States reduce the occurrence of tax evasion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Income tax evasion is a problem that poses considerable
challenges for tax authorities and governments at the local, state, and federal
levels. Its causes and implications are both economic and social. The role of
tax evasion-related perceptions and how social networks influence those
perceptions remain poorly understood, however. The investigators will build an
agent-based computational simulation model of income tax evasion. Within the
simulation, the compliance behavior of individuals will change through an
adaptation process based on their past experiences with audits and tax evasion
penalties, their perception of the fairness in taxation rates, and social
interactions with people in their social networks. In conjunction, the
investigators will conduct a national survey on the perceptions of tax fairness.
The survey will gather individual-level data that will inform the simulation
model's behavioral mechanisms. These mechanisms influence the propensity to
evade, and the survey provides an empirical basis for choosing model-specific
parameter values. Model assumptions will further be informed using sensitivity
analyses. The simulation model will be validated and calibrated to reproduce
U.S. national levels of income tax compliance for different tax brackets. In
addition to the U.S., the model also will be calibrated using data sets and
compliance levels for Greece and Denmark. Once calibrated, the model will be
used to understand how tax evasion behaviors evolve differently depending on
various starting assumptions, such as how social networks are structured or what
fiscal policies are in place and the conditions for the system to produce
tipping point dynamics. The model then will be used to identify fiscal policies
that are most effective in minimize tax evasion and recovering compliance. The
investigators will employ robust decision making, a method for improving policy
decision making, to rank policies based both on their potential performance, as
well as how robust this performance is to the key sources of uncertainty. This
project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social
Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.