* 1519271
* Examining the Connections between Observed Atmospheric Gravity Waves and Convective Clouds for Improved Climate Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* M Joan Alexander, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2019
* USD 489,849.00

Waves in which buoyancy is the restoring force are referred to as gravity waves,
and such waves are ubiquitous in the atmosphere. They occur over a broad range
of spatial scales but are generally smaller than the frontal weather systems
seen on weather maps. They can be generated by a variety of mechanisms including
air flow over mountains, the formation of frontal systems, and the vertical
motions that accompany convection. Despite their relatively small size, they are
thought to play an important role in the atmospheric circulation due to their
vertical flux of horizontal momentum, through which they drive the quasi-
biennial oscillation in the equatorial stratosphere, modulate the strength of
the midlatitude jet streams, and alter the strength of the stratospheric polar
vortices, thereby playing a role in the seasonal evolution of the Southern
Hemisphere ozone hole. But the small size of the waves and their relatively
rapid propagation make it difficult to observe them and examine their
generation, propagation, and impacts on the mean flow. Moreover, the waves
cannot generally be simulated by global weather and climate models due to their
small size, and instead they must represented through parameterizations which
estimate their aggregate effects as a function of the resolved flow. While these
parameterizations have become quite sophisticated, their validity is difficult
to establish, and common circulation biases in models are often ascribed to
inadequacies of the gravity wave parameterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work
under this award specifically addresses gravity waves generated by convection,
motivated by recent observations from balloons and satellites suggesting that
that large amplitude gravity waves, of the sort that come from vigorous, small-
scale deep convection, account for a larger fraction of the gravity wave
momentum flux than previously assumed. Further motivation comes from the
availability of the record of tropical convection from the Tropical Rainfall
Measurement Mission (TRMM), a satellite record which is now over a dozen years
long and can be used to estimate the generation of gravity waves by tropical and
subtropical convection. The data is used in conjunction with the gravity wave
parameterization from the Community Atmosphere Model, along with observational
wind and atmospheric stability data, to estimate the generation, propagation,
and momentum flux of convectively generated gravity wave activity. The momentum
flux is then compared with estimates calculated from the satellite record of
atmospheric temperature from the satellite record of the Atmospheric Infrared
Sounder (AIRS). The goal of this effort is to reconcile the large-scale patterns
in gravity wave activity observed in the tropics and subtropics with existing
knowledge of their convective sources, based on a theoretical understanding of
their propagation and mean flow interaction. The reconciliation is expected to
require some ad hoc adjustment of free parameters in the parameterization
scheme, and the PIs will conduct further experiments to determine how this
"tuning" of the parameterization affects the large-scale atmospheric simulation
produced by the model. Some work will also consider the generation of gravity
waves by convection occurring in the storm tracks of the middle latitudes, using
other data sources to estimate convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts due to the need for accurate gravity wave parameterizations in
weather and climate models. These models are widely used as research tools for a
variety of applications, and are also used to provide information to first
responders, decision makers, and the general public. In addition, the project
supports and trains a graduate student, thereby providing for the future
workforce in this research area.