* 1519800
* SBIR Phase I:  A Smartphone-Based Handheld Sensor for Accurate and Quantitative Detection of Toxic Ion Contaminants in Environmental Water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Manas Gartia, MOBOSENSE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,880.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a portable, low-cost
plug and play mobile internet integrated sensor product catering to the needs of
water quality monitoring market, a global market with a compounded annual growth
rate of 4-6%. The water testing equipment market is divided into low-end, low-
cost on-field test equipment (such as nitrate strip) that gives qualitative
information about the analytes, and high-end testing devices used in labs (such
as mass spectrometer) providing accurate quantitative information. If
successful, this sensor technology will bridge the gap by providing low-cost,
sensitive, accurate tools for quantitative measurement of analytes such as toxic
ions. Consequently, successful demonstrations of the proposed sensor technology
will facilitate wider market acceptance and penetration of personalized mobile-
enabled water quality monitoring devices. Another aspect of the project is to
enable ?citizen scientist? to partake in environmental data collection and
spread sustainability education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to develop a smartphone-
based electrical sensor technology for real-time water quality monitoring.
Currently, spectrometry, capillary electrophoresis, chemical reduction methods,
and gas chromatography coupled mass spectroscopy are some of the most widely
used techniques for water quality analysis; however, these instruments are bulky
and costly; the methods are time consuming, and involve laborious sample
processing steps requiring well-trained personnel in a laboratory setting; In
order to meet the market need for a portable, low-cost, and easy-to-use water
analysis technology, the project will investigate a smartphone integrated
electrical readout sensor platform which will be able to address all of the
above issues by: 1) the development of a low-cost, portable sensor package
consisting of an electrochemical sensor chip, a driver circuit, and rechargeable
battery power for standalone operation; 2) the application of polymer
immobilized ion sensing coatings to increase the selectivity during ion
detection in a non-laboratory setting; 3) the use of algorithm against
calibration curve to automatically detect and quantify toxic ion, and 4) the use
of smartphone in-built GPS and mobile broadband function to combine the sensing
results with geospatial information and uploaded to the Cloud for further
analysis.