* 1519282
* Communicating Research to Public Audiences (CRPA) Program: Collecting, Sharing and Building from Successful Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Michele Korf, Vox Television, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 03/31/2016
* USD 49,926.00

This virtual conference proposal would bring together NSF researchers and their
media partners who worked collaboratively on previous NSF projects involved with
communicating research to public audiences (the now archived CRPA program). The
goal of the conference to is examine successful practices and lessons learned
and aggregate the findings in a manner that can productively inform and support
current and future efforts of this kind. The key objectives of the work will be
to identify approaches that broaden reach, increase the effectiveness of
researcher/outreach organizational partnerships, and make recommendations for
amplifying the strategic impact of these projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to
the conference the PI will conduct a multiphase process of document review,
online interviews, and questionnaires. Two virtual workshops will be conducted
with a subset of previous grantees and their media partners noted for effective
collaboration and outcomes. The first workshop will have participants sharing
findings on project strengths and areas needing improvement based on past
experience. They will identify possible generic tools and a framework that could
be shared across projects. The second workshop will focus on the identified
successful strategies might be implemented more widely.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this multi-component conference
will help future grantees better understand, expand, and work more strategically
with their outreach partners.