* 1519980
* Stress localization, fault activation, and earthquake migration in central and eastern US: A systematic numerical study
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Mian Liu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 245,000.00

This research is to study earthquakes in the central and eastern United States.
These earthquakes cannot be readily explained by the plate tectonics theory,
which predicts earthquakes to be concentrated along the boundary faults of
tectonic plates, such as the San Andreas Fault in California. Within plate
interiors, no large earthquakes are supposed to occur. The central and eastern
United States is within the presumably stable interior of the North American
plate, yet earthquakes in this part of the country have been widespread and
potentially catastrophic. Three large earthquakes occurred in southeastern
Missouri in the winter of 1811-1812, shaking ground as far away as Boston.
Geological evidence shows large prehistoric earthquakes in many central and
eastern states, and the 2011Virginia earthquake, which shook much of the eastern
seaboard, is a reminder of earthquake hazard in the central and eastern US. The
researchers on this project will systematically investigate the cause of these
earthquakes. Using computer modeling, this research will address three major
questions: 1) What causes stress and strain localization in the central and
eastern US? Existing hypotheses explain these earthquakes as the results of
either weak zones in the Earth?s crust or local tectonic forces. Sophisticated
computer models will be developed to investigate how the observed Earth
structures interact with tectonic forces to cause clustered earthquakes in the
central and eastern US. 2) What triggered the recent seismicity? Present
seismicity in Missouri apparently has resulted from geologically recent fault
reactivation, perhaps since the last ice age. This research will test the
various hypothesized causes to quantify their roles in reactivating faults. 3)
Why large earthquakes have repeated in Missouri? Results of this work will
improve the assessment and mitigation of earthquake hazards in the central and
eastern US. This work will also help understand earthquakes in geologically
similar regions such as India, North China, Europe, and Australia. This project
will involve undergraduate research and strengthen ties with the earthquake
researchers in China, where plate-interior earthquakes are
common.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;). Intracontinental earthquakes have killed more
people than other types of earthquakes combined prior to 2012, yet they remain
poorly understood and cannot be readily explained by plate tectonics. Located
within the presumably stable interior of the North American plate, the CEUS
nonetheless has widespread and potentially catastrophic earthquakes. A cluster
of M~7.0 earthquakes in the New Madrid Seismic Zone (NMSZ), southeastern
Missouri, between 1811 and 1812 were among the largest earthquakes ever recorded
in continental US, and the 2011 Virginia earthquake (Mw 5.8) is a fresh reminder
of earthquake hazard in the CEUS. The research consists of three phases of
geodynamic modeling, using the state-of-art viscoelasto-plastic finite element
codes, to address fundamental questions of earthquakes in the central and
eastern United State (CEUS). Existing hypotheses for the clustered seismicity in
the CEUS include various weak zones in the lithosphere such as failed rifts, and
regional and local driving forces such as ridge push and mafic intrusions in the
failed rifts. This research will investigate the dynamic interplay of
lithospheric structures and driving forces in a three-dimensional lithospheric
dynamic model. The model will be constrained and validated by comparing the
predicted and observed stress orientations and stress states in the lithosphere.
Present seismicity in the NMSZ and other parts of the CEUS has apparently
resulted from recent fault reactivation, perhaps since the last ice age. Various
causes of the fault reactivation, including glacial isostatic adjustment and
increased erosion, have been explored in different models. The proposed research
will quantify the relative roles of these causes in the same mechanical model,
using GPS-measured vertical crustal motion in the CEUS as the primary
constraint.This research will test the hypothesized causes, such as cyclic
loading and viscous relaxation, in a lithospheric dynamic model. This model will
also simulate how rupture of other faults in the Mississippi Embayment may have
affected loading in the NMSZ, and how the 1811-1812 NMSZ earthquakes may have
influenced the instability of neighboring faults, especially those in the Wabash
Valley, via stress migration.