* 1519047
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Americans' Thinking about Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Naomi Gerstel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 11,725.00

Growing economic inequality in the U.S. has captured the attention of many
Americans. Across political ideologies and income ranges, most Americans are
critical of the inequality in income and wealth they see in the U.S., and most
Americans want a more equal distribution. However, contrary to long-standing
theoretical expectations that would predict a rise in the demand for
redistribution in response to increasing wealth and income concentration, recent
evidence suggests that support for redistributive policy appears to decrease in
response to increasing inequality. This research will make sense of Americans'
confusing sentiments about redistributive policy through an in-depth examination
of Americans' thinking about the phenomenon of economic inequality.

The muddled and dissonant nature of public opinion toward redistributive
policies suggests the need for a study using qualitative methods that are
uniquely suited to capture and make sense of these kinds of messy but
influential sentiments. This research does just that, using in-depth interviews
(divided among rich and poor neighborhoods) to probe the complexity of
Americans' thinking about economic inequality while providing a powerful cross-
time perspective through the creative re-engagement of an influential
qualitative study on the topic from the early 1980s (Jennifer Hochschild's
What's Fair?). Using a revisit to Hochschild?s site and methods to capitalize on
the dramatic economic changes over the past several decades, this project
extends her findings in new empirical directions. If, as the evidence suggests,
a majority of Americans are dissatisfied with current income distributions, then
understanding their desire for change and how it is connected or disconnected
from their opinions about solutions is of importance to a broad range of
stakeholders, including all of those scholars, policy makers, and citizens who
seek to understand inequality and disparity.