* 1519576
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research:  Transparent and Energy-Efficient Speculation on NUMA Architectures for Embedded Multiprocessor Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/26/2014,09/30/2017
* Tali Moreshet, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 80,455.00

High-end embedded systems are turning to multicore architectures to meet the
performance, and performance/Watt, demands required for their applications.
Moreover, as the demand for more compute-intensive capabilities for embedded
systems increases, these multicore architectures will evolve into many-core
systems for improved performance or performance/area/Watt. These systems are
often organized as cluster-based Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) architectures
that provide the programmer with a shared-memory abstraction. That is, simple
cores are grouped into clusters sharing local interconnection and memory and
these clusters are then replicated and interconnected using a scalable network-
on-chip medium. This project investigates one of the principal challenges
presented by these emerging NUMA architectures for embedded systems: providing
efficient, energy-effective, and convenient mechanisms for synchronization and
communication. In particular, it proposes new solutions based on hardware
support for speculative synchronization, and software support to make such
speculation transparent. Important metrics for measuring the effectiveness of
the solutions include throughput, ease of use, system energy consumption, and
architectural simplicity. Embedded systems are becoming ubiquitous over a broad
range of applications, including smart phones, automotive systems, security, and
other ambient intelligence systems. Increasing computational demands have led to
more sophisticated products and therefore increased challenges in meeting tight
design constraints, particularly throughput/Watt. Improvements to the way these
systems communicate and synchronize data can have a substantial impact in terms
of improved functionality, utility, and durability. The project is an
international collaboration that combines PI expertise in Network-on-Chip
architectures, embedded system design, and memory synchronization. Broader
impacts of the proposal include new course development, outreach to graduate and
undergraduate women and under-represented minorities, and student exchanges
between international institutions.