* 1519687
* I-Corps:  Three-Demensional Printing of a Customizable Accommodating Intraocular Lens
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2014,05/31/2016
* Cheng Sun, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Cataract surgery is the most common surgery in the US, with an estimated 3
million per annum. The surgery involves the removal of the cloudy intraocular
lens (IOL) due to a cataract growth that prevents patients from seeing clearly.
While there has been advancement in instruments that remove the lens, there
remains a great demand to improve replacement IOLs such that patients no longer
require spectacles after surgery. Often times, due to anatomical differences
between patients and variability in the patient's reaction to existing IOLs,
patients may suffer from presbyopia or difficulty to focus on close objects.
Nearly 50% of cataract surgeries result in need for spectacles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team is working to commercialize a
personalized intraocular lens manufactured utilizing platform three-dimensional
(3D) printing technology. Developed by prominent Northwestern University
engineering faculty, this patent pending technology can allow ophthalmologists
to individually tailor for each patient a replacement lens that has been
designed to bio-mimic the natural lens. This significant improvement has the
potential to yield fewer surgical complications and eliminate the need for
glasses after cataract surgery, improving patient satisfaction and quality of
life.