* 1519015
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Water Management At An Early Urban Center
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Nicholas Dunning, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 16,827.00

The provision of a dependable water supply is of critical importance to human
societies both today and in the past. Dr. Nicholas Dunning and Mr. Jeffrey
Brewer of the University of Cincinnati, along with an interdisciplinary research
group, consisting of colleagues from the U.S., Mexico, and Canada, will study
the development and maintenance of an urbanized, complex system of water
collection, storage, and distribution within an area of limited and ephemeral
natural water resources in the heart of the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico.
Previous studies on water management have identified and analyzed a variety of
water management features within the context of regional environmental and
cultural changes. Adapting to variable climatic conditions and expressing
political control, in particular, are considered key considerations in the
creation and oversight of water storage features. Archaeology is well positioned
to provide unique insight into this discussion by focusing on the complex
interrelationship between hydrology, topography, vegetation, and architecture
across multiple spatial and temporal scales. When and how do carefully managed
water resources become an inherent component of urban adaptation? Although the
nature and scale of a community's water features change across space and time,
understanding the relationship between water storage, climatic conditions, and
human settlement is vital to promoting sustainability, resource conservation,
and public education in global societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Dunning, Mr.
Brewer and colleagues will use empirical data to study how residents of both the
urban core and urban periphery managed their limited water resources and
developed and maintained a complex system of water management. The research will
be conducted at the ancient Maya site of Yaxnohcah, located within the central
lowlands of the Yucatan Peninsula. This site provides a unique opportunity to
advance understanding of critical resource management and utilization practices
that permitted the local inhabitants to support a high population density across
a long span of time. The researchers will work with a team of archaeologists,
geographers, and environmental scientists to examine the area's hydrological,
ecological, and land use history from the Middle Preclassic to Early Postclassic
periods (900 B.C. - A.D. 1100). The combination of archaeological excavation,
sediment core studies, and high-resolution satellite imagery analysis will
permit a unique examination of this civilization's hydraulic developments and
advance the field in new directions. This diverse multidisciplinary dataset will
enable a more complete understanding of the physical, temporal, and spatial
characteristics of these hydraulic features and their precise roles in the daily
lives and activities of community inhabitants. This research will advance our
broader understanding of the resilient capacity of human societies faced with
significant environmental challenges, and the collaborative focus of the project
will also establish and enrich opportunities for international student training
and research.