* 1519667
* IBSS-Ex: Exploring Recidivism Through a Tablet-Based Battery to Assess Individual Decision Making
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2017
* David Eagleman, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2017
* USD 244,639.00

Scientists long have explored and measured a range of decision-making traits,
such as the ability to inhibit impulses or to understand other people's
emotions. Researchers have developed, validated, and refined a wide range of
neurocognitive assessments, some of which have been used to try to make
reasonable predictions of how dangerous prisoners will be in the future. This
interdisciplinary research project will build on these previous efforts to test
whether a newly developed tablet-based battery of tests can approve capabilities
to improve prediction of future dangerousness by identifying and evaluating the
relationships among several aspects of decision making and criminal recidivism.
The assessment battery is designed to quantify an individual's decision-making
profile, even if a user has limited reading proficiency and little to no
previous experience with tablet computers. The project will explore a
methodology than may be able to better tie details of individual decision making
directly to past and future behavior. Although this project will focus on the
topic of criminal recidivism, the software to be tested will provide an open-
source, validated tool for correlating decision making with a variety of
behavioral variables. Project findings will provide a deeper understanding of
offenders' deficits, which may yield more rational, evidence-based policies
aimed at the prevention and control of crime. The project also will provide
education and training opportunities for graduate students and a post-doctoral
researcher who are members of groups that are underrepresented in scientific
research activities.

This project will focus on the core question of whether signatures of individual
decision making can help to identify high-volume and high-risk criminal
offenders. Past studies have employed a range of techniques, such as psychiatric
assessment, behavioral inventories, and brain scanning, which have generally
found that offenders have problems with anger, empathy, aggression, impulse-
control, and self-management. The project advances efforts to directly measure
those traits among offenders by accomplishing three specific aims: (1) finalize
development of the battery, (2) validate it against standardized neurocognitive
tests, and (3) quantify patterns of criminal recidivism by correlating decision-
making metrics with future criminal activity of 300 released probationers. This
project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social
Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.