* 1519796
* SBIR Phase I:  Activation and Mobility Profiling for III-V Semiconductor Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Abhijeet Joshi, Active Layer Parametrics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,994.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of a novel analysis tool
for III-V semiconductor compounds with immediate impact in Light Emitting Diode
(LED) manufacturing and high-mobility channel device industries. Currently,
relatively low yields during epitaxial growth of the LED semiconductor layers
cause a significant loss to the industry. High mobility integrated devices and
LED epitaxial development teams have access to methods that provide partial
information and metrology about the semiconductor layers. The system proposed
here will provide complete electrical data on the materials and could cut
significantly improve the feedback time, resulting in higher yields and lower
manufacturing costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will build a prototype system to directly measure high-
resolution mobility and activation profiles for III-V semiconductors. Currently,
electrical profiling methods do not measure mobility profiles of activated
materials that form the basis of the III-V semiconductor device industries.
Thus, researchers cannot take into account the effect of process variations on
the mobility profiles of the electronic materials. This prevents the complete
electrical characterization of the material, and the optimization of the
material growth/implantation and activation processes. The anticipated outcome
of this project is a functional system that will provide better and quicker
analysis on electronic materials.