* 1519732
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Sonal Singhal, Singhal                 Sonal
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow, and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Sonal Singhal is "Geographic ranges and diversification." The host
institution is the University of Michigan, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Daniel L. Rabosky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether we as a nation see biodiversity
as innately valuable or economically valuable, or both, it remains that that
biodiversity provides important services to society. Yet, although species are
the fundamental unit of biodiversity, much about species are a mystery. To
address these unknowns, the fellowship research investigates an important aspect
of species: the species range. Species ranges are dynamic through time,
originating, shifting, expanding, and sometimes even disappearing. What
determines the trajectory of species ranges is not well-understood; but it has
important implications for the accumulation and distribution of diversity across
landscapes. The research integrates genomic, phylogenetic, and ecological
approaches to determine factors that influence range dynamics. In particular, it
tests how environmental suitability, dispersal rates, incomplete reproductive
isolation, and biotic interactions permit or limit a species ability to expand
its range. It then assesses what impact, if any, range evolution has on
macroevolutionary dynamics across phylogenies. These ideas are being tested
using genetic resources and materials already collected from lizard communities
in Australian arid and Brazilian neotropical biomes, as they are two of the most
diverse vertebrate communities on Earth. The host laboratory has an extensive
collection of the needed materials and live animals are not being used. The
broad phylogenetic and geographic sampling ensures the findings can be
generalized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals include gaining expertise in
phylogenetic comparative methods and macroevolutionary analyses using
computational approaches. Broader impact plans include developing programming
courses for young girls in the public schools, working with the University of
Michigan Museum of Natural History to engage the community in biodiversity
science, and training undergraduates in the process of scientific research.