* 1519406
* ICES: Small: Risk Aversion in Algorithmic Game Theory and Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 11/15/2014,07/31/2017
* Evdokia Nikolova, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 357,791.00

The fields of Algorithmic Game Theory and Mechanism Design study the strategic
interaction of multiple agents. The growth of available data and computational
power enable these fields to make a real impact in understanding the agents'
incentives and improving their decisions and the resulting social outcomes. A
grand challenge is the presence of uncertainty and risk, which calls for new
game theoretic models and algorithmic techniques. As a brief example, consider
going to the airport to catch a flight. In uncertain traffic and a deadline,
risk considerations are critical and a less risky, albeit longer, route might be
preferable over one that minimizes expected delay. But the fundamental questions
do not depend merely on one individual's preferences, but on a broader social
model that captures many individuals and their interactions. For instance, how
does strategic risk-aware routing by multiple users affect route selection and
the overall congestion in the network? And how different is the individually
optimal (equilibrium) route selection of multiple risk-averse users from a
socially optimal traffic allocation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
outlines an agenda for investigating how uncertainty and risk aversion transform
traditional models and methodologies employed by Algorithmic Game Theory and
Mechanism Design. It will import models and tools from areas with a rich
tradition in studying risk, such as Financial Engineering, and adapt them to
multi-user computational environments. Ultimately, the goal is to develop new
game theoretic models and analysis, as well as new algorithms for solving the
computational questions in these models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
focuses on problems that arise in complex multi-user systems in the real world
and has the potential to improve a variety of applications that involve
uncertainty and risk-averse users, for example, reduce congestion in
transportation and telecommunication networks, enhance the quality of streaming
applications over the Internet, increase the safety and security in military
operations, autonomous and robot navigation, etc. From a research standpoint,
the transformative potential of the proposed research is to fundamentally shift
thinking about uncertain multi-user environments away from optimizing simple
expected performance and instead towards a systematic treatment of contingencies
and risk.