* 1519160
* IUSE/PFE:RED: The Connected Learner: Design Patterns for Transforming Computing and Informatics Education
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Bojan Cukic, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,250,648.00

The Connected Learner project at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte
is a re-orientation of undergraduate computing and informatics education to
focus on student learning that connects to peers, the profession, and the
community. The project vision is to transform the student entering an
undergraduate computing and informatics program from a person with an interest
in computing - to a person with an identity as a computing professional. The
project will transform faculty attitude towards education, shifting their
attitudes and behaviors away from knowledge transmission and lecturing toward a
refreshed approach of developing educational activities that scaffold the
computing knowledge and skills to build successful computing professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will catalyze and sustain this transition with
the identification of pedagogical design patterns to guide all faculty teaching
courses in the undergraduate computing and informatics curriculum. Innovative
teaching and assessment practices will be implemented across an entire
undergraduate computing and informatics curriculum, demonstrating the
applicability and efficacy of these practices across a student body; which is
diverse in terms of socio-economic status and demographics. The project will
develop taxonomies and design patterns for knowledge and assessment to
facilitate scaling and disseminating educational innovation in computing.
Additionally, the project will examine the key factors in building a sustainable
practice of educational innovation, which includes faculty attitudinal shifts
and infrastructures to support and sustain learning practices. The project will
evaluate and disseminate pedagogical practices and lessons learned.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are: educational
impact on a diverse student population (first time college students, ethnic
diversity, GPA diversity); community impact on high schools and other partners
in STARSComputingCorps.org; and professional impact on providing the talent pool
for the region and the country in IT (including: data science, cyber security,
visual analytics, and human centered design). Key outcomes from the Connected
Learner project are anticipated to be: an increase in the quality of education
provided to a diverse population of computing students, improved retention and
graduation rates, the provision of a regional and national talent pool in
computing, and the integration of pedagogical research with faculty development
and advancement. The project will disseminate educational design patterns, best
practice examples, and scholarly publications for educational change and faculty
development through a publicly available online resource, as well as through
journals, conferences, blogs, and social network publications.