* 1519175
* Investigations in High Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Adam Leibovich, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Ayres Freitas and Adam
Leibovich at the University of Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This purpose of
this project is to develop improved theoretical tools and calculational methods
for the robust, model-independent interpretation of results from current and
future particle-physics experiments, both at the highest-energy colliders, such
as the Large Hadron Collider, and for lower-energy precision measurements. The
identification of a potentially small signal of new physics requires an
excellent understanding of known particles and interactions. Furthermore, we
will investigate techniques for model-independent descriptions of the effects of
new physics, using a framework called "effective field theories". As a result,
research in this area advances the national interest by promoting the progress
of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. In conjunction with this effort, the PI's
will also teach a special-topics course on effective field theories and
precision physics. Both are topics that are often neglected in typical particle-
physics textbooks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the research program
can be divided into three main parts: (1) The development of calculational
techniques for three-loop corrections to electroweak precision observables, and
the integration of existing and new theoretical results for these observables
into a flexible, object-oriented computer program; (2) The application of
effective field theories, in particular Soft-Collinear Effective Theory, to
unresolved questions at hadron colliders, such as processes involving jets,
quarkonium production, and low-x physics; and (3) A comprehensive study of the
use of effective field theories for new physics in Higgs, electroweak and flavor
physics, with a focus on investigating correlations between operators, the role
of different mass scales in the new-physics sector, and complications that arise
in models of dark matter. This research plan is guided by ongoing and planned
experimental high-energy physics efforts, and results will be made available to
the experimental community in a suitable form.