* 1519923
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel  Electric Field Encephalography Sensors for Neuromonitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Craig Versek, NeuroFieldz Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is development of a new neuroelectric sensor
(NeuroDot) for brain monitoring that will measure electric fields generated by
brain activity using a new technique termed Electric field Encephalography
(EFEG) with best-in-class sensitivity. The EFEG brain monitoring technique is a
new modality that has several advantages over the current modalities,
electroencephalography EEG (which measures the electric potential on the scalp)
and magnetoencephalography MEG (which measures the magnetic field). The NeuroDot
brain sensors are quickly mountable and demountable and enable 24/7
neuromonitoring with wireless connectivity to smartphones and wearable
technologies like smartwatches. The NeuroDot sensors provide neurological data
analyzed with subsequent software post-processing to provide information on the
activity of the brain for analysis of the mental health state. Some of the
immediate areas of impact of the EFEG technology based NeuroDot sensors include
functional brain imaging at high temporal and spatial resolution to enable
localization of epileptic seizures, and understanding of pattern recognition and
cognition by the brain. The signals from these sensors will provide insights
into mental conditions related to aging, sleep, epilepsy and neurological
disorders. The high performance NeuroDot sensors will also be usable for human-
machine and brain-computer interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
project will improve and optimize the current NeuroDot prototype to create
marketable products that meet specifications for real-time neuromonitoring. This
project will achieve its aims through the following Goals. Goal 1: Optimize the
wireless NeuroDot sensor to meet metrics and milestones for real-time
neuromonitoring. Goal 2: Perform Usability Testing and Sensor Performance
Benchmarking through studies on human subjects. The project will develop
breakthrough nanodendritic electrodes and wireless technologies for the NeuroDot
sensor for long-term low noise EFEG recordings in a compact (&lt; 1square cm)
form factor. The critical research tasks involve the characterization of the
sensor performance including standard metrics pertaining to sensitivity and
noise immunity - signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and common-mode rejection ratio
(CMMR) - as well as robustness to common artifacts afflicting other
neuroelectric measurement modalities (e.g., electrode movement, jaw and ocular
movements, baseline drift). Specific benchmarks of NeuroDot performance in terms
of signal-to-noise ratio, wireless connectivity, battery life and signal quality
will be assessed. The human subjects tests will provide benchmarks for
neuromonitoring performance in terms of parameters like information bit rate,
speed of stimulus response, measurement of visually evoked potential, spectral
content of brain activity and classification accuracy.