* 1519717
* SBIR Phase I:  The Teen Career Pathway: A Serious Game for Job Skills
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Marc Zimmerman, The Language Express, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 131,208.00

This SBIR Phase 1 Project will systematically develop, test, and revise a video
game. Emerging technologies, such as educational videogames, have the potential
to increase the accessibility of learning materials, promote readiness and
knowledge of employment options, and improve students' attitudes toward full-
time employment. Unfortunately, the lack of an accessible, coherent career
planning system in the United States has left many high school students
unprepared to meet the rigorous demands associated with being college and career
ready. This project will teach critical life, social, and academic skills
related to a career in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
aligning with NSF's mission supporting and education for all fields of
fundamental science and engineering. This project is designed to enhance student
learning, reduce school costs, and increase the efficacy of transition plans,
which are mandated for every student with a disability under Federal law. The
game aligns with Common Core Standards and the Universal Design for Learning
framework. While this project will be designed for students with disabilities,
it is assumed the highly accessible career preparation software will also meet a
critical need for other students at risk of learning failure or students without
disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is a critical
component of a comprehensive product line that will provide adolescents with
virtual career training. During the project, participants will experience three
mini-games related to their daily living skills, a "day in the life" of a person
in a STEM career, and social skills acquisition and how those allow individuals
to interpret the culture. A virtual mentor coaches the student to make choices
that will lead to career advancement &amp; explains the hierarchy of jobs within
the chosen career. The virtual mentor also provides financial advice throughout
the daily living games, modeling exemplary fiscal management and reinforcing
decisions that have a high likelihood of leading to financial stability. The
project team will build, test, analyze, and revise the three alpha versions of
the mini-games and then compile the revisions into a beta version of the game.
Initial friends and family tests of the alpha builds will include qualitative
evaluation using observations and interviews. This will be followed with beta
testing in public schools using a mixed methods design. Beta testing will
include students with and without disabilities in grades six through nine,
special education and general education teachers, counselors and parents.