* 1519154
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Tailoring Post-9/11 Military Credentials for Access to Different Domains of Civilian Life
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Alexis Pang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 5,991.00

American society is experiencing an influx of "post-9/11" military veterans
returning from war. Sociologists understand civilian reentry as the process of
leaving the military and integrating into civilian institutions and communities.
On the surface, popular rhetoric to support the troops and initiatives like
Joining Forces suggest that veterans enjoy strong institutional and public
support. Nevertheless, research suggests that many veterans still struggle to
connect with employment, housing, and other institutional resources. Although
there is little academic research on veterans' social reintegration, reports
from national surveys, war memoirs, journalists, and others reveal perceptions
of a military-civilian gap. Historically, scholars have struggled to identify
the mechanisms underlying differences between veterans and civilians in
employment, educational attainment, and other outcomes. This project examines
the disjuncture between proclaimed and experienced support for veterans by
focusing on one critical aspect of civilian reentry: the exchange of military-
related information when veterans present themselves as candidates for
institutional and social opportunities.

A survey experiment simulates gatekeeping scenarios to test how a national
sample of the American public normatively evaluates veteran candidates with
different military backgrounds. Interviews and document analysis capture how 50
post-9/11 veterans recount navigating these normative contours; specifically,
how they translate and tailor their military information when seeking work,
applying for college, pursuing romantic interests, and meeting the families of
potential life partners. This study builds on previous research by offering data
on how veterans and gatekeepers shape gatekeeping outcomes during civilian
reentry. Findings can inform veterans on how disclosing different aspects of
one's military service may influence the success of their efforts and how other
veterans have navigated these challenges. Policymakers and programmers working
on reintegration initiatives will gain clarification in what contributes to
veteran candidates' desirability (or stigmatization) and how veterans are
selecting and attempting opportunities after returning from war, and the
research contributes to more general social science interest in impression
management in interaction.