* 1519654
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Compact Cell Settler for Perfusion Cultures of Microbial Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Dhinakar Kompala, Sudhin Biopharma Company
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project is to reduce the manufacturing cost of therapeutic
biologics using more efficient production technologies. This will be
accomplished by developing novel cell retention technologies for increasing cell
concentration and productivity in continuous perfusion bioreactor cultures of
recombinant microbial and mammalian cells. Based on the inclined settler
technology already proven in large scale mammalian cell cultures, compact and
more efficiently scalable cell or particle settlers are being developed to
expand its applications to other industrial areas, such as microbial yeast
secretory production systems, heterogeneous catalysis, municipal water
clarification, wastewater treatment, etc. Following thorough characterization of
a novel compact cell settler device for recombinant microbial yeast cells during
this Phase I grant, it will be launched commercially for large-scale
manufacturing of biologics from recombinant microbial and mammalian cells. As
biological manufacturing technology matures from early fed-batch cultures to
continuous manufacturing due to increasing market size and more consistent
product quality-by-design considerations, these novel compact settlers will
enable more efficient production of many therapeutic biologics in large scale
high cell density perfusion bioreactors and contribute to a significant
reduction in cost of their manufacturing from recombinant mammalian and
microbial cell cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to develop a novel method of scaling up the proven inclined settler technology,
which has been scaled up rectilinearly in the past as lamellar settlers. While
the lamellar settlers have been used successfully to manufacture therapeutic
biologics secreted by recombinant mammalian cells in high cell density perfusion
bioreactors, they have not yet been adapted for microbial cell cultures. The
research objectives of this proposal are to develop more compact and efficient
settlers for recombinant yeast cells and characterize the capability of these
settlers to remove dead cells selectively in the harvest and recycle the live
and productive cells back to the bioreactors. Initial results from the first
prototype demonstrate selective removal of the smaller yeast cells, while most
of the larger cells are concentrated and recycled back to the bioreactor. Lower
cell concentrations and smaller size distributions of the yeast cells leaving in
the harvest stream from these compact settlers compared to the those in
bioreactors will be measured in steady state continuous cultures and
dramatically increasing cell density in the perfusion bioreactor due to the
complete recycle of live and productive cells to bioreactor will be
characterized for different perfusion harvest rates.