* 1519204
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Worker-Recovered Businesses and Workplace Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Javier Auyero, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2016
* USD 3,698.00

This project examines how organizations construct and maintain equality in the
workplace. Despite the important contributions made by studies examining the
workplace as a site where social inequalities are produced and reproduced,
recent scholarship has begun to consider proactive efforts to address workplace
inequality, highlighting the need for more research on the workplace as a
potential site of social change. This project examines the possibilities and
limitations of worker cooperatives as a means of addressing persistent workplace
inequalities. The project will document and explain efforts to create more
equitable distributions of power and resources in the workplace and the
implications these efforts have in alternative workplace organizations (like
cooperatives) and conventional organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine
how and whether work organizations can proactively reduce inequality, this
project examines workplace inequality in worker-recovered businesses in
Argentina, companies that have been converted from privately-owned enterprises
into worker-controlled cooperatives. These businesses provide goods and services
like their traditional counterparts, but operate under a different ownership
arrangement, authority structure and operating logic. Concretely, this project
will analyze organizational practices around pay, authority, participation and
work processes used by four worker-recovered businesses operating in the service
sector. The first three -a health clinic, hotel and school - are "first
generation" worker-recovered businesses. We will study the organizational
history of each WRB by conducting in-depth interviews and historical research.
The purpose of these cases is to examine efforts to redistribute power and
resources over a longer period of time. These three cases will be supplemented
by a fourth much younger organizations in an early transition stage. The aim of
this case is to observe the construction of organizational practices as they
emerge in real time and space. Together, the analysis of the four field sites
should highlight the problems and prospects of worker-recovered businesses and
cooperatives for altering workplace power and authority relationships.