* 1519640
* Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Electron and Proton Transfers in Proton Pumping Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2022
* Marilyn Gunner, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,110,396.00

Membranes surround cells and cellular compartments. These membranes make
possible a dynamic and important storehouse of cellular energy, which is a
transmembrane proton gradient, i.e. a situation (by analogy to a battery) in
which there are more protons on one side of an energized membrane and fewer on
the other. Energy from food or light (in photosynthesis) can be used to make
this proton battery, which efficiently fuels the cell. This research program
will study a class of proteins (Heme Copper Oxidases), which includes Cytochrome
c oxidase that uses atmospheric oxygen as a fuel. The Heme Copper Oxidase
proteins help build the gradient by a common and important mechanism in biology
called proton pumping, which moves protons in one direction across a non-
electrically conducting membrane, thereby constructing a transmembrane proton
gradient. The objective of this research is to better understand the design
features of proton-pumping proteins, which will also help in the design of
specialized semi-permeable membranes such as those needed for electrochemical
cells (which include batteries). The project brings together the study of the
biology of the cell, of the chemistry of the reactions that fuel the proton
pumping process and of the physics of the motion of the charged protons. The
work will train graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
interdisciplinary science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to carry out computer simulations starting with the known positions of the atoms
in the Heme Copper Oxidase proteins. While there is no detailed model for proton
pumping in any protein, there is a general outline that forms the basis of the
research. The calculations will look for regions of the protein that can provide
stopping points for the proton as it moves across the protein. In addition,
protons must move through the protein via pathways that can be made up of
channels filled with water molecules. These pathways will be identified and
studied to see where blockages can be formed to keep the protons from moving
backwards to dissipate the proton gradient. The calculation methods used here
are evolving state of the art techniques and they will be tested and improved by
these calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences; the Physics of Living
Systems Program in the Division of Physics, and the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.