* 1519514
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Paper Electronics: Feasibility Study
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Yuriy Atanasov, Uniqarta, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to introduce and establish the foundations of
a new class of electronic products - ultra-thin electronic devices embedded in
thin, flexible, inexpensive, and environmentally friendly substrates such as
common paper. The ultra-thin embedded electronics offer superior cost,
flexibility, reliability, and security characteristics relative to conventional
flexible electronics. The most significant applicable market for such products
in the near term is that for Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID)-based
devices. In 2014, shipments of passive RFID tags will approach 7 billion having
a value of about $3.5 billion and an annual growth rate of about 25%. However,
the application of the ultra-thin embedded electronics technology extends well
beyond RFID. It encompasses both defense and commercial applications within the
general category of flexible hybrid electronics. Examples of defense
applications include wearable health monitors, disposable sensors, embedded
sensors with communication capability for monitoring equipment and structural
health, etc. Examples of commercial applications are counterfeit-proof 'smart'
security, legal, and financial documents, wearable and disposable electronics,
interactive media, and intelligent product packaging.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to study the
feasibility of embedding ultra-thin electronic devices in thin flexible
materials such as paper. Paper has been considered extensively as a substrate
material for printed electronics. However, embedding ultra-thin, silicon-based
flexible electronic devices inside paper during the paper making process has not
been researched. Similarly, an extensive body of knowledge exists on the topic
of device reliability. However, current research is almost entirely focused on
the interconnection system between the chip and circuit board and on the
situations where the entire device is subjected to cyclic thermal and/or
mechanical stresses. Embedding hybrid electronic devices in thin flexible
materials requires the semiconductor chips to be extremely thin, less than 50
microns and preferably about 20-25 microns thick. This is significantly thinner
than the conventional chips. Still, no research has exclusively considered the
survivability of such chips and the entire embedded electronic device under the
stress and strain conditions typical for the paper making process. The results
from this study will pave the path to developing ultra-thin electronic devices
embedded in other thin flexible materials such as polymers, composites, and
synthetic paper.