* 1519211
* I-Corps L:  ET-CONNECT: Employer-Talent CONNECT Pathways for Long Term Employment for Innovative and Motivated STEM Workforce
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2015
* Ibrahim Zeid, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

College graduates receive excellent formal education and earn a degree. But they
never receive formal mentoring and coaching, before they embark on jobs, to
transition to the workforce. As a result, mismatches between employers and
employees often happen. According to a recent Wall Street Journal article, over
50% of the workforce is disengaged and stuck in jobs they do not like. This
project is, therefore, motivated by the national need of providing recent
college graduates with meaningful paid project-based internship opportunities in
various STEM fields. The project develops a model that offers formal mentoring,
proactive coaching, effective guidance, and supportive career networking
opportunities that are otherwise unattainable by recent graduates. As a result,
recent graduates become better informed and prepared to decide, based on both
coaching and real life experience, whether a field or a company is the right
choice for a successful and rewarding career or not.

To fulfill the aforementioned national need, the project creates an exchange
platform for recent college graduates (learners) and companies to share common
interests and provides an opportunity for both to explore each other for the
best match and growth potential. This team has created a cloud-based system and
portal that allows learners and industry partners to share and exchange their
data and facilitate data search for matching and aligning learners and
companies, in addition to providing "just-in-time" resources for both learners
and companies. The project is expected to have profound impact and benefits. In
the scientific and technological area, it builds on the STEM research
discoveries and shows the best technological methods to implement them to
benefit society. In the societal and commercial area, it serves recent college
graduates and small businesses well. Recent college graduates are provided
opportunities to: (1) explore project-based jobs. Providing a job pool is
especially important for the underrepresented, women, and minorities who lack
contacts and social networks to facilitate their entry to the job market; and
(2) explore multiple career pathways and select the best fit. Similarly, the
project serves companies equally well by reducing their hiring overhead and
burden, especially small businesses and startups that do not have the resources
for the traditional hiring processes to seek out qualified employees.