* 1519031
* RAPID: Robotic Nursing Assistant for Contagious Patient
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2014,07/31/2015
* Yi-Je Lim, Hstar Technologies Co
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Chirikjian
* 07/31/2015
* USD 117,572.00

Ebola virus spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact with
the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and
with surfaces and materials contaminated with these fluids. Hstar Technologies
is developing and validating the Advanced Mobile Lifting and Transferring
Robotic Nursing Assistant for Contagious Patients as a viable means for
transporting patient without direct contact by care givers. A unique linkage
system allows powerful, safe, and flexible lifting and positioning of the
patient with a minimal number of actuators. The lifting mechanism is mounted on
a low profile, stable and flexible footprint robotic mobile base for various
terrains and among buildings. A simple, intuitive user interface allows control
by a single caregiver with minimal training beside the robot or remotely.

This research includes developing feasible and novel cooperative nurse-robot
protocols that will result in healthcare enhancement for both patients and
caregivers. This project utilizes rapidly deployable, articulated robotic arms
with gentle conveyor belts in reaction of urgent outbreak of contagious disease.
Hstar Technologies is drawing upon its expertise in autonomous mobile platform,
human robot interaction, operation control, robotic dexterous manipulation, and
haptics.