* 1519126
* Management and Operation of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO)
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2026
* Ethan Schreier, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 09/30/2026
* USD 0.00

To enable a world-wide multi-user community to realize research and education
programs of the highest caliber, Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI) presents a
strategic vision over the next decade to manage, operate, optimize and
disseminate results from the world-leading capabilities of the National Radio
Astronomy Observatory (NRAO). With the successful construction of the Atacama
Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), and the recent enhancement of the
Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA), two new forefront facilities are moving
into routine operation with ever-increasing scientific capability. Taken
together, these iconic arrays fulfill a major milestone in modern astronomy,
encompassing more than an order-of-magnitude leap in observational capabilities
for astronomical sources at frequencies between 1 gigahertz and 1 terahertz.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As prioritized by multiple National Research Council
Decadal Surveys in Astronomy and Astrophysics, NRAO facilities are tools for the
entire scientific community that will empower discoveries across all fields of
astrophysics. ALMA enables transformational research into the physics of the
cold Universe, regions that are optically dark but shine brightly in the
millimeter/submillimeter portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Within the
broad range of science accessible with ALMA, the top-level objectives include
imaging the redshifted dust continuum and molecular line emission from evolving
galaxies as early as a redshift of z~10 (500 million years after the Big Bang),
determining the chemical composition and dynamics of star-forming gas in normal
galaxies like the Milky Way but at z~3 (75% of the way across the Universe), and
measuring the gas kinematics in young disks in nearby star-forming clouds. ALMA
has already demonstrated its revolutionary impact with its dramatic images of
planet, star and galaxy formation. These results will accelerate as the full
array becomes operational, and with the longest baselines ALMA will achieve an
angular resolution of tens of milli-arseconds. ALMA provides one to two orders-
of-magnitude improvement over previous facilities in all areas of millimeter-
and submillimeter-wave observations, including sensitivity, angular resolution
and image fidelity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Likewise, at centimeter wavelengths,
the broadband VLA has ushered in a new era in radio astronomy, with
groundbreaking results published in areas ranging from Galactic proto-stellar
clouds to images of the molecular gas in the earliest galaxies. The enhanced VLA
is opening new scientific frontiers and explicitly addressing four primary
science themes: measuring the strength and topology of cosmic magnetic fields;
imaging young stars and massive black holes in dust-enshrouded environments;
following the rapid evolution of energetic phenomena; and studying the formation
and evolution of stars, galaxies and active galactic nuclei. Improvement over
previous performance is up to a factor of 10 in continuum sensitivity and
coarsest frequency resolution, and a factor of 1000 or more in finest frequency
resolution and the number of frequency channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
collaboration with NSF's international partners in ALMA, NRAO will transition
ALMA from the current phase of commissioning and early science to full science
operations. Already the most capable millimeter/submillimeter facility on the
planet, in the next few years ALMA will realize significant new capabilities,
further increasing ALMA's scientific productivity. The ALMA
Development&lt;br/&gt;Program, a key component in the plan for the coming
decade, will solicit and support community input and expertise in upgrading
ALMA's capabilities throughout its useful lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
AUI management, NRAO will implement a staged VLA infrastructure maintenance and
development plan to renew and support operation of the VLA beyond the end of the
next decade, followed by community-based planning and technical development for
the next-generation centimeter-wave facilities. AUI will expand the NRAO Central
Development Laboratory (CDL) mission to enhance NSF's existing radio astronomy
facilities, to develop technology and expertise needed to build the next
generation of radio astronomy instruments, and to benefit the broader economy
via technology transfer. In collaboration with the university community, the CDL
will support development for both ALMA and VLA and conduct leading-edge,
creative research in both core and exploratory technologies that will continue
to be vital to the NRAO mission in the coming decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
plans for enhanced user support services and new data manipulation and
visualization tools, AUI envisions expanding the NRAO user base beyond
traditional radio astronomers and enabling multi-wavelength science by
researchers and students. AUI will also ensure that NSF's investment in NRAO
achieves the broadest possible impact in cutting-edge research and technical
innovation, training the next generation of researchers, and inspiring students
and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on an existing framework of
diversity activities, AUI will conduct ambitious programs to transform the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering. An Office
of Diversity Initiatives will lead programs, including the National Astronomy
Consortium and Physics Inspiring the Next Generation, to empower under-
represented students to obtain graduate degrees in STEM fields. The enhanced
International/National Exchange Program and Chilean Women Graduate Internships
will support international student research in radio astronomy. A key AUI
objective for the NRAO workforce in the coming decade will be to move toward
achieving parity with the nation's demographics for women and people of
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AUI embraces an integrative approach to education
and public outreach (EPO), closely aligned with NRAO research. The EPO plan
builds on a comprehensive suite of programs, targeting learners of all ages,
broad geographic regions, and traditionally under-represented groups, and
incorporates federal STEM education initiatives that identify evidence-based
best practices. NRAO will support graduate and undergraduate research, and
Jansky postdoctoral fellows will carry out investigations independently, or in
collaboration with staff and/or university collaborators, thus building
professional relationships between NRAO and academic research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of AUI's management and oversight of NRAO,
AUI will regularly review the technical, financial, and administrative
functioning of NRAO as well as AUI's own governance and business practices. Key
Performance Indicators and both qualitative and quantitative assessments will
inform NRAO activities and AUI policies to achieve optimal management and
operation of NRAO.