* 1519045
* Electroweak Symmetry Breaking and Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Elizabeth Simmons, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 510,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors R. Sekhar Chivukula and
Elizabeth H. Simmons at Michigan State University.

The research funded under this grant focuses on uncovering the origins of the
masses of the elementary subatomic particles. The next three years will coincide
with the 13-TeV high-energy run of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN,
which will reveal the properties of the newly discovered 126-GeV "Higgs" boson,
perform detailed studies of the top quark (the heaviest elementary particle
known), and investigate the nature of matter down to the smallest distance
scales ever probed. In their research, Professors Chivukula and Simmons will
perform theoretical investigations to model the behavior of matter at these
short distance scales and predict new phenomena that could be observed at the
LHC. This research is in the national interest because it will promote the
progress of science in helping to elucidate the fundamental laws governing our
universe and deepen our knowledge of the subatomic realm. The proposed project
also has several broader impacts. Professors Chivukula and Simmons are leaders
in campus and national efforts to improve students' learning and persistence in
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics), especially first-
generation students and those from under-represented populations. The PIs will
also involve graduate students and postdocs in their research, providing
training to junior physicists in research methods and professional preparation
to become independent scientists. Finally, the PIs will continue presenting the
results of their research in outreach events focused on students from groups
underrepresented in science, in order to engage the next generation of
scientists.

More technically, Professors Chivukula and Simmons will investigate how
electroweak symmetry breaking and the origins of particle masses are impacted by
relationships between the Higgs, top quark, and QCD sectors of theories beyond
the Standard Model. The PIs will construct and study models in which the Higgs
is composite, including those where the top plays a special role in electroweak
symmetry breaking and may also be composite. They will derive constraints on
these theories from flavor physics and precision electroweak data, emphasizing
the phenomenological consequences of the models for the new scalar and other
states that may appear at the LHC and future colliders. Professors Chivukula and
Simmons will also study models of an extended color sector featuring new colored
vector, scalar, or fermion states. The high-energy LHC will dramatically extend
our experimental reach for new colored states, and the PIs will systematically
investigate how to determine the properties of such a state upon discovery.