* 1519059
* Paleoanthropological Survey of a Late Miocene-Early Pliocene Site
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Scott Simpson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2016
* USD 34,781.00

This project will survey a new site in Ethiopia that may contain fossils and
archaeological evidence of early human (hominin) ancestors around 5 to 6 million
years ago. The site was previously identified as potentially fossil-bearing
using satellite imagery data. A team of investigators with many combined years
of paleontological and archaeological experience will survey a 100 square
kilometer area to identify and document any fossils and artifacts and gather
geological data. If new fossils and artifacts are found at this site, they could
expand our understanding of the environmental and biological pressures that led
to the evolution of key human adaptations like walking upright, stone tool use,
and meat eating. The project will support science education, training, and
conservation in the local community, and among US and Ethiopian students,
researchers and the US public.

This project, submitted in response to the High-Risk Research in Biological
Anthropology and Archaeology (HRRBAA) solicitation, is a two-week field survey
of a previously unexplored area, known as Asale, in the Danakil Depression in
the Afar Regional State, Ethiopia, to document the presence of paleontological
and archeological remains. The investigators are a highly qualified group of
paleoanthropologists with a long history of successful work in Ethiopia and in
Africa more broadly. They have a strong familiarity with the Mio-Pleistocene
fauna of the Afar region, paleoecological reconstruction, and isotopic
geochemistry. They will assess the paleoanthropological potential of volcanic
and sedimentary deposits with the goal of documenting earlier stages of human
evolution and its context, specifically the Miocene-Pliocene boundary when
hominins first appear in the fossil record. Data from the site may also provide
information about the geographic distribution of taxa and paleoenvironmental
reconstruction. The project supports science conservation efforts, and if the
site contains hominin data, the larger ensuing project would support training of
students and communication of findings to the general public through university
scientific outreach programs. The project is jointly supported by the Biological
Anthropology and Archaeology Programs at NSF.