* 1519164
* EAGER: Automatic Speech Recognition for Uyghur
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Tanja Schultz, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 27,338.00

Advances in speech engineering now allow audio to be transcribed as text, even
for languages for which there are few computational resources. Automating text
transcription for more languages allows public, community, and researcher access
to previously inaccessible materials. This project uses several thousand hours
of radio broadcasts in an under-resourced language as a test case to improve
rapid audio-to-text development techniques, which are applicable to any
language. The project allows speech engineers to apply technology to new
languages, to learn about the characteristics of new languages and their impact
on speech recognition performance, and how to overcome them with the goal of
building better speech recognition systems. It also enables communities to
preserve their language, distribute tools and data, and overall, improve the
current extreme resource limitations of their language. The project encourages
students to work and think across the fields of speech engineering, linguistics
and journalism.

In this EAGER project, the Uyghur language (ISO 639-3: uig), a severely under-
resourced Turkic language of Xinjiang in Central Asia with about 11 million
speakers, is used to test the rapid development of an Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) system with the long-term vision of creating web-based speech
and language services including pronouncing dictionary generation, audio and
text data archiving, and part-of-speech tagging. The project is exploratory
because the language is devoid of computationally tractable resources, yet
bootstrapping through a related language (Turkish) promises rapid ASR
development. The project can serve as a model for such development for any
language, large or small, and is potentially transformative -- first because so
many of the world's languages are like Uyghur in having few available
computational resources., and second because so many documentary linguists still
rely entirely on non-automated methods.