* 1519268
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transnational Migration and the Global Circulation of Talent
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Liza Weinstein, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 02/28/2017
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1519268 Liza Weinstein Yingchan Zhang Northeastern University

An increasing number of U.S.-educated Chinese have reportedly returned to China
in recent years. Chinese state-run media emphasize the prosperous outlook for
these returnees and the state's recognition of their importance for the
country's transition to a knowledge economy. As Chinese cities compete to
attract talented returnees, little is known about how the municipal strategies
work and what roles returning skilled labor indeed play in Chinese cities'
development. This dissertation research studies the ways in which Chinese cities
recruit U.S.-educated Chinese talent to achieve their goal of stimulating urban
development, and how these recruitment initiatives in turn affect the migration
decisions and reincorporation experiences of the targeted returnees. This study
addresses three questions: 1) how Chinese cities, in the hope of becoming
global, recruit U.S.-trained Chinese talent back for development projects 2) how
these recruitment programs affect the migration decisions of U.S-educated
Chinese talent in the U.S. and the reincorporation experiences of the returnees
in China 3) how the disjunctures between the ways the local Chinese state and
the returnees conceptualize "value" and "contribution" influence the ways in
which they interact with each other. To examine these themes, the researchers
will conduct a case study of a major city in eastern China and utilize semi-
structured interviews, participant observation and secondary analysis as the
main methods of investigation. This study has the following potential impacts.
Firstly, it will contribute to social science research on urban development,
global cities, and transnational migration by presenting a critical case for
understanding the complexities of urban development in the neoliberal era and
demonstrating how specific state development policies affect the relocation and
settlement patterns of highly skilled professionals. Secondly, this study will
provide implications for policy makers and urban planners. The findings will
help cities that fiercely compete with each other in a globalizing world to
better understand how the strategies of attracting talent work in practice and
if these strategies do foster development. Moreover, this project will inform
how to retain a highly competitive workforce that is globally mobile in nature
in the contemporary era. As highly-skilled immigrants from Asia consist of an
increasing part of the overall immigration to the U.S., it is essential for U.S.
policy makers to understand these processes in order to make informed decisions
about immigration reform in general and about policies to attract and retain
highly skilled immigrants in particular.