* 1519190
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement: Understanding the Medicalization of Domestic Violence
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Paige Sweet, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2016
* USD 11,999.00

This project asks how processes of medicalization -- or the transformation of
social problems into medical ones -- are at work in domestic violence cases.
Domestic violence policymakers and healthcare providers engage in frequent
debates about the best ways to screen, intervene with, and treat domestic
violence victims. This study examines these debates and their implications for
domestic violence survivors? lives through the concept of trauma. From federal
funding directives to grassroots coalition strategies, the language and
therapeutic practices of trauma infuse the field of domestic violence advocacy.
This research asks how the concept of trauma has transformed anti-violence
politics since the 1970s, as well as how those politics impact domestic violence
survivors when they seek resources for abuse. This research will contribute to
sociological theories about medicalization while also responding to burgeoning
policy debates in the domestic violence field about the contradictory
relationship between anti-violence and medical work. Ultimately, this study aims
to link historical and contemporary processes of medicalization with victims?
management of everyday life under conditions of inequality and
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research hypothesizes that the rise of
medical discourses and treatments for domestic violence changes the ways in
which victims understand and seek help for abuse. There are three central aims
of the project: 1) to describe the historical changes that have linked feminism
and medicine; 2) to explore how medicalization processes transform domestic
violence services and advocacy; 3) to explain how domestic violence victims
engage with the concept of trauma, both in explanations of their abuse and in
their interactions with healthcare providers. The data collection involves the
use of qualitative methods in three parts; 1) archival research will weave
together the historical relationship between medicine and anti-violence social
movements, as well as the rise of trauma discourse in both fields; 2) interviews
with professionals in anti-violence and trauma fields are expected to
demonstrate how the hybrid feminist-scientific concept of trauma is produced in
professional practices; 3) interviews with domestic violence victims are
expected to demonstrate how these historical processes and professional
practices are lived by victims through their interactions with these helping
systems. Overall the project seeks to understand the local and broader
implications of the growing medicalization of domestic violence for victims and
those who treat them.