* 1519313
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Affecting the Economic Integration of Refugees
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Kim Korinek, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 11,641.00

Each year the U.S. receives approximately 70,000 refugees for permanent
resettlement. The principle goals of resettlement are integration and self-
sufficiency, and refugee adaptation has been a persistent subject of inquiry for
immigration research. Existing literature examines how diverse skills and life
experiences have contributed to divergent trajectories of social and economic
integration. Despite extensive research into the effects of skills and life
experiences on the economic integration of refugees there is a great deal of
variation in economic outcomes that are not understood. Moreover, measuring the
degree to which a refugee is capable of deploying their skills and training has
been quite difficult and has rarely been done. The purpose of this study is to
understand the factors contributing to the successful economic integration of
refugees. It builds on the existing literature by examining skills, life
experiences, and contexts with attention to the potential barriers that restrict
the individual's capability of using their assets to promote integration and
self-sufficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a mixed methods
approach to analyze several forms of economic integration including labor market
participation, the acquisition of a livable wage, and occupational mobility.
Quantitative data for the study comes from the individual case files of refugees
seeking employment assistance at the Refugee and Immigrant Center of Utah. Sets
of characteristics that comprise individual capabilities will be identified
using Qualitative Comparative Analysis. This analysis will determine the
necessary and sufficient factors that generate several different recipes for
successful economic integration. These individual factors and "recipes for
success" will then be analyzed for their affect on the duration between arrival
in the U.S., labor market participation and the acquisition of a livable wage
using Event History Analysis. Qualitative data will be collected in a series of
focus groups with local service providers and with refugees. Insights from focus
groups will be triangulated with quantitative data to enhance our understanding
of refugee capabilities and their relationship to economic outcomes. By better
understanding the factors that shape the early economic integration experiences
of refugees, we will be better equipped to promote sustainable self-sufficiency
after resettlement.