* 1519678
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Scanning Electron Microscope Performance Through Advanced Image Restoration Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Yukun Han, NANOJEHM INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2016
* USD 184,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
image acquisition. SEM is critical in nearly all fields that require
characterization of solid materials, in particular, semiconductor and
electronics manufacturing, nanotechnology and life sciences. Resolution, and
reducing beam size, has almost always been the driving factor in SEM
development, but recently, the limits of beam size are making further progress
increasingly expensive. The approach being developed in this project has the
potential to enhance resolution, and/or increase throughput, without expensive
hardware modifications would be valuable in a variety of fields and application
and make electron microscopy more affordable and accessible for a wider range of
applications.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop an image
reconstruction product that will either improve the resolution of an image taken
by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) or enable faster, high resolution image
acquisition. The innovation builds on developments in other fields such as
medical imaging, surveillance and astronomy to perform software-based image
restoration (deconvolution) in the presence of noise. Critical to this effort is
the development of an algorithm to determine the spatial distribution of the
electrons in the probe striking a sample (the point spread function). The
objectives of this project are to develop suitable references, explore the
boundaries of this approach on low-end SEMs and evaluate the value proposition
of the approach for high-end SEMs.