* 1519023
* RAPID: Socio-technical systems and Big Data Analytics in the Ebola Response
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2016
* Vasant Honavar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 11/30/2016
* USD 99,902.00

In response to the 2014 Ebola virus outbreak in western Africa, dozens of
humanitarian relief organizations as well as the CDC and U.S. military are
providing medical assistance or logistics support to the relief effort. At the
same time, a diverse range of volunteer technical communities (VTCs) and
academics, as well as the humanitarian relief organizations themselves, are
attempting to make use of "big data" to improve the response. These big data
analyses are based on diverse data from diverse sources, including call records
from mobile phone companies, health worker inventories from ministries, and
daily case-data reports aggregated from multiple organizations. The analyses
have generated outputs such as visually appealing maps and predictions of
outbreak trajectories. However, precisely how, when and where these analyses can
be used effectively by response organizations are still open questions. The
project will develop knowledge to guide response organizations interested in
leveraging existing and emerging big data from a variety of sources (response
organizations, firms, government, individuals), which in turn may improve the
speed, quality, and efficiency of crisis response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team of computer and social scientists will partner with a consultant
with expertise in crisis information management deployed in the Ebola response.
They will examine both organizational and technical dimensions of the use of big
data analytics in the Ebola response organizations, carrying out a series of
interviews to investigate how and where data is used (field, headquarters, or
both) and the work involved to make big data analyses usable in the decision
making of response organizations. The results will inform the development of a
socio-technical systems framework to explain what makes big data analyses
useable. The social dimensions of the framework will include the response
context as well as decision making processes. The technical dimensions will
include data availability, data analyses and output formats. In the process of
developing this socio-technical framework, this research will identify
mechanisms for matching organizational needs with big data analyses. More
importantly, however, by identifying these mechanisms, the research will shed
light on the fundamental roles of multi-level governance and articulation work
in making effective use of big data analyses. The multi-level approach helps
explain and predict the location in an organization?s hierarchy of technical and
decision making expertise. Within these levels, a focus on articulation work
helps specify the necessary tasks for using data in a highly dynamic
environment. The project will extend the scholarship in the crisis informatics
sub-field of big data beyond its current focus on social media data and provide
clarification of "last mile" issues in big data aimed at ensuring the usefulness
of output.