* 1519795
* SBIR Phase I:  Magnetoreception Sensors for Field Enabled Navigation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Bamidele Omotowa, Pearlhill Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the superiority of
the accuracy of magnetoreception sensor technology, compared to the state-of-
the-art for the aviation industry. In February 2012, Congress passed the FAA
Modernization and Reform Act, requiring the Secretary of Transportation to
develop a plan to (1) accelerate safely the integration of civil UASs into the
national airspace system, and, before completion of the plan, (2) determine if
certain drones can operate safely in the national airspace system, with
particular emphasis on the need to examine the vulnerability of UASs to GPS
spoofing. In 2010, the Federal Aviation Administration?s (FAA), in CFR ยง92.225
and ยง91.227 on Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen), mandated
that, by 2020, all aircraft be equipped with Automatic Dependant Surveillance-
Broadcast (ADS-B Out), which provides minute-by-minute transmission of location
and altitude to air traffic control. To comply with the ADS-B Out mandate, more
than 250,000 civilian general aviation aircraft will require the installation of
new navigation capabilities. Unfortunately, much of the equipment needed to
comply with the ADS-B Out mandate is still in development, and airline operators
are working with industry to achieve compliance. The global civilian aerospace
avionics market is estimated to be at $8.3 billion. The North American Military
Avionics market is $13.5 billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a high-sensitivity
wireless magnetoreception sensor technology with fifth order accuracy, for
detecting the Earth?s magnetic field. The targeted sensitivity is more than an
order of magnitude greater than the state-of-the-art, and the technology has the
potential to be widely adopted in civilian and military aviation for proper real
time definition of spatial orientation; guidance and control of unmanned airline
systems (UASs); and the biomedical industry. This proposal will determine the
feasibility of measuring the spin resonance from the interaction of the magnetic
field with radical pair ions ? that is, magnetoreception ? as a means to the
development of an accurate sensor of the Earth?s field. This innovative
technology is based on scientific knowledge of avian magnetoreception. The
resulting accuracy will enable altitude to be determined within a few feet,
compared to within a few hundred meters in the state-of-the-art. The
magnetoreception sensors will be disruptive to the avionics industry. The Phase
I work will also determine the feasibility of (1) construction and testing of a
zero field resonance spectrometer, and (2) construction and testing of ultra
low-frequency electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrometer for studying spin
resonance as selected radical pair ions interact with the Earth?s magnetic
field.