* 1519090
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Do Stereotypes Affect Emotion Norms and Attributions?
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Stephen Benard, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 11,950.00

This dissertation examines whether people expect and attribute different
emotions to Black women, Black men, White women, and White men even when they
display similar emotions in response to the same situation. Prior research has
documented that certain groups of people have systematically different emotional
experiences, but it is unclear why this is the case. In this dissertation, the
situation leading up to an emotion is held constant using experimental methods
to better examine how people may respond differently to the same situation, and
how other people may interpret the same emotional reaction differently depending
on the race and gender of the person displaying the emotion. In doing so, we can
better understand the role cultural stereotypes in shaping emotional
expectations that people have for themselves and others as well as how people
react to these emotion norms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In three experiments and one
survey with an oversample of Black respondents, we test a theoretical model of
how people's interpretations of others' emotions may be affected by the social
characteristics of the emotion displayer. In Study 1, we ask Black women, Black
men, White women, and White men for their self-reports of how they would,
themselves, respond to a hypothetical situation. In Studies 2 and 3, we present
participants with the same hypothetical situation as in Study 1, but ask
participants to interpret the response of another person. We vary the race and
gender of the person in the situation to see how these characteristics affect
the way participants interpret that person's emotions. Finally, Study 4 links
differences in perceived emotions to outcomes such as perceived warmth,
likeability, job performance, and hiring. Participants are shown videos where
the race, gender, and emotional displays of job applicants are experimentally
manipulated. They are then asked to evaluate the applicants. The project will be
of great importance to understanding the functioning and communication of
diverse working groups and will also serve as a training site for student
researchers learning experimental research techniques.