* 1519387
* I-Corps:  The PictureSTEM Project - Using Picture Books to Transform STEM Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Tamara Moore, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

There is a need for curricula that address STEM standards in an integrated way.
The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and the Common Core State Standards
for Mathematics (CCSS-M) are research-based academic standards that were created
so that U.S. states would have the option to adopt high-quality standards for
their students. Each one has concepts and skills that most current curricula do
not address. The NGSS include engineering design processes as required concepts
and skills for students to learn in conjunction with their science content. The
CCSS-M includes process standards such as modeling with mathematics. The Common
Core Standards for English Language Arts include standards that ask students to
learn technical communication, particularly with a connection to STEM subjects.
Each of these separate standards requires realistic contexts for which to
situate the learning. Teachers and principals are currently looking for
curricula that meet these needs, but integrated curricula are few and far
between. The curricula (PictureSTEM) proposed by this I-Corps team integrate all
of these ideas into one unit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the
PictureSTEM project is to develop an instructional module at each grade level,
kindergarten through fifth, which employs engineering and literacy contexts to
integrate science, technology, and mathematics content instruction in meaningful
and significant ways. These transformative new models for STEM learning use
picture books and an engineering design challenge to provide students with
authentic, contextual activities that engage learners in specific STEM content
as well as integrate concepts across traditional disciplinary boundaries.
PictureSTEM units will focus on standards-based engineering, mathematics, and
science content, which is different than other curricula currently available.
They are research based curricula as described above. These modules have the
potential to transform the way literacy and STEM are taught at the elementary
level by attending to the learning goals of all areas, therefore, providing a
potential framework for the development of an entire elementary curricula in the
future.