* 1519701
* SBIR Phase I:  Boron Nitride Nanotube Cyclotron Targets for Recoil-Escape Production of Carbon-11 For PET/CT
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Bruce Wieland, BTI Targetry LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to meet the need for low cost dose-on-demand
production of Carbon-11 for biomarker and radiotracer applications in nuclear
medicine. Biomarkers and radiotracers are commonly used for metabolic imaging,
in support of research, drug discovery, and detection of cancer and other
illnesses. They are also used for therapy staging of cancer, to determine if
treatment is effective. Common examples include myocardial perfusion imaging of
the heart to visualize blood flow and function, positron emission tomography
(PET) scanning of the brain to detect early onset Alzheimer's and brain tumors,
and Choline positron emission tomography - computed tomography (PET/CT) for the
diagnosis and staging of prostate cancer. Carbon-11 is an important
radiotracer/radiopharmaceutical that offers unique advantages due to its ability
to be easily incorporated into many molecules without impacting biological
activity. Carbon-11 is currently produced by using specialized targets on high-
energy commercial cyclotrons. These cyclotrons cost millions of dollars to
install and existing targets are inefficient. Low energy cyclotrons are
significantly less expensive, and are currently under development by multiple
commercial companies. This project seeks to develop a novel cyclotron target
methodology for producing Carbon-11 at low energies using unique nanomaterials,
resulting in significantly lower costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project involves the use of novel nanomaterials to produce
Carbon-11 more efficiently and at lower cost, through development of recoil
escape targets. It is challenging to find a good target material suitable for
both efficient production of Carbon-11, by one of several available nuclear
reactions, and efficient recovery of the produced radiotracer in a usable form.
The produced Carbon-11 can be difficult to recover, as it is easily trapped in
many conventional target materials, resulting in low yields. Recent advances in
nanoscience and technology allow for production of novel materials with unique
characteristics. Boron nitride nanotubes (BNNT) are composed of fibers with
single atomic thickness, or at most a few atoms thick, allowing Carbon-11 to be
efficiently produced and recovered in the form of carbon dioxide gas using low
energy cyclotrons. This project seeks to further develop BNNT materials with
ideal characteristics, including high purity and optimal density. A prototype
production target will be developed and tested which can be used to produce
Carbon-11 using economical, low-energy cyclotrons. The process for collecting
the Carbon-11 gas will be optimized to achieve the highest yields of usable
radiotracer material.