* 1519338
* WORKSHOP: iConference'15 Doctoral Research Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2014,11/30/2015
* Wayne Lutters, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 11/30/2015
* USD 25,946.00

This award supports on-site lodging, subsistence, and operational expenses for a
diverse group of U.S. doctoral students and distinguished faculty mentors to
participate in a doctoral colloquium (workshop) on information science research.
It will be co-located with the 2015 iConference hosted by the University of
California-Irvine and held in Newport Beach, California on March 24-27, 2015.
The iConferences, the annual meetings of the iSchool community, are a leading
forum that brings together faculty, students, research staff, and industry
practitioners with a common interest in supporting and augmenting human
engagement with information and technology. Open to broad participation, the
iConferences have been successful in building a sense of community around the
information field, bringing together people who otherwise might rarely interact
with one another, and helping promote their interdisciplinary research. More
information about the iConference may be found online at
http://ischools.org/the-iconference/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2015 iConference
Doctoral Colloquium will be a meeting of 27 selected Ph.D. candidates studying
all aspects of information science, along with approximately 9 distinguished
faculty mentors. Colloquium activities will be woven throughout the conference,
starting with an orientation on March 25th and culminating in an all-day event
on 27th. The core of the event will be mentor-led, peer-critique sessions of
dissertation research projects held in small four-person teams. The primary
objective of the Doctoral Colloquium is to help train the next generation of
information science researchers. To this end, it will provide the student
participants with an environment in which they can share and discuss their
goals, methods and results at an early stage of their research. By participating
in the doctoral colloquium, students will gain feedback on their work both from
the mentors and from other students, which should allow them to enhance their
research. Students will also develop a better understanding of the different
research communities engaged in the study of information science, and learn how
to position their work within the community. In addition, the colloquium will
provide students with opportunities to make new professional connections beyond
their own disciplines and institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The iConference doctoral colloquia traditionally bring together the best of the
next generation of researchers in information science, allowing them to develop
a social network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical
stage in their professional development. Participation is encouraged from a
broad range of relevant disciplines, thereby expanding attendees' perspectives
on their topics of study and promoting advancement of the field. The organizers
will proactively work to maximize diversity along such key dimensions as
institution type, research topics, methodological approaches, disciplinary
traditions, gender, ethnicity, and national or cultural backgrounds.