* 1519644
* Topics in Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Joshua Erlich, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 09/30/2018
* USD 840,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Christopher Carone,
Joshua Erlich, and Marc Sher at the College of William and Mary.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Standard Model of particle physics provides a
consistent description of all known elementary particles and their interactions.
However, there are many features of the theory that remain mysterious and
suggest that the Standard Model is incomplete: How must the theory be modified
to explain the observed pattern of elementary particle masses? How must the
theory be extended to explain the observational evidence for the existence of
dark matter? Is the relatively small mass of the recently discovered Higgs boson
hinting at a more complicated spectrum of Higgs-sector particles yet to be
discovered? The intellectual merit of the work proposed by Professors Carone,
Erlich and Sher stems from its focus on addressing these and other fundamental
issues, which will help to advance our understanding of the physics of the
elementary particles. With the restart of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and
with new results from dark matter detectors imminent, one expects exciting new
discoveries in the near future, and the PIs' research will be well timed to
explore the results from these experiments. As a result, research in this area
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of
its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical
law. The Broader Impact of this work is that it furthers the education of
undergraduate and PhD research students, including those from underrepresented
groups, facilitates outreach to the general public, and promotes high-energy
particle physics in the southeastern part of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of their specific research projects, the
PIs anticipate progress along several distinct lines. On the issue of fermion
masses, the PIs and their students will study model-independent bounds and
cosmological consequences of pseudo-familons - particles that may be light
enough to be experimentally accessible even though they are originate from new
flavor physics associated with a very high energy scale. On the issue of dark
matter, the PIs and their students will consider new models in which a dark
sector of particles arises dynamically, such as certain supersymmetric "moose"
models in which non-perturbative physics associated with a strongly coupled dark
sector drives a messenger sector gauge coupling to very small values. On the
issue of Higgs-sector physics, the PIs will study novel two-Higgs doublet
models, one class that avoids flavor-changing-neutral currents via non-Abelian
discrete symmetries and another class extended as in the Lee-Wick Standard
Model, providing numerous predictive relations between heavy Higgs masses and
couplings. They will explore the implications of these models for the LHC. In
addition to these investigations, the PIs and their students will also consider
other fundamental issues, for example, attempting to elucidate the appearance of
black-hole horizons in gravity duals of finite-temperature theories by matching
appropriate calculations in dual gauge-gravity models to perturbative finite-
temperature quantum chromodynamics. Carone, Erlich and Sher will also continue
activities that provide a substantial broader impact, including the supervision
of undergraduate, PhD, and REU research students, participation in local events
(for example, QuarkNet), and continued interaction with local and national media
on particle-physics issues.