* 1519449
* Collaborative Research: Investigations on Fluids, Gauge Fields, Matrix Models and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* V Nair, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

This Collaborative award funds the research activities of Professors V.P. Nair
and A.P. Polychronakos at the City College of the City University of New York,
and Professor Daniel Kabat at Lehman College of the City University of New York.

Physics made tremendous strides during the 20th century, with the landmark
achievements of general relativity, relevant to the universe at large, and
quantum theory, relevant to the microscopic structure of matter. Further
progress calls for studying situations in which our understanding of these
theories is incomplete. The interior of a black hole and the binding of quarks
to form atomic nuclei are two examples of poorly understood situations. This
research program brings powerful mathematical tools to bear on these and related
problems. As a result, research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new physical laws. Moreover, this research will
involve graduate and undergraduate students, providing ideal training for the
next generation of scientists and science educators. By running a joint program
between City College and Lehman College we achieve a critical mass and can draw
on a large pool of students, especially from minority and under-represented
groups which are a large part of the student body at both colleges.

More technically, this project furthers an investigation into a new formulation
of fluid dynamics focusing on symmetry structures. It elaborates on previously
initiated techniques to study gauge theories in 2+1 dimensions and their
extension to the realistic case of four dimensions. New calculational
techniques, developed by Professors Kabat, Nair and others, will be used to
explore the effects of spin and novel boundary conditions on the Casimir force.
Various aspects of field theory on "fuzzy" (noncommutative) spaces will be
explored using recently developed techniques, the eventual goal being an
effective action which captures nonperturbative effects in the large-N
(continuum) limit. Finally the AdS/CFT (Anti-de Sitter Space/Conformal Field
Theory) correspondence will be used as a precise formulation of quantum gravity
to investigate how local bulk physics emerges from the CFT. Previous work by
Kabat and collaborators, relying on 1/N perturbation theory to represent local
bulk observables in the CFT, will be extended to higher orders in 1/N and used
to constrain CFT four-point functions. The entanglement structure of the CFT
will be used to study the black hole interior, and the failure of bulk locality
at finite N for black holes and cosmology will be investigated.