* 1519453
* IUSE/PFE RED:  Developing Changemaking Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Ming Huang, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,954,532.00

The University of San Diego's (USD) Shiley-Marcos School of Engineering is
embarking on a multi-year project to revolutionize engineering education with
the goal of developing "Changemaking" Engineers. The project addresses how an
engineering education that integrates traditional technical skills, enhanced
social awareness and an integrated professional spine produces connected
learning that empowers graduates to improve society - by practicing engineering
within the contexts of social justice, peace, humanitarian advancement, and
sustainable practices. An incubation model is being developed where new courses
in a general engineering program are designed to include rich changemaker
context and professional skills. Learning modules from these classes are
transferred to the more traditional, disciplinary engineering programs to
promote change in those curricula. The project examines the impact of infusing a
professional spine and the changemaker engineering canon on student motivation
and attitudes by measuring the impact in attracting and retaining a more diverse
population of engineering students. The new course materials developed are being
published as companion materials for traditional course textbooks. Finally, a
national symposium of scholars and commensurate community is being established
to promote changemaking engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work explores
how collaborative leadership can revitalize engineering culture to produce a
transformative engineering canon. By co-generating a cultural transformation
within all departments of the Shiley-Marcos School of Engineering, a faculty
learning community is being developed through a model of collaborative
leadership and faculty empowerment. The project team includes all of the
engineering department chairs, the dean of engineering, and the associate dean,
and a faculty member in sociology. In building cultural consensus for the new
initiatives in engineering education, an understanding of which mechanisms of
leadership/shared-leadership can produce positive or negative responses is being
developed. Workshops, faculty support mechanisms and other methods are being
used to: 1) advance cultural development, 2) create collaborative abilities and
values, and 3) develop a spine of professional competencies. The combined
partnerships with industry, the community, and faculty outside of engineering
help to promote the vision of creating changemaking engineers prepared to face
society's challenges.