* 1519977
* Number Theory: From Arithmetic Statistics to Zeta Elements II
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* John Voight, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 02/28/2017
* USD 27,250.00

This travel grant will help bring junior US mathematicians (students,
postdoctoral fellows, and other young researchers with limited access to
resources) to the Centre de Recherches Mathematiques (CRM) in Montreal to
participate in three workshops in winter 2015 on the following topics: *
regulators, Mahler measures, and special values of L-functions (February 16-20,
2015); * p-adic methods in the theory of classical automorphic forms (March
9-14, 2015); and * the Kudla programme (April 6-10, 2015). These subjects are of
great current interest in number theory, and these meetings will present
opportunities for young US researchers to interact with leading researchers in
the field. Talks and presentations will be made accessible to students and
recent doctoral degree recipients who are relatively new to the subjects. Their
participation will further existing relationships between researchers in the US
and Canada.

The past two decades have seen a wealth of new and exciting developments related
to number theory, including: * striking progress on the Birch and Swinnerton-
Dyer conjecture; * proofs of the Shimura-Taniyama-Weil conjecture, Serre's
conjectures, the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture for two-dimensional Galois
representations, and the Sato-Tate conjectures; * revolutionary ideas blending
techniques in harmonic analysis and additive combinatorics, and a breakthrough
on primes in arithmetic progressions; * new interpretations of algebraic objects
and consequences for ranks of elliptic curves and points on higher genus curves;
* great progress in establishing bounds on gaps between primes. The CRM thematic
year "Number Theory: From Arithmetic Statistics to Zeta Elements" is intended to
broaden the impact of these spectacular results to a wide community and to
develop the connections between them; this series of conferences will broaden
participation by young participants and encourage them to build connections with
people from all over the world. The February conference "Regulators, Mahler
Measures, and Special Values of L-Functions" concerns the intriguing identities
relating these topics (http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2015/Mahler15/index_e.php).
The March conference "p-Adic Methods in the Theory of Classical Automorphic
Forms" is on p-adic methods and the theory of Galois representations, families
of automorphic forms, p-adic Hodge theory, and the Langlands program
(http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2015/Automorph15/index_e.php). Finally, the April
conference "The Kudla Programme" treats the latest developments stemming from
the ideas relating the Fourier coefficients of central derivatives of incoherent
Siegel Eisenstein series to arithmetic intersections of special cycles on
unitary and orthogonal Shimura varieties
(http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2015/Kudla15/index_e.php).