* 1519345
* 2015 Drinking Water Disinfection By-Products: Charting the Horizons of Interdisciplinary Research and Application in Water Disinfection, By-Products, Water Reuse and Public Health
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Michael Plewa, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/29/2016
* USD 15,000.00

CBET 1519345&lt;br/&gt;Plewa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2015 Drinking Water
Disinfection By-Products: Charting the Horizons of Interdisciplinary Research
and Application in Water Disinfection, By-Products, Water Reuse and Public
Health&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is interesting to note that of the 30 years that
was added to life expectancy of people in the United States in the 20th Century,
20 of those years can be attributed to Environmental Engineering through the
implementation of drinking water disinfection. The 2015 Gordon Research
Conference on Drinking Water Disinfection By-Products will present cutting-edge
research on the purification of water and the generation of disinfection by-
products. With the era of pristine source waters ending, vitally important
issues confront scientists, engineers, water utilities, industry groups and
public health professionals in the production and delivery of high quality
potable water. Increasing demands on scarce water sources, drought, water
pollution and an aging water delivery infrastructure are preeminent challenges
for society. The Conference will feature a wide range of topics including
Drinking Water Disinfection By-Products formation, occurrence, toxicity and
molecular mechanisms, engineering solutions, health effects and regulation. The
conference is entitled, "Drinking Water Disinfection By-Products" and will be
held at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, MA from August 9-14, 2015. Gordon
Research Conferences are high impact Conferences as they assemble scientists at
the forefront of their field and will provide a venue for graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and early career scientists to network, to learn and to
plan future work together. For the first time, a Gordon Research Seminar,
(August 8-9, 2015) will expand the opportunities for graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and early career scientists to present their work, and to
be integrated into the general discussion of the. The Gordon Research Seminar
will allow students and early career scientists to participate in career
mentorship with senior scientists in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific aims of this Gordon Research Conference and Seminar are to introduce
novel information and critical review of the following topics; 1) Water
disinfection in an era of water scarcity; 2) Water disinfection chemistry:
analytical approaches on the formation and detection of emerging DBPs; 3) DBP
toxicity: molecular mechanisms of action; 4) Integration of Disinfection By-
Product analytical chemistry, quantitative toxicology and epidemiology; 5)
Disinfection By-Products and the water energy nexus; 6) Wastewater reuse,
desalination and emerging Disinfection By-Products; 7) Water disinfection
challenges and Disinfection By-Products research in China; 8) Engineering
options on Disinfection By-Product control; and 9) Disinfection By-Products
research: the way forward, future research and regulation. This meetings because
of its focus on the chemistry, toxicology and engineering of the environmental
risks posed by emerging DBPs generated by the use degraded source waters,
wastewater reuse and desalination. A goal of the Conference and Seminar is to
aid in the establishment of interdisciplinary teams of academic scientists and
engineers with industry scientists to develop new solutions and alternative
practices to address these Disinfection By-Products issues and to protect the
environment and the public health.