* 1519957
* SBIR Phase I:  A Mobile Application for Detecting Atrial Fibrillation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Ming-Zher Poh, Cardiio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a cost effective solution for early
identification of atrial fibrillation (AF) in the form of a mobile app to reduce
preventable strokes and associated costs. AF causes a third of all strokes, but
often goes undetected due to the lack of symptoms. Two out of three AF-related
strokes can be prevented through medication if a diagnosis is available. Given
the ubiquity and accessibility of smartphones, the proposed mobile app can be
distributed to large populations for large community screening of AF in a rapid
and cost-effective manner unmatched by any existing solution. If successful,
this will improve the quality of life for patients with AF by allowing the
timely introduction of therapies to protect patients from stroke, and also
prevent progression of AF from an easily treated condition to a refractory
problem.

The proposed project will develop a mobile app capable of detecting AF using
smartphones. There is a need for a highly accessible solution for screening of
AF. The mobile app will use a smartphone camera to measure a user?s heart rhythm
and apply a novel algorithm to identify the presence of AF. It is intended to
provide people at high risk of developing AF with an easy and convenient tool
for self-monitoring. This is transformative because instead of relying on the
arrhythmia being present at the time of an in-clinic electrocardiogram to
identify AF, this product will allow regular testing and can be operated by
patients at home. In Phase I, a prototype will be developed and validated using
real world data.