* 1519653
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Community Organization And Sport Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Takeshi Inomata, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 18,973.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Takeshi Inomata, Marijke Stoll will explore the
intersections between formalized competitive interaction, sociopolitical
conflict, and public architecture among Prehispanic societies in southeastern
Mexico. Such interaction through for example sporting events can serve valuable
social functions which extend well beyond viewer entertainment. They provide a
forum to consolidate and strengthen cultural affiliation and integrate broad and
often diverse groups of individuals within a regional or national framework.
Such regional based competition was integral to community and regional politics
among ancient societies. Archaeology as a discipline is well-placed to
investigate the social role of sports in the distant past.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Prehispanic ballgame was an important ritualized sport
and shared cultural tradition that was played throughout much of ancient Mexico.
It was played in large masonry ballcourts, unique structures that were
constructed for this single purpose. As a special category of public
architecture, ballcourts would have distinguished communities from each other.
How ballcourts were distributed across the social landscape was significant -
where a ballcourt was emplaced within public space would express the importance
of the ballgame to political and daily life. By measuring the centrality of the
ballcourt and how accessible it was, it is possible to infer their
sociopolitical function at the local and regional levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research assesses the degree to which the ballgame was
interwoven with local community politics in the Nejapa region of Oaxaca, Mexico.
During the dynamic Postclassic (AD 1000 - 1521), a time of internal population
expansion, settlement reorganization, and outside pressure from expanding
imperial armies, several communities in Nejapa constructed multiple ballcourts.
This suggests that residents of Nejapa may have used the ballgame to integrate
different social strata, highlight social differences, and resolve or heighten
intra- and intercommunity conflicts. The research will test the hypothesis that
the ballgame was a key tool used by both local elites and different communities
in Nejapa through site reconnaissance, topographical mapping, and geospatial
analysis of ballcourt placement and distribution. Specifically, the project
focuses on two broad questions. First, how central was the ballcourt to
community social organization and who would have been the intended audience for
ballgames and other ritual activities performed in and around the court? Second,
does the distribution of ballcourts overlap with the distribution of complex
civic centers in Nejapa? Systematic study of the ballcourts in Nejapa at the
local and regional scales enhances understanding of how a competitive sport
became an important sociopolitical institution in Mesoamerica.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the first in-depth study of the ballcourts in Nejapa,
this project will be conducted in collaboration with area communities with the
goal of documenting, recording and preserving the local cultural heritage for
future generations to come. Study results will be disseminated through
publications and presentations at scholarly venues, official reports for the
Mexican government, and a project website targeted at broader audiences. Data
from Nejapa will be added to a much larger geodatabase on ballcourts in Oaxaca
that will improve the availability of information as well as permit further
statistical and geospatial analyses for future research.