* 1519998
* SBIR Phase I:  Commercialization of Bio-Design Automation Software for Synthetic Biology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kevin LeShane, Lattice Automation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 177,937.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to develop algorithms and software to address
basic and fundamental design automation tasks in synthetic biology. The goal is
to fundamentally change the way that biological designs are conceived, designed,
and physically created. The tools and techniques proposed introduce a new way of
thinking about biological engineering that will transform the current biological
procedures from an "artisanal" craft confined to small niche research projects
to an engineering discipline based on modular parts, characterization data,
requirements, rule-based design, optimized planning, and standardized
automation, all capable of scaling up to support the complexity of future
applications, and is the first to do so in an end-to-end manner. Further, the
proposed work is a core enabler for the synthetic biology discipline that has
the potential to assist the biomanufacturing industry turn resources and
expertise into products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to develop algorithms and software for the design, planning, assembly, and
analysis of synthetic biological constructs. The proposed activities will bring
three software tools closer to commercial deployment: Tools for genetic design,
assembly planning, and rule mining. This proposal addresses the fundamental
overall problem of designing, building, and optimizing a network of genes that
produce a specified behavior in an organism. The proposed project will further
develop and tailor software algorithms and tools for the combinatorial design of
genetic networks using graph theory. It will extend algorithms and tools for
planning the DNA assembly of large sets of designs using advanced dynamic
programming algorithms, and it will integrate data mining approaches for
learning design rules for optimizing genetic networks.