* 1519006
* Understanding the Contributions from Thunderstorms and Electrified Shower Clouds to the Global Electric Circuit
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Chuntao Liu, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 359,549.00

This study seeks to improve our knowledge of the role of cloud electrification
in the global electric circuit (GEC). For decades we have known that lightning-
producing thunderstorms add an upward directed current, known as the Wilson
current. The GEC also consists of a downward, fair weather, current that
originates from the electric potential difference between the earth's surface
and the upper atmosphere. Though these connections are well understood, no known
study to date has quantified these properties using observations. Improvements
in our understanding of these processes will lead to quantitative models of the
GEC, which will in turn benefit society through an improved knowledge of the
role of the GEC on weather and climate. This study provides mentorship
experiences and training and supports educational diversity through the
inclusion of underrepresented groups; especially Hispanic
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will focus on existing cloud
electrification data from ground-based radar, airborne and satellite remote
sensing platforms. This study will create a global climatology of Wilson current
to describe the contribution to the GEC from thunderstorms and electrified
shower clouds. This research will also advance our understanding of the
relationship between the Wilson current emanating from electrified cloud tops
and their convective intensity. Knowledge gained from this research will serve
as the quantitative basis for answering larger questions of the global scale,
current generators and individual life cycles of electrified cloud systems.