* 1519375
* CAREER: Topological mechanism of DNA unlinking by the XerCD-FtsK system
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2014,04/30/2018
* Mariel Vazquez, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2018
* USD 422,194.00

DNA topology is the study of knotting, linking and supercoiling of circular DNA
molecules. The bacterial chromosome is circular and replication invariably
results in the formation of interlinked daughter chromosomes. Error-free
unlinking is required to ensure proper segregation at cell division and stable
plasmid inheritance. Type II topoisomerases unlink replication links. In
Escherichia coli, in the absence of topo IV (a type II topoisomerase credited
with chromosome unlinking), the site-specific recombination system XerCD
mediates sister chromosome unlinking. This reaction is activated at the division
septum by a powerful translocase FtsK, which coordinates the last stages of
chromosome segregation. The mechanism by which the XerCD-FtsK complex simplifies
the topology of DNA remains unclear. The main objective of the proposed studies
is to characterize the topological mechanism of DNA unlinking by the XerCD-FtsK
system using knot theory, low-dimensional topology, and computer simulations.
There is evidence that after being activated by FtsK, the enzymes XerCD unlink
DNA in a stepwise manner. The tangle method will be used to find possible
topological pathways of DNA unknotting and unlinking by site-specific
recombination on small substrates. A computer model of DNA recombination will be
developed, adapted to the Xer-FtsK system, and combined with the analytical
results to analyze experimental data obtained from the Sherratt lab. The
research is highly interdisciplinary and involves close collaboration with
groups in Japan, Canada and the UK. Such collaborations will facilitate state-
of-the-art student cross-training. Basic information about DNA topology will be
disseminated to the general public, including elementary school children and
visitors to the California Academy of Sciences.

DNA replication is the basis for biological inheritance. In bacteria,
reproduction starts with replication of the chromosome into two identical
daughter molecules, followed by segregation of the newly replicated chromosomes
and division of the parent cell into two daughter cells. In circular
chromosomes, problems of entanglement during DNA linking complicate the process
of chromosome segregation. In Escherichia coli, DNA unlinking is typically
mediated by the enzyme topoIV, which is an important drug target for quinolone
antimicrobial agents. Understanding DNA unlinking by Xer recombination, in
addition to providing a more complete picture of the chromosome segregation
process, is highly relevant for drug design. Mathematical and computational
tools are very useful for studying the action of enzymes that change the
topology of DNA. In this project such tools will be used to characterize all
unlinking pathways and to reveal the mechanism of unlinking by Xer. The
educational goal is to develop new and effective ways to disseminate knowledge
related to DNA topology and its biological significance, as well as to increase
public awareness of the critical role of mathematics in understanding biological
processes. The proposed plans include the creation of Math Circles for
elementary school children in San Francisco and the development of a series of
educational materials for public consumption in collaboration with the
California Academy of Sciences. This will culminate in the production of an
exhibit on DNA topology for the general public in the California Academy of
Sciences Museum.