* 1519086
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetics, Environment, and the Influence of Eating Disorders on Marriage and Fertility Trajectories
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Rebecca Utz, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 09/30/2016
* USD 9,602.00

In life course theory, a turning point is defined as a particular event,
experience, or set of behaviors that result in a significant change to the life
or health trajectory of an individual. One set of behaviors that has not yet
been incorporated into life course theory is eating disorders, despite the fact
that approximately 24 million people in the US suffer from them. Eating
disorders are known to be the result of genetic and epigenetic factors, and
result in unfavorable physical and mental health outcomes that persist well into
adulthood. Although preliminary evidence suggests that eating disorders result
in poor social adjustment in adolescence and adulthood, including delinquency
and higher unemployment, little research has explored the influence of eating
disorders on markers of social wellbeing. This project examines whether eating
disorders act as a turning point that disrupts, delays or inhibits other
outcomes associated with adult development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically
this study explores the relationship between eating disorders and outcomes
related to family formation such as marriage and fertility behaviors using a
sibling-comparison design. Biological siblings share similar genetic traits and
generally develop in similar early-life environments. A sibling-comparison
design allows for greater isolation of eating disorders as a particular
divergent experience by accounting for a wide-array of early-life and epigenetic
factors that may be associated with both the etiology and consequences of eating
disorders. The project utilizes two data sources to examine the marriage and
fertility experiences of individuals with eating disorders: The National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and the Utah Population
Data Base (UPDB). Once completed, this project will be among the first studies
to control for the epigenetic factors influencing both the risk for eating
disorders and the outcomes associated with family formation during adulthood.