* 1519829
* Participant support for UV Symposium at Pacifichem 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Karl Linden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

1519829&lt;br/&gt;Linden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participant support for
Ultraviolet Radiation Symposium at Pacifichem
2015&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photochemical processes are becoming increasingly
important in both engineered and natural systems. One of the premier
international scientific conferences is held every five years in Hawaii. The
purpose of this location is to attract scientists and engineers from the Pacific
Rim countries as well as the rest of the world. This symposium, taking place at
Pacifichem 2015 conference, will be an interdisciplinary study of the
photochemistry of water disinfection and advanced oxidation of chemical
contaminants using sunlight and engineered ultraviolet light. The emphasis is on
collaborations between researchers performing fundamental work in water
treatment, agencies that identify critical environmental needs, industrial
providers of water treatment solutions, and applications of treated water in
developing countries. This symposium will bring leaders and students with
international perspectives across a wide range of backgrounds and disciplines in
the area of photochemical and photobiological processes in environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual relevance of the symposium is
tied to the unique demographic of the Pacifichem conferences. Two main themes
will make up this symposium: (1) Disinfection Applications, where a major issue
to be considered is the photochemistry of short wavelength UV inactivation of
organisms; and the impact of this work on UV disinfection science, commercial
applications, and the regulatory community. This will include fundamental
research on pathogen inactivation for safe water under sunlight in natural
systems. Practical aspects of reaction chemistry and system design appropriate
for developing countries and indigenous communities will be a focus. (2)
Oxidation and Photolysis processes for UV treatment of emerging contaminants in
water, such as pharmaceuticals and personal care products, UV treatment for a
range of potable reuse applications, specific technologies for UV water
treatment and synergies between treatment options such as ozone and UV. Water
treatment issues specific to geographic regions will be highlighted.