* 1519468
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost sensors for rapid narcotic intoxication screening in the field
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Wei Yu, Diagnostic anSERS Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development a low-cost, rapid sensor for drugs of
abuse in saliva. Currently, there is no roadside test to establish intoxication
with drugs other than alcohol. With the ongoing societal shift towards
legalization and decriminalization of certain drugs, it is imperative to enable
law enforcement officers to verify intoxication at the roadside to keep our
roads safe. Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) has been recognized as an
ideal technology to solve this problem as it enables screening for a multitude
of drugs at trace (nanogram) levels using a single sensor and reader. The
immediate application and target market of the proposed innovation is the
detection of illicit drug usage, such as marijuana, heroin, cocaine and other
narcotics, since this has been identified as the greatest market need. However,
this technological platform has great potential to serve as a low-cost platform
for detecting trace chemical and biological targets within complex samples, with
the ability to be rapidly adapted to address emerging needs.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop functionalized sensors for
detection of substances of abuse in saliva. These sensors will be generated
using low-cost, high-throughput additive manufacturing processes (roll-to-roll
inkjet printing), and will be paired with a portable AA battery-powered
spectrometer, enabling rapid, low-cost screening at the point of sample
collection. Key aspects of the proposed approach include: 1) Surface enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (SERS) to provide a high sensitivity and specific detection
modality; 2) inkjet printing of the sensor, enabling simple and low-cost mass
production; 3) solid phase extraction and lateral flow immunoassay concepts
enable on-sensor cleanup prior to detection; and 4) functionalized plasmonic
nanostructures to provide Raman enhancement, and to specifically capture target
drug molecules of interest.