* 1519074
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Development of Corporate Personhood Law In Comparative Perspective, 1886-2014
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Frank Dobbin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 11,593.00

With the rise of corporate capitalism and the establishment of the first great
enterprises, American jurists and scholars struggled with the question of how to
define the status of the corporation for the purposes of American law. The main
point of contention concerned the degree to which the corporation should be
considered as similar to a person; a natural entity with rights that could be
separated from those of the corporation's owners. By the end of the 1920s, the
debate had largely dissipated with the ascendance of a "realist" view that cast
legal terms as largely empty signifiers. In recent years, corporate personhood
has once again become a topic of public debate. Recently the Supreme Court re-
visited the question of the proper scope for corporate rights: when and upon
what basis should corporate entities engage in political speech and enjoy
protections that citizens enjoy. The questions this research address are, what
role (if any) did the legacy of the legal doctrine of corporate personhood play
answering these questions, and in crafting American corporate regulation more
broadly? And why has corporate personhood come to play this role in American
law? To address these questions, the researchers undertake a mixed-method
approach to analyze the development of corporate personhood law between
1886-2014. First, the researchers trace the historical development of the
personhood doctrine through the web of legal citations. This allows them to
identity the periods, cases, courts, and legal arenas where the personhood
doctrine was deployed. Second, the researchers use a comparative historical
analysis between the United States and England to explain why the doctrine of
corporate personhood was especially appealing to American jurists. The
researchers use archival material to assess the relative influence of economic,
political, institutional, and cultural drivers of legal development. The overall
goal of the project is to develop a cultural theory of the development of
corporate law.