* 1519218
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Environmentally Induced Migration
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Amanda Bertana, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2016
* USD 11,233.00

Although scholars have begun to examine the relationship between migration and
environmental quality, they often ignore how communities threatened with the
impacts of climate change are experiencing and managing relocation as an
adaptation to climatic changes. This research attempts to fill this gap by
looking at how the residents of Vunidogoloa in Fiji implemented and managed
relocation as an adaptation to rising sea levels. This case study provides a
comprehensive strategy for the entire process of displacement, including the
arrival and adjustment period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will employ
participant observation and open-ended interviews with community members and key
actors involved in the relocation of the Vunidogoloa village to address the
following: (1) How are communities that are directly threatened by rising sea
levels implementing and managing relocation as an adaptation to climate change?
(2) At what point is relocation the last viable option? (3) What economic,
social, and cultural obstacles do communities face prior to, during, and after
relocation? and (4) How do communities establish networks with government
officials, NGOs, and other community organizations to help financially assist
with their relocation efforts? The results of this study will enhance scholarly
understanding of the relationship between migration and environmental
degradation. Furthermore, it will provide an alternative perspective of the
strategies, and challenges of environmentally induced migration by paying
attention to the personal experiences of people directly impacted by rising sea
levels. By documenting the relocation of Vunidogoloa, which was a community led
climate change adaptation program that was supported by the national government,
governments will be better equipped to address possible relocation policies in a
more equitable manner.