* 1519206
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Organization After Major Disasters
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Vivian Shaw, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2016
* USD 11,975.00

Contemporary research on the profound impacts of major disasters has
demonstrated that, in addition to creating sizable material damage, disasters
are influential moments that shape how communities understand their social roles
as victims, citizens, and activists. Within this context, protests and other
forms of collective action are among the most visible evidence of the larger
social consequences of disasters. This project investigates how major disasters
influence the practices of social movements, focusing on the case of the
Fukushima nuclear disaster, which began on March 11, 2011 when a 9.0 earthquake
triggered a devastating tsunami and multiple reactor meltdowns at Fukushima
Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. Our project is a study of anti-nuclear and anti-
racism social movements in Japan and the ways that the 2011 disaster has shaped
how these community organizations understand and respond to the key issues of
human rights, citizenship, and racial inequality. In particular, this project
examines how the revival of anti-nuclear protests since 2011 has laid the
groundwork for the recent growth of anti-racism activism, which has emerged in
part as a response to an increasing trend of anti-Korean and anti-foreigner hate
speech in Japan. Using participant observations, interviews, and social media
data analysis, this project seeks to better understand how communities
organizing after major disasters navigate heightened political stakes while
confronting longstanding structures of social inequality and
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study employs a mixed methodology of
ethnography, interviews, and social media content analysis to examine how anti-
nuclear and anti-racism social movement networks actively negotiate cultural
meanings around "citizenship" in post-disaster Japan. Our analysis relies on a
total of twenty months of ethnographic research in Tokyo (June 2014 to July
2014; August 2015 to July 2016) and Osaka (September 2014 to March 2015), as
well as social media content analysis. We have selected Tokyo and Osaka as field
sites for the following reasons: 1) they comprise the largest urban areas in
Japan, 2) they are the largest sites for anti-nuclear and antiracism activities,
and 3) the co-PI has already established research contacts and institutional
affiliations. Anti-nuclear and anti-racism social movements in Tokyo have
national influence and are comprised of dense and complex networks. Findings
from this study will contribute to human rights policy debates on the issues of
social inequality and racial discrimination following major disasters.