* 1519181
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Religion and the Professional Middle Class in Contemporary China
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Mary Ellen Konieczny, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 11,983.00

This project examines how one portion of the Chinese population?the growing
professional middle class?is engaging with religious practice and asks how they
are using these practices to make sense of their success and place in their
country and global society. Why is a rapidly modernizing society that underwent
forced secularization now awash with religious activity even in the face of
continued governmental control of religion? What does this growth of religion
actually look like in people's everyday lives, and how do they use these
religious practices, beliefs, and identities to make meaning and build
community? Drawing on critiques of the standard sociological theories of
religion and ways of conceptualizing and measuring of religion, this project
uses the lens of religious practice to analyze distinctively Chinese ways of
practicing religion that transcend established religious lines.

The data collection involves community observations and interviews with
individuals from the following communities: self-identified Buddhists,
Protestants, Catholics, Muslims, and the non-religious in a prefecture-level
city on China's eastern seaboard. Using a combination of qualitative methods
(ethnography, in-depth interviews, and photo elicitation interviews), this
project will answer the research questions by examining the religious practices
of the cosmopolitan sector of Chinese society while also analyzing distinctively
Chinese ways of practicing religion that transcend established religious lines.
The research also will examine key tensions in the lives of this population and
the ways that they use religion to address practical concerns, make meaning, and
pursue happiness in the context of rapid social, cultural, and economic change.
This project will further our knowledge of both contemporary Chinese society and
the role of lived religion among the global middle class.