* 1519691
* SBIR Phase I:  Dendrimers for Fast-Drying, High-Solids, Nonisocyanate Coatings which Yield High Wear Resistance Finishes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* RANDY CAMERON, INSTRUMENTAL POLYMER TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to help coatings companies meet the goals of
the EPA for reducing the amount of solvent and toxic isocyanate used in the
large automotive, yachts and aviation refinish markets. In doing so it will also
bring back polymer manufacturing to the United States, which has largely moved
to Europe. The vehicle refinish markets have a difficult time moving towards
using less solvent in their coatings because such coatings generally require a
long time to dry. This leads to collection of dust in the high gloss finish,
which then needs to be sanded and buffed. The nanotechnolgy of this project will
constitute solid spherical polymers, known as dendrimers, which liquefy with
only a small amount of solvent. The technology of this project will be
enthusiastically accepted by the repaint facilities because the one component
fast drying capability of the coatings will reduce the energy use of heat curing
and will reduce waste they have from mixing multicomponent coatings. This
technology will also reduce the painter's exposure to the toxic isocyanates
currently used to cure polyurethane coatings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project, in its broadest sense, is to demonstrate
that the complex molecular structure required for nanotechnology, and
particularly the cell like structure of spherical dendrimers, can be most cost
effectively produced by using a biomimetic process in which the specific shape
evolves with time during its production. Dendrimers are currently very expensive
because they are made in the step by step process of classic chemistry. Their
use is therefore generally limited to markets like medicine or electronics which
can afford their high cost. This project attempts to prove that this need not be
the case. More specifically this project will break the general assumption that
high solids coatings require longer times to dry and increase costs. The
spherical shape of these dendrimers will be used to demonstrate that low
viscosity, sprayable coatings can be created using very little solvent, but can
lacquer dry within minutes at ambient conditions into a hard coating upon
evaporation of the solvent.