* 1519869
* SBIR Phase I:  Catalytic Conversion of Lignocellulosic Biomass into Glucose using Green Solvents
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* David Alonso, Glucan Biorenewables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is the production of low cost glucose from biomass. The
production of cost-competitive biofuels from biomass has been a significant
industrial challenge due to the high cost of fractionation and conversion into
sugars and biofuels. A renewable solvent has been shown to enable the efficient
fractionation of the biomass into three components, which can be further
processed within the solvent into higher value products. One of the component
parts of biomass can be further processed to produce glucose. The ability to co-
produce glucose with one or two other high value products from a single source
of biomass provides a significant economic advantage. With success, this
biorefinery concept will enable the production of cost competitive glucose for
biofuels from a variety of biomass types. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this Phase I research project are to demonstrate the low cost production of
glucose from cellulosic sugar in gamma-valerolactone and use the by-products
from this process to produce the gamma-valerolactone. The first step in the
process, fractionation of the biomass, has been demonstrated at bench scale
using multiple types of biomass. The solvent solubilizes the five-carbon
carbohydrates (C5) and lignin components leaving a solid cellulose. Production
of the C5 carbohydrates in the renewable solvent has been proven to be
advantageous versus aqueous systems as the increased reactivity of acids in
these solvents allows for the utilization of low concentration of acid, short
residence times (minutes) and low temperatures. The lignin is preserved in these
mild conditions and precipitated out; while the C5 carbohydrate is converted
into furfural. This project proposes to apply the same solvent advantages in the
conversion of cellulose to sugars delivering monomeric glucose at low cost. The
solvent utilized in the process will be produced from by-products, demonstrating
that the process can be self-sustainable and improve the carbon utilization. The
glucose produced will be similar to the glucose produced from corn or sugarcane
and will be competitive in price.