* 1519964
* SBIR Phase I:  Direct Optical Control of High Power Using Silicon Carbide
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Stephen Sampayan, Opcondys, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/29/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is progress towards
greater security and stability for the power grid through better control and
reduced energy consumption. Because of the greater speed, decreased transition
time, and increased capability, greater power systems simplification and reduced
costs will result. The total world market for power semiconductors is estimated
to be $16 billion in 2014 rising to $28 billion by 2020. Asia dominates this
market. The expected high power, high frequency, low cost device from this
effort will be an attractive alternative to existing power semiconductor
devices. A competitive and disruptive technology such as this device, and a
growing demand for more efficient high-power switching devices in more
applications will provide growth and potential for the US to gain a greater
share in this market. Power equipment manufacturers will be able to develop
smaller, lighter and less expensive inverters for renewable energy and simpler
topologies for grid-tied storage systems and industrial motor speed control.
Power supplies for medical, transportation and industrial equipment can be made
more efficient, smaller and less expensive. Simpler switching configurations for
power transmission and faster fault interruption to prevent widespread power
failures will also be possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a feasibility study of optically
driven, high power switching and control using silicon carbide. Control in the
bulk of the material eliminates the semiconductor control junction that exists
in standard power devices. This approach is based on extensive government
laboratory research that light incident on specially doped wide bandgap
materials such as SiC causes the bulk of the material to become controllably
conductive. A deeper understanding of this characteristic enables a novel,
highly efficient, cost effective device, capable of switching high power at much
higher switching frequencies. Bulk conduction also enables greater capability
than in existing semiconductor devices as power flow is not limited to the
narrow space charge region at the junction. Samples of doped SiC will be
selected for optimal carrier recombination characteristics and will be driven by
light emitting diodes or diode lasers to demonstrate 15 kV switching at 100 kHz
and eventually 10 A in an integrated four terminal package. The eventual goal is
a demonstration of switching 30 kV, 20 A, at 1000 kHz, with a transition rate of
&gt;10 MV/Ã¬s, and duty cycle greater than 50%.