* 1519508
* SBIR Phase I:  Radically Improving Data Center Cost Effectiveness through Virtualized Convergence of Data Processing and Storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Hao Zhong, ScaleFlux Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,918.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the scaling of data centers in a
very cost effective way. Global information technology business is reaching $3.7
Trillion, and data centers are an increasingly important cornerstone of future
global information technology infrastructure. By providing timely solutions to
improve the cost effectiveness of data centers, this project will contribute to
accelerating the penetration of data center based cloud services into a wider
spectrum of applications and hence generate considerable technical and societal
impact. In addition, as the project disruptively relaxes the traditional
distinct boundary among computation, storage, and networking, its success will
influence the entire industry to fundamentally re-think and re-innovate data
center design and implementation for future information technology industry
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a working demonstration of a disruptive product
that can significantly improve the cost effectiveness of future data center
infrastructure. With inevitable slowing-down of Moore's Law and rapid growth of
data volume, the conventional data center design practice demands formidable
capital investment, which will seriously undermine the cost effectiveness of
future data centers. Aiming to fundamentally address the data center cost
effectiveness challenge, this project will develop a working demonstration of a
software/hardware integrated product that can cohesively handle data storage and
processing tasks in data centers at very low cost. The key intellectual merit is
to fundamentally re-think the realization and coordination among computing,
storage and networking. The product can outperform CPUs by at least an order of
magnitude for critical data processing tasks in data centers and meanwhile
significantly improve memory/storage hierarchy efficiency. The software/hardware
integrated products installed across multiple server nodes can further form a
virtualized platform, with which inter-node data transfer and computation
coordination can be realized very efficiently.