* 1519919
* SBIR Phase I:  High Resolution, Synthetic Satellite Imagery of the Earth
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Stephanie Hulina, Geospatial Data Analysis Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,932.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to address a strong commercial and
scientific need for historical and most current satellite data for visualization
and analytical purposes with regional-to-global coverage, frequent revisit, and
high spatial detail at an affordable price. It will allow companies to improve
their value proposition, competitive edge, and to differentiate their services.
The technology will be valuable in operational settings at the large providers
of commercial satellite imagery, to individual users, and in a host of
commercial applications such as insurance, agriculture, and emergency. The
development of the proposed technology will contribute to the advancement of
scientific knowledge especially in the geospatial arena and to market
spillovers. By dramatically simplifying access to accurate historical and most
current imagery for any time and place, this project will provide companies,
researchers, educators, students, and regular citizens with a valuable tool for
visualizing and exploring our changing planet and will contribute to increasing
public engagement with science and technology. Further, the analytical
capabilities offered by the imagery have great potential in scientific
applications thus contributing to partnerships between academia and industry and
improving datasets for research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate the
technical feasibility of operationally synthesizing accurate global, high
spatial / high temporal satellite imagery of the Earth. The complexity of
accessing, processing, and analyzing various sources of satellite imagery
creates a significant barrier to its use. Synthesis of regionally and globally
continuous high spatial and high temporal resolution imagery is a challenge as
in addition to inherent differences in spatial and temporal resolutions of the
source data, the new models need to account for enormous data volumes and sparse
coverage of high spatial resolution imagery. Existing techniques to handle these
challenges have severe limitations which curtail their use outside of the
research arena. The proposed technology will overcome these limitations by
implementing advanced data fusion algorithms to combine various sources of
satellite data to synthesize imagery for any given date and location while
preserving the best spatial and temporal attributes of the data sources. The
algorithms will be robust, easily automated, scalable, deliver accurate data,
are usable in operational settings, and will provide spatially consistent and
temporally relevant imagery which will empower businesses with regional and
global outreach to make better decisions with better data.