* 1519706
* Permeability and Elastic Properties of Fractured Rock: Systematic Experimental Investigation and Model Development
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Carl Renshaw, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 496,998.00

Fractured-rock aquifers are an important water resource. Complex fracture
distributions in most rocks make it difficult to characterize and understand
groundwater flow in them. Cost-effective methods are needed to ensure sound
decisions in groundwater management. Methods using well water levels and cross-
hole tests to identify groundwater flow pathways are useful, but the resolution
of maps based on these data alone depends on the number of wells, which is
commonly inadequate due to financial and time constraints. In these cases, it is
necessary to rely on additional data, particularly seismic velocities, to
improve the mapping of subsurface flow pathways. This research will be the first
systematic experimental study of the flow properties in well-characterized 3D
fracture networks that will relate changes in seismic velocity to changes in
permeability. This proposal builds on more than a decade of work using ice as a
model for rock, which has shown that the basic processes controlling brittle
failure of rocks and ice are similar. However, ice has distinct experimental
advantages over rock. The proposed experiments and model development offer the
opportunity to gain insights into the elastic properties and permeabilities of a
broad range of fractured, crystalline natural (i.e., rocks) and synthetic
materials. Thus, this research has applicability to many disciplines in
materials science, engineering, and the geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying narrow, continuous high conductivity zones in
fractured rock is a pressing challenge in hydrogeology. Hydraulic tomography
(the inverse modelling of multiple cross-hole well tests) has shown increasing
promise for this task, but the resolution of hydraulic tomography is sensitive
to the number of boreholes and cross-hole tests, which are commonly too few. In
these cases it is necessary to rely on additional data types, particularly
geophysical surveys, to improve the resolution of the hydrogeological
characterization. Combining hydraulic and geophysical data is most effective
when the form of the relationship that links geophysical and hydrogeological
parameters, particularly the relationship between seismic velocities and
permeability, is known. Both permeability and seismic velocity depend on
fracture density. This research examines these relationships to link seismic
velocity to permeability. Specifically, using ice as a model material, this will
be the first systematic experimental study of the flow properties of well-
characterized 3D fracture networks designed to elucidate the relationship
between changes in seismic velocity and changes in permeability in fractured
geologic media. Despite the importance of fracture-induced changes in elastic
properties and permeability, there are few systematic observations of the co-
evolution of these properties during brittle deformation. Such data are critical
for refining constitutive models linking hydrogeologic and geophysical
parameters. The proposed research is a combination of laboratory measurements
and mechanistic model development that serves as a necessary precursor to field
applications designed to obtain spatially dense information about permeability
that will improve the quantitative characterization of groundwater flow and
transport.