* 1519664
* SBIR Phase I:  Superhydrophobic Zinc Coatings for Anti-Corrosion Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Atieh Haghdoost, P & P Coating
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,783.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a
superhydrophobic zinc coating that is expected to exhibit higher anti-corrosion
performance than existing zinc coatings. Existing zinc coatings easily get wet
and, consequently, their anti-corrosion performance is significantly reduced. As
a result, these coatings are often treated with an additional layer of
hexavalent chromate to improve their anti-corrosion performance. However,
hexavalent chromium is a human carcinogen, which has been targeted for
elimination by environmental regulations. Existing substitutes to this material
provide lower performance at a higher cost and thus are not fully accepted in
the industry. The superhydrophobic coating to be developed in this effort
prevents water from wetting the surface. Therefore, this coating is expected to
exhibit higher corrosion resistance without the need for the additional
hexavalent chromate coating. This new coating, therefore, represents an eco-
friendly replacement for the zinc coating treated with hexavalent chromate, and
potentially exhibits higher anti-corrosion performance than existing
alternatives. The proposed development can be adopted in the $370 million target
market of US zinc coatings.

The intellectual merit of this project includes developing superhydrophobic zinc
coatings based on the technology invented by the company founders. Most existing
superhydrophobic coatings are made of non-metallic materials such as polymers or
ceramics, and therefore are not feasible for the proposed application. The
superhydrophobic zinc coating provides a transformative solution for the
corrosion problem when a metallic coating is required. The main objective of the
proposed Phase I research is developing a superhydrophobic zinc coating, which
eliminates the need for the hexavalent chromate treatment. This development is
expected to provide corrosion protection equivalent, or superior, to that
provided by the chromate-treated zinc coatings. The anti-corrosion properties of
the superhydrophobic coating will be evaluated using salt spray tests and
electrochemical techniques. In addition, durability of the superhydrophobic zinc
coating will be investigated using the standard abrasion test.