* 1519228
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migration and Universalism in Social Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Aaron Ponce, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2016
* USD 7,110.00

------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT FOR 1519228&lt;br/&gt;The
social democratic states of Northern Europe are characterized by a
universalistic welfare system, which guarantees basic living standards for
everyone. Although these countries have historically had little diversity,
recently they have experienced significant demographic change through
international migration. The incorporation of diverse immigrant groups into
Nordic societies presents a number of interesting challenges for the principle
of universalism. This project, which trains a graduate student to conduct
rigorous social scientific research in the areas of international migration and
political sociology, analyzes the forces that have created universalist social
democracies that are strikingly different from those of the past. Moreover, it
investigates whether increased migration has undermined
universalism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation project will investigate
country-to-country trends in international migration and some consequences of
these trends in three steps. First, the research uses quantitative panel
techniques on an extended sample representing all welfare state types to test
whether migration follows a welfare magnet pattern, where migrants are
disproportionately drawn to the generous welfare institutions of the Nordic
social democracies, as some researchers have suggested. Second, the project
offers a contemporary approach to international migration by tracing the
institutional and social influences on migration flows within a context of
increased global connectedness, going beyond conventional macro-structural
explanations. In particular, the study considers destination countries' ties and
commitment to an international society that seeks to aid refugees. It also
considers social connectedness and exchange factors, like the sending of
remittance monies and the increased use of communication technologies in an
understudied context - migrants' origin countries. Third, the study turns to
multilevel quantitative analyses of individual-level survey data to examine
whether increasing migration levels and diversity in a region or country are
associated with a decline in individual social trust and support for state
welfare programs.