* 1519908
* IBSS: Communication in the Global University: A Longitudinal Study of Language Adaptation at Multiple Timescales in Native and Non-Native Speakers
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2020
* Arthur Samuel, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 999,817.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine how native and non-native
speakers of English adapt to accents, linguistic knowledge, and communication
practices that may differ markedly from their own in the context of a large
public university. The project will explore the nature of communications in
college classrooms, where much of the instruction (particularly in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields) is provided by
instructors who are not native speakers of English. The project will enhance
understanding of basic language representations, processing, and use by native
and non-native speakers of English engaged in social interaction. The project
will generate new information and insights regarding the flexible adaptive
processes that underlie human communication and language development by
addressing issues associated with pronunciation by non-native speakers as well
as the nature of mutual intelligibility and adaptation on the part of both
native and non-native speakers of a language. The project will inform efforts to
facilitate communication between native and non-native speakers of English.
Project findings will be useful for those engaged in developing and implementing
programs to improve communications skills of those who will serve as
instructors, and they may help improve capabilities of students to better
understand those whose native languages differ from their own, thereby improving
the students' academic success and preparation to participate in the modern
workforce. While an immediate aim is to enhance communication in the college
classroom, project findings will be applicable to any situation in which cross-
cultural communication is crucial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
conduct a longitudinal study involving approximately 150 international students
newly arrived in the United States and more than 1,000 native-English-speaking
American undergraduates. The project will be grounded in a theoretical framework
that views successful communication as fundamentally collaborative. The goal is
to measure, track, and improve not only the international teaching assistants'
developing communication skills in English, but also the undergraduates'
understanding of and adaptations to foreign-accented English as well as their
ability to learn to transfer their experience of one accent to another.
Reflecting the composition of international graduate students at U.S.
universities, over half of the international teaching assistants in the study
will be native speakers of Chinese, with the rest being native speakers of
Korean, Russian, and other Asian and European languages. Multiple methods of
analysis will include ethnographic observations and interviews, psycholinguistic
and dialog experiments, linguistic analyses of spontaneous and elicited speech,
electrophysiology studies of perception, eye tracking studies of language
processing, and surveys. Data will be collected from the same individuals at
multiple timescales (over conversations, class sessions, semesters, and
international teaching assistants' first two years in the U.S.) and at multiple
levels (from pronunciation and perception of phonetic segments, to use of
vocabulary and syntax, to discourse cues and strategies, to communicative norms,
preferences, and attitudes). Systematic comparisons will be made in order to
learn which kinds of experiences and interactions can lead to enhanced
communication between native and non-native English speakers. The data resulting
from this project will provide new opportunities for scientists to examine long-
term effects in foreign language learning, language processing, and the
development of communicative strategies. This project is supported through the
NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS)
competition.