* 1519280
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Organizational Anticipation and Response to Disaster Risks
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Peter Bearman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2017
* USD 11,472.00

The purpose of this research is to improve our understanding of how
organizations in metropolitan areas work together to identify, plan for, and
respond to disaster risks. Previous research has focused on reactions to
specific disaster events. This research shifts attention to an under-studied
area, the everyday practice of professionals working in government to
proactively anticipate disaster in a way that reduces the frequency and impact
of these disruptive events. The research will focus on how disaster risk
management expertise is developed, and how that expertise is deployed in times
of stability and crisis within and across organizational boundaries. In
sociology this project represents the first systematic empirical study of the
daily work of disaster managers in a major metropolitan area. The analysis of
interview and participant-observation data will provide critical links between
the sociology of disaster and more general research on risk and expertise.

This project collects and analyzes data from participant observation in a
municipal emergency management agency in New York City as well as in-depth
interviews with disaster risk management professionals in public service and the
private sector. The participant observation phase of the data collection will
involve shadowing Office of Emergency Management staff while they perform seven
different tasks; network administration to maintain ties with other government
organizations to coordinate disaster response; planning, which includes the
writing of disaster preparedness plans and playbooks; the development and
execution of tabletop exercises for disaster simulations; monitoring conditions
during times of stability; public communication; training and education; and
actual operations activity. These observations will be complemented by 75 in-
depth interviews with disaster management practitioners, 60 from the New York
City OEM network and 15 from outside of it. The purpose of these observations
and interviews is to understand how risk management practitioners define risk,
how expertise is defined in an area where knowledge changes rapidly and how
multiple organizations interact (or not) to protect the citizenry from disasters
of multiple kinds. In a period where disasters are becoming more frequent and
their effects more severe, this project will contribute to our understanding of
how disaster risk can be reduced. It also will be helpful as a source of best
practices for emergency management practitioners currently working in government
and private industry.