* 1519243
* EAGER: Cybercrime Susceptibility in the Sociotechnical System: Exploration of Integrated Micro- and Macro-Level Sociotechnical Models of Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 08/14/2014,03/31/2017
* Saman Zonouz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2017
* USD 138,558.00

This project develops a holistic approach to sociotechnical system security that
combines innovations in both criminology and engineering/computer science. We
design unified sociotechnical security models that capture how sociotechnical
intrusions against social as well as technical aspects of the system (i.e.,
modeled as hidden sequences of system security states) result in observed hard
data such as security sensor alerts and soft data produced by human/social
sensors such as reports about slow machines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To model the
social aspect of the sociotechnical security models, (1) we collect extensive
social survey data from one specific subpopulation (employees) nested within one
sociotechnical system (the university campus); (2) we identify various social
and social-psychological factors reducing susceptibility to victimization by
computer-focused crime drawing on several criminological and sociological
theories; (3) we supplement social survey data with organizational-level data to
explore influences of characteristics of organizational units on individual-
level employee victimization by computer-focused crimes as well as rates of such
cybercrime threats in organizational units. We analyze the collected data by
applying unique integrated sociotechnical analytical approaches that encapsulate
the adversarial actions and subsequent rewards/costs using stochastic Markov
decisions processes and probabilistic data production models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research provides guidelines for other researchers
looking to incorporate social science methods and models into engineering
systems, with the criminological/sociological aspect of the study of use to many
other researchers. This work will transform how researchers approach the problem
of sociotechnical security, in that our holistic view cognizant of both social
and technical factors will become widespread.