* 1519858
* SBIR Phase I:  Transluminal Attenuation Flow Encoding (TAFE) for Rapid and Accurate Assessment of Significant Coronary Artery Disease
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Albert Lardo, HeartMetrics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of a novel non-invasive
quantitative computed tomography (CT) imaging-based alternative to existing
coronary artery disease (CAD) diagnoses. Over 17 million Americans have coronary
artery disease (CAD) and 400,000 Americans die annually from this disease.
Current diagnoses of CAD based on nuclear tests are not only complex, costly and
involve a high radiation exposure, they have relatively low specificity and lead
to over a million unnecessary risky and expensive invasive procedures every
year. Invasive tests have higher specificity, but carry the inherent expense and
risks of catheterization. The new technology to be developed here (Transluminal
Attenuation Flow Encoding-TAFE) will provide rapid and accurate determination of
the functional significance of CAD such that appropriate and cost-effective
health care can be deployed. TAFE will also lead to a significant reduction in
unnecessary invasive catheterization, and in doing so, reduce the costs and
patient risks associated with these procedures. The Phase 1 effort is designed
to make advancements in TAFE that are key to its development and
commercialization. These studies will prepare the groundwork for a TAFE-based
software package, and animal and human clinical studies in the future.

The proposed project spans the areas of biomechanics, fluid dynamics, imaging
and biomedicine. The formation of temporal and spatial gradients in the
iodinated contrast that appear during a CTA exam are the result of complex
interactions between fluid dynamics and dispersion physics, which is not
completely understood. These patterns of contrast have only begun to reveal
themselves in the last few years with the availability of CTA scanners with high
spatial and temporal resolution. In conducting this research, we will not only
break new ground in understanding the physics of blood flow and contrast
dispersion in human vasculature; we will also demonstrate that these new-
generation scanners can be combined with physics-based algorithms to facilitate
optimized, patient-centered evidence-based decision support. The development and
use of CTA compatible phantoms which mimic the fluid dynamics, contrast
dispersion patterns and imaging attributes of coronary vessels is novel, and it
is expected that the current research will help make these standard tools in
this arena.