* 1519987
* IBSS: Towards an Integrated Understanding of Natural Resource Use and Management
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Michael Gavin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2021
* USD 999,144.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine variations in the ways that
different human societies have managed natural resources. Scientists long have
debated how environmental, demographic, institutional, social, and historical
factors shape the natural resource management strategies used by different
societies and why these strategies change over time. Diverse natural resource
management approaches have allowed humans to inhabit every continent on earth,
including such varied settings as deserts, rainforests, savannas, tundra,
mountains, and plains. The degree to which society can use and manage resources
sustainably is a primary determinant of current and future well-being. This
project will provide global-scale empirical tests of possible answers to
critical questions in long-standing debates regarding the geography and
evolution of land tenure and subsistence strategies. The investigators will
demonstrate the utility of approaches developed in biogeography and evolutionary
biology for addressing theoretical issues from multiple disciplines regarding
drivers of global geographic patterns in natural resource management. Project
findings will provide policy makers and others with critical insights about the
constraints and opportunities different contexts offer for more sustainable
planning. The project will demonstrate the utility of a global, publicly
accessible, interdisciplinary database developed by the investigators to
facilitate studies of cultural diversity and other dimensions of resource
management and use. The project also will valuable interdisciplinary education
and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students for for post-
doctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will address three
critical questions: (1) To what degree do different factors determine
subsistence strategies and land tenure systems across different regions of the
globe? (2) Do predictable patterns of change exist, or can any form of
subsistence or land tenure turn into any other form over time? (3) Do
subsistence strategies and land-tenure systems co-evolve? Consideration of these
questions has been difficult due to the limitations of prior analytical
approaches. The investigators have demonstrated the utility of methods
originally developed in biogeography and evolutionary biology to explore the
factors that drive the evolution and geographic patterns of cultural diversity,
and they have assembled a database that maps more than 100 cultural features
onto language family trees for over about 1,400 societies. They will link these
data with data on ecological and environmental variables in order to conduct new
inquiries into the drivers of cultural change and patterns of cultural
diversity. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary
Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.