* 1519308
* XXIII International Workshop on Deep-Inelastic Scattering; Dallas, TX; April 27 - May 1, 2015
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Pavel Nadolsky, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 03/31/2016
* USD 8,000.00

This award provided support for the DIS2015 XXIII International Workshop on
Deep-Inelastic Scattering and Related Subjects (DIS2015) to be held on the
Southern Methodist Universiy campus, Dallas, TX during the period April 27-May
1, 2015. The conference covers a large spectrum of topics in high energy
physics. A significant part of the program is devoted to the most recent results
from large experiments at major research laboratories in the United States and
abroad. Theoretical advances are included as well. The program is organized
around seven working groups: Structure Functions and Parton Densities; Small-x,
Diffraction and Vector Mesons; Electroweak Physics and Beyond the Standard
Model; Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) and Hadronic Final States; Heavy Flavors;
Spin Physics; Future Experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has emerged
as the premier venue for comprehensive discussions and debate between
experimentalists and theorists. While the original DIS workshops had a strong
emphasis on the Hadron Electron Ring Accelerator (HERA) based physics, the
topics of the workshop have now branched out to include the recent Large Hadron
Collier (LHC) physics as well as the US-based measurements at Fermilab in
Illinois, JLab in Virginia and RHIC in New York. This meeting draws
approximately 300+ scientists from across the globe to discuss the latest
results. Recent meetings were held in Poland, France, Germany, Japan and Russia.
The 2014 meeting hosted 265 talks with participants from 32
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has generally been based in Europe
and visits the US every few years. Therefore, hosting this meeting in the US
represents a special opportunity for US-based students to be exposed to this
breadth of topics and also the leaders in their field. The group is making
arrangements to allow students to participate in a cost-effective manner so as
to expand the scope of participation.