* 1519719
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid Calculation of Earthquake Damage and Repair Costs for High-Performance Building Design
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Curt Haselton, Haselton Baker Risk Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that structural engineers will be enabled to
design high-performance buildings that have minimal damage in earthquakes. Using
the software tool created in this project would fundamentally change the way in
which a structural engineer develops the initial design for a building. By
enabling engineers to enhance their understanding of building performance, they
will be able to design buildings for higher seismic performance and will thus
improve the resilience of buildings in future earthquakes. There is a large
potential new market for this software, as it can eventually be used by every
one of the approximately 10,000 structural engineers designing buildings in the
Western United States, and the tens of thousands of engineers working worldwide
in regions with earthquake hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop technology to rapidly
estimate the structural behavior during an earthquake and also provide a rapid
estimation of the inventory of components in a building. This rapid
autopopulation will then enable efficient calculations that predict the damage,
the repair costs, and the repair time for a building when it experiences an
earthquake. The company's method for rapid estimation of structural responses
will utilize principles of engineering mechanics, applied to estimating response
of a structure whose properties are not fully specified. The method for rapid
estimation of building contents will learn from users' updates to the company's
initial predictions. The proposed statistical model will enable the company to
study this question, and deploy a model that allows real-time and user-specific
refinements in a scalable manner.