* 1519467
* IUSE/PFE:RED:  Shifting Departmental Culture to Re-Situate Learning and Instruction
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* James Sweeney, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,000,000.00

Revolutionary Changes in Chemical, Biological and Environmental Engineering at
Oregon State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to
make bold and deliberate changes to the educational environment and practices in
the School of Chemical, Biological, and Environmental Engineering at Oregon
State University. While society needs engineers from diverse backgrounds ready
to face the challenges of the 21st century, most engineers are still educated
using methods developed several decades ago. One of the most important shifts in
thinking (that has yet to be incorporated into engineering education) is to move
away from "decontextualized" content - in which what students learn is
intentionally removed from the context of their lives, identities and future
careers. Engineering students, therefore, are hindered from putting their whole
selves into engineering and learning, and many talented students leave
engineering as a result. The project team is redesigning the curriculum and
investing in extensive faculty training to reshape the School of Chemical,
Biological, and Environmental Engineering into a warm, welcoming environment
that helps students build strong ties between the content in the classroom and
the rest of their lives. The graduates will be dramatically better prepared to
apply their knowledge to whatever new and unpredictable challenges face our
society in the years to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the School of
Chemical, Biological, and Environmental Engineering (CBEE) at Oregon State
University provides students many innovative learning opportunities, the extent
to which these efforts are marginalized and isolated limits their influence. The
goal of the effort is to implement revolutionary change by replacing a business-
as-usual approach with a holistic, inclusive, professionally based learning
environment woven through both curricular requirements and co-curricular
opportunities. The team will address social inequality by creating engineering
educational systems and interpersonal interactions that are professionally and
personally life affirming for all people across their differences. Change will
come through construction of a culture of inclusion and a shift in learning
environments from sequestered activities to realistic, consequential work. This
requires a fundamental change in the nature of department culture (values, norms
and structure). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort's core activities include: (1)
curricular redesign of nine core sophomore- and junior-level studio courses to
include more realistic, consequential work (leveraging research-based pedagogies
like problem-based learning and model-eliciting activities); (2) growing faculty
and students' capacity to engage issues of inclusivity by shifting their
cognitive and affective knowledge of power and privilege; (3) planning and
implementing student professional development pods, longitudinally mixed student
teams where students help one another understand the university experience and
how it relates to professional practice; and (4) implementing formal changes in
governing policies and procedures within CBEE. This project will provide the
first well-documented case study of institutional, cultural change in
engineering making use of a situative theory. As more institutions and faculty
experience an inclusive culture centered on engaging students with work that
connects to engineering practice as well as their own identities and
communities, we expect retention, recruitment and graduation numbers to
increase. Additionally, faculty empowered to participate holistically in their
teaching and research will reap personal benefits that are likely to be
reflected in measurable outcomes, such as: research productivity, teaching
effectiveness, sense of belonging, and growth.