* 1519109
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The influence of home and school experiences on preschool children's dispositions and behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Mustafa Emirbayer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,733.00

This dissertation examines how 4-year-old children develop patterns of behavior.
Almost half of U.S. children in this age group attend preschool, spending 4-8
hours a day away from their parents. To better understand how children,
teachers, and peers influence early socialization, I will conduct 12 months of
observations both in the classroom and in children?s homes. I ask: (1) How do
children interpret the implicit and explicit socialization messages from adults
and peers? (2) How do children respond to conflicting socialization messages? By
addressing these questions, my work highlights the social and cultural
implications of current policy proposals to extend access to preschool for low-
income children.

This research will build an account of the process of primary socialization.
Primary socialization is a core process in the reproduction of culture and
social inequalities. Yet despite acknowledging that children experience contact
with multiple socializers, previous empirical work focuses in a single domain.
Researchers either examine parents' messages to their children or examine peer
culture as isolated from the adult world. In contrast, this project builds an
empirical account of primary socialization as process happening across multiple
domains and among multiple socializers.I examine the case of Head Start children
at a childcare center in the Madison, Wisconsin area. My observations will be
focused among the 17 children ages 3 and 4 in the Sunshine Room (a pseudonym). I
have selected the Sunshine Room because of its demographic heterogeneity and
because its extended childcare services allow most children spend more than 6
hours each weekday there. I will conduct ethnographic observations in order to
trace the social interactions and the behaviors of individual children over
time. I will conduct in-depth interviews to triangulate my observations with
adults' narratives of their approach to socialization. Altogether this data
collection and analysis will provide information to academics and policy-makers
on the socialization mechanisms and messages communicated between parents and
care providers for young children.