* 1519686
* IBSS: The Levels and Timing of Family and School Influences on Children's Development
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Robert Crosnoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 999,956.00

This interdisciplinary research project will identify the optimal levels and
timing of key aspects of the two most important contexts in children's lives --
their families and their schools -- for the development of children from birth
through their transition to adulthood. The project will draw on and contribute
new fundamental knowledge that bridges a broad range of fields, including
developmental psychology, sociology, demography, sociology of education,
educational psychology, and economics. The project will yield new insights
regarding developmental transitions precipitate continuity or discontinuity in
development across the early life course, with equal emphasis placed on children
who experience continuity in development as on children who experience
discontinuity. By enhancing basic understanding of the complex interactions
among children, their families, their schools, and other contextual factors, the
project will inform the design of interventions to address problems experienced
by some children and more effectively guide the use of public dollars toward the
most efficient times for interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will focus on three ways of characterizing the influence of family and school
contexts on child and youth development: sensitive periods, tipping points, and
transitions. Sensitive periods refer to the times in development that are most
susceptible to contextual influence and are most effective for predicting future
functioning. Tipping points are the levels at which a contextual influence
affects accelerated or diminishing returns. Transitions are major changes in a
context that can affect changes in the individual. The investigators will
analyze data from six national longitudinal datasets that cover multiple stages
of the early life course as well as three experimental datasets that will permit
them to draw stronger conclusions about causal relationships. The team will
implement cutting-edge statistical methods that adhere to the best practices
across disciplines. Throughout the project, the investigators will use the best
available measurements to examine each part of the conceptual model, replicate
models across datasets and cohorts as a means of increasing confidence in
results, leverage state-of-the-art methods to capture the dynamic nature of
individual development, and consider alternative explanations and specifications
in order to increase confidence in causal inferences. This project is supported
through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS)
competition.