* 1519462
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Competitive Intelligence Product for Decision-Making and Training in the Innovation Enterprise
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Uma Kaundinya, Aavishkar LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to build an
automated, smart competitive intelligence product for education, training and
decision-making in academic innovation management. Currently, $40b- $60b of tax
payer dollars is spent in academic research. Yet, 80% of inventions that arise
from this investment in academic research do not impact society as product(s) or
revenue. The key deficiencies of current processes include, costly and time-
consuming decision-making, and lack of training, education and work-flow. This
ultimately has resulted in lack of best practices in academic innovation
management. This project would result in products that would educate and cross-
train inventors and invention managers, would produce automated and appropriate
decisions for every invention and would streamline workflow, thus defining best-
practices for the industry. This project would have several positive impacts,
including lowering costs and increasing business partnerships for academic
inventions. Such increase in business partnerships would increase products and
revenue. Thus, as a result of this project, the potential of dormant inventions
would be realized, which would in-turn creates jobs and fuel reinvestment into
the innovation economy. Thus the product would leverage the billions invested in
academic research.

This project proposes to build a product for automated invention management and
decision-making. The decision-making is empowered by information or data
aggregated from disparate sources in several domains as well as by assimilation
of personnel insights. This is accomplished by the design that allows collection
of data from several sources in multiple domains and providing the most relevant
data to the user in the context of the invention. The mathematical modeling used
to develop the decision-making technology is based on objective criteria rather
than on subjective criteria. The product resulting from this project will be
hosted in the cloud with unique access points to several layers of users. The
user-interfaces and the analytical output will be customized to the type of
user. Moreover, the design accommodates multiple users at the different layers
and will serve as a web-portal for collaboration. The overall goal of the
research project is to provide an automated innovation decision-making product
that is customizable to suit the risk profiles of different academic innovation
centers. The goal of the Phase I project is to build a proof-of-concept product
that can undergo testing.