* 1519544
* SBIR Phase I:  Blending Real and Virtual Worlds in Chemistry Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Zane Everett, IS3D LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will determine the feasibility of an innovation aimed
at enhancing student learning in hands-on science experiments. Currently, US
students' poor performance in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
disciplines is limiting their career options. The aim of this project is to
provide students the best possible opportunity to succeed in high school science
courses so that they may pursue rewarding, well-paid, careers in STEM fields. To
that end, this project will develop technologies that will seamlessly blend
hands-on experiments with virtual worlds that engage students by giving
laboratory activities a real world context. These virtual worlds will immerse
students in environments wherein they can develop and hone critical thinking
skills. The design of this blended reality approach is based on foundational
theories of learning and engagement. By testing the innovation in high schools,
this project will determine whether a blended reality approach is a feasible way
to meet the growing demand that schools move from content-based to skills-based
instruction. In doing so, this product will improve student learning and deliver
a skilled workforce to industries that require STEM expertise and are vital
components of the US economy.

The project will develop technologies that will transform traditional hands-on
science experiments through integration of virtual worlds that place science
concepts of experiments in real-world context. By engaging students in authentic
inquiry and enabling students to act like real scientists, the new technologies
will scaffold the learning experience such that students can practice critical
thinking skills. As students progress, their performance at each stage will be
sent to their teachers in real time. This allows teachers to immediately
identify difficulty students may have with a specific science concept or skill.
The feasibility of the product will be tested in high schools to determine
whether this new approach engages students in their learning, and whether the
new technologies help teachers meet their goals of increasing critical thinking
during hands-on experiments. Critical thinking will be increased by emphasizing
the scientific method where the product will enable students to acquire
requisite knowledge, collect data, analyze and interpret data, form and test a
hypothesis, refine the hypothesis, if needed, according to collected data, and
communicate their findings. By blending real and virtual worlds, students will
be able to visualize the inner-workings of an experiment so as to engender more
accurate and sophisticated understanding.