* 1519125
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Filipino Military Service & The Promise of Benefits
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Katrina King, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 12/31/2016
* USD 11,991.00

The PI's analyze the benefits promised to Filipino veterans as a case to explore
how race and nation were constructed through empire and war. They analyze the
period between 1934 and 1947 -- a time when the U.S., having already promised
independence to the Philippines, recruited Filipinos in World War II. In
exchange for their service, the U.S. promised citizenship and military benefits.
But in 1946 the United States revoked this promise. No other national group was
denied benefits. By focusing on this puzzling period of war and decolonization,
the PI's explore how the competing interests of the state manifest in policies
toward Filipinos. The overarching research questions are, (1) what was the logic
organizing these polices? (2) how did government officials deploy the category
of "active military service" in revoking military benefits from Filipinos? And
(3) how did they invoke the concepts of race and nation in making these
decisions?

To answer these questions, the PI's examine historical records from the National
Archives in College Park, MD and from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential
Library in Hyde Park, NY. By collecting data from multiple institutions, the
PI's explore how various state agencies, President Roosevelt, his advisors, and
and Filipino elites decided to grant and revoke military benefits and
citizenship to Filipino non-citizen veterans and no other national group. The
PI's explore different explanations for exclusion and examine them against one
another. A multi-agency analysis gives the project additional leverage for
understanding the contradictory and complicated logics of exclusion within the
state. The project increases our understanding in the contemporary context of
what inclusion and exclusion means in a rapidly diversifying society like the
United States.