* 1519782
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Macromolecular Corrosion Inhibitors Based on Renewable Resources for Biolubricants and Lubricants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Ashok Cholli, Polnox Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to help protect the environment by replacing
existing toxic and environmentally-hazardous corrosion inhibitors used as
lubricant additives with more environmentally-friendly alternatives. Release of
lubricants (for example from loss during use, improper disposal of waste
lubricants, accidental spillage, or off-shore drilling) has the potential to
cause damage to the environment. Awareness of the toxic nature of current
lubricant additives is a driver to develop new technologies for environmentally
friendly products. This project addresses the development of novel,
environmentally friendly corrosion inhibitor lubricant additives. Besides the
environmental benefits of the new technology, the lubricant industry also
benefit by expansion into environmentally sensitive lubricant market sectors
(for example, marine lubricants used on ships) through the use of safe and non-
toxic additives. The new products also utilize non-petroleum based raw materials
from renewable and sustainable resources, thus reducing dependence on petroleum.
Apart from being non-toxic and environmentally friendly, the proposed products
are also expected to be more effective inhibitors as compared to the products
currently used in the market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase
I research project are to design and develop environmentally friendly, corrosion
inhibitors providing high performance while meeting the eco-toxicological
requirements of environmentally acceptable lubricants (EAL), including bio-
lubricants. The use of corrosion inhibitors in lubricants is essential to
protect metal surfaces. Unfortunately, many commercial corrosion inhibitors
present issues with aquatic toxicity, persistence in the environment, and/or
bioaccumulation that render them unacceptable for use in EAL or bio-lubricants.
Awareness of the eco-toxicological problems of current inhibitors and the
implementation of new regulations mandating the use of EAL in certain
applications (e.g. marine lubricants) has created an urgent need in the market
to replace existing products and the opportunity to develop new technologies for
corrosion inhibition. The proposed Phase I project work includes design of
product candidates using renewable raw materials based on the Company?s
proprietary product concept, synthesis on a laboratory scale, characterization
using standard analytical methods, preliminary assessment of eco-toxicological
properties using structure activity relationship (SAR) calculations, performance
testing in bio-lubricants, and design optimization based on the results. The
expected outcome of Phase I is the selection of one or more candidates for
commercial development in Phase II.