* 1519339
* IUSE/PFE: RED: Additive Innovation: An Educational Ecosystem of Making and Risk Taking
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Jennifer Bekki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,993,593.00

The Polytechnic School at Arizona State University focuses on the education
ecosystem that empowers faculty to be agents of change in the way that they
teach engineering courses -- with a special focus on the four year project
sequence, the 2nd and 3rd year engineering fundamentals courses, and the upper
division concentration area disciplinary courses. The project takes a systems
and community building perspective on how to sustain a mindset of risk-taking,
making and innovation to instill creative confidence in students and faculty.
The project approaches this challenge by attending to the larger ecosystem
within which innovation happens, and by using evidence-based methods to make
continuous teaching and learning advances within the engineering program. The
specific objectives of this project are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Characterize
the ecosystem within the Polytechnic School to establish the foundation for
enacting innovation across the faculty, impacting students and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;2. Realize a mindset of additive innovation in the
students and faculty to promote sharing, scaling, sustainability, and
propagation of unique understandings within the community.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Establish an understanding of the engineering program culture and dynamics to
assess the catalysts and barriers to establishing a culture that is risk
seeking.&lt;br/&gt;4. Identify and implement administrative structures to
support cultural change and remove perceived barriers that may inhibit such
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages several pedagogical
innovations from the project team's prior research. For example, making is
integrated into the curriculum; the Lean Launchpad methodology is implemented to
characterize the engineering educational ecosystem; and previously
tested/refined engineering education research methods are implemented,
particularly as it relates to the project team's expertise on faculty
development, in order to contribute knowledge on advancing engineering faculty
teaching practices. By taking an entrepreneurial approach and using a rapid and
iterative process of customer/user/stakeholder discovery, the project captures
influencers and potential barriers of the ecosystem that contribute to, or
inhibit impact of the proposed work. This research provides guidance for how to
establish administrative structures that lead to supporting faculty as change
agents, and how embracing a mindset of making and risk-taking can lead to
desired professional competencies in engineering students. Characterizing the
ecosystem within which change happens serves as a model for other engineering
programs that strive to excel in their educational enterprise. The leadership
team is disseminating all aspects of this project using an additive innovation
philosophy so that others can modify and improve innovations for their own
context. The longer-term impacts of creating a culture that values risk taking
and making include attracting a new kind of student to the field of engineering.
In particular, students who seek out career options in which they can make a
positive impact on the world or on their specific community may not have
traditionally considered engineering but now may consider it as a career choice.
By changing the conversation from having an impact to having the agency to make
an impact, the project aims to engender a measurable increase in student
interest and persistence.