* 1519198
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Oncologists and Patients Understand the Cancer Experience
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Laura Rogers, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 03/31/2017
* USD 5,602.00

According to the American Cancer Society, nearly half of all U.S. citizens will
be diagnosed with some form of cancer in their lifetime. In 2012, approximately
40% of all new diagnoses for women were for breast or gynecological cancers, and
30% of all new diagnoses for men were for prostate or testicular cancer. Those
diagnosed often need extensive treatment, which can result in the loss of
function or removal entirely of gendered/sexed body parts (for example,
impotency or infertility or the surgical removal of breasts or testicles). This
disruption of the gendered body that cancer patients face provides a unique
space to examine the salience of gender in everyday life. I argue that when
people's bodies are altered, they must find new ways to experience and
understand them. This dissertation examines how cancer and treatment of the
disease can challenge or reinforce cultural scripts that define the gendered
body. While cancer and its various forms of treatment can be understood as
disruptive, their effects on the gendered body have been neglected in academic
study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to access medical discourse surrounding
gender and the body, I interview male and female oncologists, knowing that their
position gives them the distinctive authority to prescribe solutions to the
gendered concerns of their patients. In addition, I interview men and women who
have been diagnosed with prostate, testicular, breast and gynecological cancer
to find out how they view the changes to their gendered body and subsequent
changes to self and identity from undergoing treatment. Policy recommendations
are generally made based on studies focused solely on the experiences of women
with breast cancer. Knowing this, it is essential to study the experience of
male and female patients with various forms of cancer, in order to improve
patient care overall. This dissertation also promises to make significant
empirical insights to improve cancer care and will provide noteworthy
contributions to the sociology of gender, gender studies, sociology of the body,
and cultural and medical sociology.