* 1519623
* The International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) International Project Office (IPO)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Megan Melamed, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project supports the International Project Office (IPO) of the
International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) Project, currently a core
project under the umbrella of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme
(IGBP) and co-sponsored by the international Commission on Atmospheric
Composition and Global Pollution (iCACGP). IGAC was formed in 1990 to address
growing international concern over rapid changes observed in the Earth's
atmosphere. IGAC's mission is to foster atmospheric chemistry research towards a
sustainable world.

IGAC's priorities and activities are determined and guided by an international
volunteer Scientific Steering Committee (SSC) that includes representatives from
16 different countries around the world. The main responsibility of the IGAC
International Project Office's (IPO) is to implement these priorities in
collaboration with SSC members and other members of the international
atmospheric chemistry community. The role of the IGAC Project Office is two-
fold. Its first responsibility is to provide intellectual leadership and create
networks that lead to the coordination of atmospheric chemistry research at an
international level. IGAC's second responsibility is to act as a liaison between
the atmospheric chemistry community and global change and sustainability
community.

Support for the IGAC International Project Office provides the broader impact of
building scientific capacity around the globe. For developing country
scientists, IGAC fosters the creation of a strong cohesive community of
atmospheric scientists in under-represented regions of the world and also
connects the scientists to the larger IGAC community in order to foster
international collaborations. IGAC also works to communicate atmospheric
chemistry research effectively to the international atmospheric chemistry
community and to the wider global change and sustainability community, including
stakeholders, policy makers and the public.