* 1519411
* RAPID:   Networked Knowledge and Preparedness for Ebola
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Wesley Shrum, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 90,000.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator and
his team will collect data to further understanding of how cultural and
political contexts shape the ways people respond to epidemics. They will conduct
300 interviews, most of which will be video-taped for public engagement and
wider distribution. The results of this project will provide guidance for policy
makers and others seeking to understand the diversity of fears, risk
perceptions, preparedness, and acceptable actions. The Ebola epidemic is not
likely to end soon, nor will it be the last infectious virus of global
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
primary goal of this project is the immediate collection of perishable data on
seven important social groups in five countries that are significant for the
recent epidemic in West Africa. The data will be used to contribute to our
understanding of networked knowledge, transmission mechanisms for both disease
and information, and perceptions of risk and acceptable actions in response to
the recent emergence of the virus in West Africa and the United States. The
research team will collect qualitative baseline information on seven groups
consisting of approximately 300 interviews. The interviewees are to be selected
for their importance to for providing insights about the transmission and
treatment of disease, and of information about the disease. They include medical
professionals, teachers, youth, the informal sector, and the unemployed. The
data will be collected in three African locations (Ghana, Guinea, and Mali)
including rural communities, and in two US locations (Baton Rouge, LA, and
Minneapolis, MN)