* 1519110
* The evolutionary biology of telomeres
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Christopher Kuzawa, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2018
* USD 352,712.00

In the U.S. and many other countries people are increasingly putting off
starting families until later in life. Correspondingly there is growing concern
about the effects of mothers' and fathers' ages on the biology of their
offspring. This research examines an important genetic marker of aging, telomere
length, that is thought to be influenced by paternal age. Telomeres are DNA that
cap the ends of chromosomes, and that shorten with cell replication, oxidative
stress, and age. Contrary to other findings, older paternal age might have
positive influences on telomere length that promote offspring longevity. This
proposal will collect family tree histories and measure telomere lengths in
order to better discern whether paternal age actually influences telomere
length, and whether this effect persists across generations (e.g. whether
grandfather's age or great-grandfather's age at reproduction influences
descendants' telomere lengths). Additionally this proposal will examine whether
telomere length influences early life immune function in addition to aging.
These investigations will therefore contribute to the larger understanding of
the evolution of human life history. Broader impacts include the production of a
valuable shared dataset that will be relevant to human biologists and public
health researchers, and integration of the project analysis and data into
student training, mentoring and curricula.

Models for the evolution of senescence assume that when individuals reproduce at
advanced ages, selection will favor increased maintenance effort and a
corresponding slowing of senescence. Inter-specific comparisons and selection
experiments in model organisms have demonstrated that lower mortality/later ages
of reproduction are associated with lifespan extension, broadly supporting these
theoretical expectations. While natural selection operating on gene frequencies
is assumed to form the basis of much of this variation, recent work in telomere
biology provides evidence for a mechanism of intergenerational plasticity that
could lead to rapid changes in maintenance effort in response to shifts in
reproductive scheduling. Telomere shortening places limits on cell division, and
is thought to contribute to impairment of cell proliferation-dependent traits
such as immunity and tissue repair, and thereby to accelerate senescence. Unlike
the telomere length (TL) attrition that occurs with age in most tissues, sperm
are the only cell type in which TL increases with age. Because telomeres are
DNA, any lengthening of sperm TL due to delayed reproduction should be passed on
to offspring with high fidelity, leading to the hypothesis that multi-
generational secular trends towards older paternal age at conception (PAC) will
result in cumulative and rapid lengthening of inherited TL. Although PAC in any
one generation will vary due to birth order and other factors, the cumulative
multi-generational character of the PAC effect could lead to a more stable, and
thus reliable, indicator of age at reproduction in recent ancestors--thus
providing a useful signal from which to calibrate patterns of resource
allocation that influence the pace of aging. Recent pilot data demonstrated this
cumulative PAC effect across two generations living in Cebu, the Philippines.
However, it remains unclear how many generations the PAC effect on TL persists,
and thus, how deep and integrative the historical demographic signal conveyed
via TL is. This project will therefore 1) examine the intergenerational
stability of the PAC effect on descendants' TL across four generations; 2)
characterize the sex-specific heritability patterns of TL; and 3) assess
possible fitness impacts of inherited TL as reflected in early life infectious
disease related morbidity and mortality.