* 1519520
* SBIR Phase I:  High performance magnetic labels for more accurate quantification of biomolecules in complex samples
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kevin Hagedorn, Life Magnetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 178,750.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make more medical tests available at
distributed testing facilities like clinics and pharmacies at a lower cost. To
accomplish this, this project seeks to develop labels for biomolecules and cells
which can be accurately quantified in complex environments which will benefit
several types of diagnostic tests. lateral flow assays, for example, possess
many desirable traits including fast results, a long shelf life, minimal
training, and low cost, but lack sufficient sensitivity for some applications
because the tags are embedded in a dense paper-like material that distorts
optical and electronic signals. Magnetic detection, in contrast, is insensitive
to biological materials and the plastics. This project seeks to develop magnetic
tags which are more than an order of magnitude easier to detect with magnetic
sensors. The objective is to create a precise and sensitive system for detection
which operates equally well in any media or sample conditions. The feasibility
of the product will be demonstrated by fabricating these magnetic labels and
implementing them in existing tests and demonstrating more than an order of
magnitude improved sensitivity as compared to existing
labels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to improve
quantification of biomolecules in complex samples by providing a line of
magnetic labels which are more than an order of magnitude easier to detect with
magnetic sensors. Optical and electronic labels are both sensitive methods for
detection but can be limited by the sample media. Optical detection is affected
by scattering, autofluorescence, and sample geometry. Electronic detection is
sensitive to sample pH and ionic strength. Magnetic detection is insensitive to
the media, biological samples, and even the container. This is particularly
relevant to lateral flow assays, the most common point-of-care test, where
labels are buried in a paper-like material. Physics simulations have been used
to identify a class of magnetic labels which should be more than an order of
magnitude easier to count with magnetic sensors but will require new
manufacturing processes. Work on this project will involve developing new
tooling to manufacture this tag, measuring the magnetic properties of the
produced label and comparing to theory, and working with medical device
manufacturers to test this label in existing devices.