* 1519221
* Collaborative Research: Electromagnetic Induction in Geological Formations: A Careful Evaluation of the Subdiffusion Perspective
* GEO,EAR
* 08/10/2014,05/31/2017
* Chester Weiss, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,834.00

Team 1 Proposal Number: 09-43598 Principal Investigator: Weiss, Chester;
540-231-3651; cjweiss@vt.edu Institution: Virginia Tech

Team 2 Proposal Number: 09-43589 Principal Investigator: Everett, Mark;
979-862-2129; everett@geo.tamu.edu Institution: Texas A&M

Title: Electromagnetic Induction in Geological Formations: A Careful Evaluation
of the Subdiffusion Perspective

ABSTRACT

While controlled-source electromagnetic geophysics has been often hailed as a
potential breakthrough technology for subsurface hydrology, the current reality
is that hydrogeologists often experience severe difficulties in interpreting
electromagnetic data. In simple cases, where the electrical properties of the
subsurface are reasonably approximated by a smooth or piecewise-constant
distribution, classical geophysical methods of low-frequency electromagnetic
induction are useful in constraining our knowledge of the hydrologic system.
However, in cases where the setting is more complicated ? for instance, where
the subsurface is characterized by length-scale-dependent heterogeneity ? the
classical methods of electromagnetic induction must be modified accordingly. A
promising analytic approach uses the historical methods of fractional calculus
to accommodate scale-dependent lithologic complexity in the governing Maxwell
Equations. Through a systematic study of the fractional Maxwell response (FMR)
and corresponding classical electromagnetic simulations of appropriate
complexity, we aim to illuminate geological settings where the FMR is present
and to interpret the FMR in terms of hydrologic parameters such as porosity,
clay content, pore water salinity, fracture density, position of a saline wedge
or contaminant zone, etc. The technical innovation of our current proposal is
based on extending traditional electromagnetic geophysics into new territory
with the development of anomalous diffusion of electromagnetic fields into
scale-dependent geological media. The broad sweep of electromagnetic geophysics,
both traditional and innovative, must however be better communicated to the
hydrological community. Accordingly we plan to utilize the newly developed
virtual institute ?OpenEM.org? as a platform to better engage the hydrologic
community in the application of electromagnetic geophysics.

