* 1519174
* RUI: Experiments with Topological Excitations in Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* David Hall, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 475,000.00

Modern physics is often an exploration of the extreme environments. For example,
the Large Hadron Collider at CERN is a particle accelerator that studies what
happens when protons collide at extremely high energy, briefly generating
conditions that mimic those of the early universe. At the other end of the
energy scale, extremely low-energy collisions (at temperatures only tens of
billionths of a degree above absolute zero) contribute to the phenomenon of
superfluidity, in which a fluid (such as a very dilute gas) flows without any
viscosity. Remarkably, the superfluid gas is itself a pristine "universe,"
hosting its own "particles" that can be analogues of those existing (or expected
to exist) in the cosmos. One example is a particle known as a magnetic monopole,
which has not yet been observed but has recently been simulated in a superfluid.
Creating such particle-like analogues permits scientists to study some of the
properties of anticipated particles in the universe that would otherwise be
completely inaccessible, as their creation would exceed the capabilities of even
the most powerful particle accelerators. The research in this project is devoted
to creation and study of several particle-like structures, including direct
analogues of monopoles and more exotic structures known as "knots" and "merons."
As simulations, they promise additional insight into the fundamental physical
processes of our universe; but they are also of interest in their own right as
examples of new and, in many cases, completely unexplored physics. The research
program also provides training opportunities for highly motivated
undergraduates, a postdoctoral researcher, and a secondary school teacher, with
whom we will engage and motivate the next generation of scientists and citizens.

Topological structures are central to diverse branches of physics at many
different energy and length scales, including cosmology, particle physics, and
condensed-matter physics. Superfluids, such as Bose-Einstein condensates,
provide new and exciting opportunities to examine these structures in highly-
controlled environments. Notably, the complexity of the order parameter
describing the superfluid determines what kind of topological excitations it can
support. Here, researchers will examine experimentally several aspects of these
topological excitations, including quantized vortex dynamics in scalar
condensates (total spin F=0) at nonzero temperature, creation of vortex
molecules (or "meron pairs") in pseudospinor condensates (effective spin F=1/2),
and linked field configurations in quantum fields (or "knots") in spinor
condensates (spin F=1). The excitations will be imprinted by exposing the
condensate to time-dependent magnetic and optical fields, and will subsequently
be analyzed through examination of atomic density profiles using established
imaging techniques. Subsequent studies will study their dynamics and
interactions, developing new imaging techniques as required.