* 1519438
* Revolutionizing Roles to Reimagine Integrated Systems of Engineering Formation
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Anthony Maciejewski, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,988,663.00

The current engineering educational system fails in two fundamentally critical
ways. First, students who have the desire and aptitude to become accomplished
and productive engineers are abandoning the discipline in startling numbers.
Second, students who graduate are frequently not prepared for the realities of
their chosen profession and are switching careers at alarming rates. A team of
educators at Colorado State University propose a new organizational model that
looks at the undergraduate electrical and computer engineering (ECE) degree as
an integrated system, breaking down the barriers inherent in higher education
structures and implementing novel pedagogical approaches that allow students of
all backgrounds to see the utility of their knowledge and connections to
professional practice. At the pedagogical level, the new approach combines rigor
and flexibility in engineering education to improve student efficacy and content
knowledge integration through building communities of learning and practice. At
the organizational level, the transformational approach aims to energize faculty
to collaboratively weave important knowledge and application threads throughout
the curriculum, while utilizing a new learning model that connects disparate
anchoring concepts. Whether demonstrating the relevance of content through
research, labs, or hands-on projects, the ECE faculty will work as a
multifaceted team, ensuring that every educational component gives consideration
to the big picture, while simultaneously instilling a deep knowledge of the
discipline. Colorado State's approach is expected to reverse the attrition trend
in engineering education and fill the engineering pathway with motivated
students of diverse backgrounds. These students will have the mastery of
fundamental engineering knowledge, while being ready and excited to apply their
knowledge to real-world applications. The pedagogical and organizational
innovations provide a broad framework for transformative and sustainable changes
in engineering departments, which are necessary to produce professional
engineers of the future. Moreover, the approach builds a community of
universities, community colleges, and industry partners for wide participation
of effective teaching and learning. CSU's approach will propel a new engineering
workforce that generates superior ideas, products, and services, ultimately
contributing to the nation's economic vitality and global competitiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colorado State's proposed model incorporates
transformative innovation in engineering education that yields an inclusive
environment that is characterized by rigor and flexibility. The new approach
utilizes learning studios with modules that build on the concept of
"nanocourses" and emphasizes knowledge integration - which is a learning model
that is well grounded in pedagogy and supported by education research. CSU's
efforts will span the entire undergraduate electrical and computer engineering
experience, with special attention to the critical technical core of the middle
two years. While area-specific learning modules have been in existence for
years, such modules are usually supplements to the core curriculum and do not
typically cover fundamental subjects vital to comprehending abstract topics; nor
do they stitch together anchoring concepts to lay the groundwork for real-world
applications. Key to the new approach is its: latitudinal knowledge integration,
which will be used to link fundamental concepts and illustrate the utility of
topics using applications students are familiar with (e.g., the smartphone,
digital camera, and high-speed internet), consonant with research
recommendations from the cognitive sciences. Furthermore, the pedagogical
innovation of the new approach is accompanied by organizational redefinition of
roles within an engineering department - based on established behavioral science
principles coupled with rigorous evaluations and research methods specifically
developed for this project. The research findings will advance theoretical
development of engineering education and organizational development frameworks,
while also providing practical case-study examples of change interventions for
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education. Furthermore,
successful porting of organizational science principles to higher education may
provide validity evidence that higher education can be compared to other
organizations, such as those found in private industry.