* 1519704
* I-Corps:  Career Advancement for STEM Faculty through Summer Writing Retreats and Online Communities
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Loretta Moore, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Women of color in STEM disciplines at HBCUs often have a series of needs which,
when met, have a positive impact on professional development and career
advancement. Such faculty teach 3-4 courses per semester at a minority serving
institution (or primarily undergraduate institution), or are a minority within
their department and, therefore, tend to have high student advising/mentoring
demands; or are early career faculty who may have difficulty negotiating the
competing demands of teaching, service, and research. They may even be mid-
career faculty who are seeking to develop a steady track record of contribution
to the discipline; and faculty who need coaching to navigate the campus climate
while maintaining a solid record of research and make progress toward tenure and
promotion. Currently, these needs are not being met fully at most institutions.
When they are partially met it is through faculty development efforts that are
often not discipline specific or are through an individual scholar's search for
a career mentor or collaborator who may or may not be in the scholar's field of
study. The overall purpose of this proposal is to provide summer writing
retreats with online intellectual community follow-up services to the higher
education community to increase scholarly productivity and career advancement of
women of color in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
disciplines while also being applicable to diverse scholars in other
disciplines, especially those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building from the knowledge gained from a
previously funded research project, this team proposes to explore the
feasibility of commercializing the following scholarly productivity resources:
(1) a one week, in-residence Summer Writing Retreat; (2) a nine-week online
service featuring access to accountability coaches and STEM consultants to
facilitate completion of the summer writing project; and (3) an online academic
year follow-up resource which includes expanded access to scholarly writing
productivity tools such as peer writing groups, facilitated career advancement
discussion groups, research and scholarly agenda planning tools, daily writing
plans, and peer productivity partners. The products provided will increase the
scholarly productivity of individual faculty consumers while also supporting
institutional consumers in the acquisition of a heightened awareness of the
types of coaching, accountability, and collaboration that are necessary to
recruit, retain, and support other underrepresented populations in their
advancement in STEM academic careers.