* 1519900
* EAGER: Elucidating Rhizobial Interactions and the Possibility of Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation in Non-nodulating Legume Gleditsia Triacanthos L.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Gyaneshwar Prasad, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2019
* USD 292,133.00

Nitrogen (N) is one of the most limiting nutrients for the growth of many plants
though it is abundant in the atmosphere. Modern agriculture depends upon
chemical N fertilizers that cause extensive environmental damage and are not
sustainable. In contrast to the majority of crops, legumes (such as soybean,
bean, lentils, alfalfa) form symbiotic associations with soil bacteria,
resulting in the formation of nodules in which the bacteria accumulate in high
numbers and fix atmospheric N for the plant. Because of N-fixing ability,
legumes play an important role in sustainability in both agricultural and
natural environments. However, many tree legumes do not form nodules and are
thus considered non-N fixing. Many non-nodulating legumes are important
components of various ecological systems and are increasingly being used for
land reclamation and as biofuel crops. Increased understanding of the mechanisms
by which non-nodulating legumes obtain their nitrogen will be crucial in
improving the utilization of these legumes in nutrient-poor soils. The project
will provide opportunities to undergraduate students and a post-doctoral fellow
to train in both microbial and plant biology, especially as they relate to
plant-microbial interactions. The benefits of research on microbial symbioses
will also be emphasized in the urban agriculture initiative at UW Milwaukee.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legumes are by far the largest contributors of
biologically fixed N2 to pristine environments. Although nodulation is often
considered to be a distinguishing characteristic of legumes, a large number of
species are not known to nodulate. Non-nodulating legumes live in the same
native environments as their nodulating 'cousins' and yet have the same in
planta N concentrations. Very little , however, is known about the mechanisms of
N-acquisition in non-nodulated legumes. This project will explore the hypothesis
that non-nodulating legume honey locust (Gleditsia triacanthos L.) possesses the
potential for symbiotic N2 fixation with rhizobia. Preliminary data from the
investigator's laboratory shows the presence of nodule-like structures on the
roots of G. triacanthos that contained rhizobia. This project will (i) Elucidate
the extent and mechanism of rhizobial colonization in G. triacanthos, (ii)
Determine the response of G. triacanthos to rhizobial infection and (iii)
Determine the potential of N2-fixation in the G. triacanthos-rhizobial
association. In the long term, the results of this project could pave the way to
improve N nutrition of non-legumes, including cereal crops that do not form
N-fixing symbiosis.