* 1519702
* SBIR Phase I:  Convection Battery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Donald Dornbusch, Homeland Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes significant advances in societal goals
on energy security, sustainability, low cost energy, and reduced greenhouse gas
emissions. The convection battery is a systemic approach to improve the way
normal (not flow) battery chemistries are used in large systems (&gt;2 kWh).
This technology will make batteries lower cost and lower weight. Specific
examples of how this technology can achieve these goals include: a) reducing the
cost of a battery pack for an electric vehicle from $10,000 to $2,000, b)
reducing the cost of using wind power by up to $0.05 per kWh, and c) lowering
the cost of remote power system used on farms and regions without an electrical
power grid. From a commercial perspective, the proposed technology will better
enable several important industries such as wind power, electric vehicles, solar
power, storage of grid electricity, and electrical power systems for remote
locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact/commercial potential of
this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes
significant advances in societal goals on energy security, sustainability, low
cost energy, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions. The convection battery is a
systemic approach to improve the way normal (not flow) battery chemistries are
used in large systems (&gt;2 kWh). This technology will make batteries lower
cost and lower weight. Specific examples of how this technology can achieve
these goals include: a) reducing the cost of a battery pack for an electric
vehicle from $10,000 to $2,000, b) reducing the cost of using wind power by up
to $0.05 per kWh, and c) lowering the cost of remote power system used on farms
and regions without an electrical power grid. From a commercial perspective, the
proposed technology will better enable several important industries such as wind
power, electric vehicles, solar power, storage of grid electricity, and
electrical power systems for remote locations.