* 1519353
* Theoretical Physics: LHC, Gravity, Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Marc Kamionkowski, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Marc Kamionkowski and
David E. Kaplan at Johns Hopkins University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
particle physics is to understand the fundamental laws of physics and the rules
that govern the behavior of all physical systems in the Universe. The
traditional avenues for progress in this endeavor have over the past century
been experiments at particle colliders, the most recent such experiment being
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), a major international collaboration with
significant US participation. Another avenue has been to use observations of
astrophysical systems, as well as the Universe as a whole, as a laboratory for
fundamental physics, as these cosmic systems must also obey the laws of physics.
In their research, Professors Kamionkowski and Kaplan aim to develop new
hypotheses about the fundamental laws of physics and to develop analytic tools
to capitalize fully, in our effort to uncover new physical laws, upon the
nation's investment in collider and cosmic experiments. Research on this subject
advances the national interest by promoting the advancement of science in its
most fundamental direction. It also advances the national interest by attracting
young talent to STEM fields and providing them with powerful analytic tools in
order to drive the type of innovation that drives economic progress. This
project will also have broader impacts through the training of graduate students
who will serve as apprentices in the research. Professors Kamionkowski and
Kaplan also intend to be engaged energetically in public education through
public lectures, films and videos, online tools, and popular
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Prof. Kamionkowski will explore
models for dark energy inspired by the string axiverse. These dark-energy models
often involve not only axion-like quintessence fields but also other fields that
may have small but subtle dynamical effects in the early Universe. Prof.
Kamionkowski will explore a suite of techniques based on measurements from the
cosmic microwave background (CMB) and galaxy surveys, as well as assorted
searches for axion-like fields, to search for evidence of these dark-energy
models. Kamionkowski also plans to study new ideas for dark matter. The
implications of these limits for direct and indirect detection and the
implications for CMB fluctuations, CMB spectral distortions, and 21-cm
fluctuations from the dark ages will be explored. Prof. Kaplan plans to explore
new approaches to the hierarchy problem in which a scalar field tunnels between
vacua, thereby exploring a vast range of values for the Higgs mass. The
convergence of the scanning to our Higgs mass is a consequence of a back
reaction due to the scanning of negative as well as positive mass-squared. Prof.
Kaplan will also develop a tree-level model of flavor of the Froggatt-Nielsen
variety which could reproduce the Standard-Model fermion spectrum and would make
predictions for flavor-changing neutral currents at future b-quark factories or
tests of lepton-flavor violation. In addition to the training of students,
numerous Broader Impacts of this project are envisioned. Kaplan will tell
additional stories of particle physics with remnant footage from his recent
film, "Particle Fever"; serve as advisor to several other science films and TV
shows; and prepare a set of brief online physics tutorials. Kamionkowski will
remain active as a public spokesperson for CMB science, do editorial work for
prominent science journals, and serve on several advisory committees. Both
Kamionkowski and Kaplan participate in the Johns Hopkins Quarknet program which
engages Baltimore-area high-school teachers and students in cutting edge
research.