* 1519191
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Federal Policy, Local Dynamics, and National School Lunch Programs
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Helena Lyson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2016
* USD 11,092.00

Skyrocketing childhood obesity rates in the United States have helped fuel
mounting public concern about the health and well being of America's children.
Efforts to address childhood obesity have increasingly targeted improvements to
federal school food programs that provide critical nutrition to hundreds of
thousands of children, including many low-income, minority youth who have been
disproportionately affected by obesity. In particular, the landmark 2010
Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act (HHFKA) marked the first substantial changes to
federal school food policy in recent years, and a growing grassroots farm-to-
school movement has taken hold in cafeterias throughout the country. While
previous research has traced the rich and often controversial history and
development of the nation's school food programs, the time is ripe for in-depth
analysis of school food politics in the aftermath of the groundbreaking changes
to federal policy and increasing local school food reform activism. To this end,
this dissertation explores the varying impact of the 2010 HHFKA on local school
food landscapes and the complex realities of how select school districts are
negotiating the terrain of school food politics in light of childhood obesity
concerns. In doing so, this research contributes to our understanding of how
federal policy affects school food politics on a local level, and how these
dynamics affect subsequent actions and outcomes in the battle against childhood
obesity.

Scholars of policy processes argue that federal policies, like the HHFKA, can
have lasting top-down impacts on a variety of social and political dynamics.
This literature, however, tends to neglect the role of state and local actors in
the implementation of federal policies, and the role of bottom-up grassroots
social change efforts on policy outcomes. Through a mixed methods design, this
dissertation fills this lacuna in the literature by 1) quantitatively examining
how school food programs across the country vary in nature as a result of
differing local contexts in the aftermath of the 2010 federal legislation, and
2) qualitatively exploring the 2010 policy impact on the local landscape of
school food politics through case studies of three California school districts.
Drawing on analyses of national school food data, and fieldwork consisting of
interviews, observations, and archival document research, this research provides
an unprecedented opportunity to expand our knowledge of contemporary school food
dynamics and to contribute comprehensive scientific information to critical
policy discussions surrounding childhood health and nutrition.