* 1519133
* Collaborative Research: Topological Characterization of DNA Organization in Bacteriophages
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2014,08/31/2015
* Javier Arsuaga, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 5,976.00

Macromolecular self-assembly processes are key players in the complex network of
interactions that take place in every organism. In viruses proper self-assembly
of the viral proteins and of the packaged genome determine the formation of an
infective virus. Two critical and interrelated aspects of this pathway that
remain mostly unknown in double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses are the packing
reaction and the subsequent folding of the DNA genome inside the virus. The aim
of this project is to make progress towards a better understanding of such DNA
packing and folding under a condensed condition in general. The long-term goal
of this project is to provide a detailed quantitative description of the DNA
packing and folding processes in dsDNA viruses. There are two specific
objectives in the proposal. The first one is to revisit and improve current
models of DNA folding in bacteriophages. These models of DNA folding will be
tested for knotting using computer simulations. The PIs will determine how
closely the knot distributions they generate match the distributions of knots
observed experimentally in bacteriophage P4. This information will be used to
guide the rejection or modification and improvement of the models. Physical
parameters such as the chain flexibility of these improved models will be
estimated. Resulting models will be validated by the criterion whether they
produce DNA density maps that can be compared to cryoEM data. The second
objective is to reconstruct the DNA folding inside bacteriophage P4 using
topology and stochastic processes. Data from DNA knots observed experimentally
implicates a certain degree of randomness in the DNA packing in bacteriophages.
Starting from a completely random model and using the knot distribution from P4
as a guide, the PIs will develop a model that accounts for the knots observed
experimentally. This model will be compared against models obtained in the first
objective and also against DNA density maps from CryoEM data.

Double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses cause a number of human diseases ranging
from the common cold to certain cancers. If drugs and vaccines are to be
developed to neutralize the effects of these viruses, a better understanding of
the self-assembly pathway through which infective viruses are produced and
replicated is needed. Results obtained in the laboratory have yielded only
partial information. Part of the reason is that because the extreme levels of
condensation to which DNA is subjected during packing and replication, the
behavior of the DNA is difficult to detect experimentally. Furthermore, though
various models of the process of DNA packing have been proposed, none of these
adequately accounts for the experimental data that have been obtained. The PIs
will employ mathematical modeling, using a tool called knot theory, to develop
and test a more refined theory of DNA packing and folding in dsDNA viruses.
Computer simulations based on existing models will be tested against
experimental data obtained on bacteriophage P4 to determine which features of
the models best predict the experimental results. The aim of this work is to
generate a revised model which can more fully account for the experimental data.
This work will advance knowledge of DNA folding and packing in viruses and will
make an important contribution to the study of chromosome structure and
dynamics, leading to a better understanding of biological processes of
replication, transcription, segregation and repair. Additionally, this work will
advance the mathematical and computational theory of random walks under
confinement. Since random walk theory is an important and commonly used tool in
other scientific studies dealing with random string like objects (such as long
polymer chains), this work can potentially benefit other fields of science as
well. Research tools developed through the project will be made freely available
to the scientific community.