* 1519515
* SBIR Phase I:  The Quantum FinFET Innovation to Extend Moore's Law: in silico proof-of-concept and performance validation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Viktor Koldiaev, FinScale Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to address current technology bottlenecks
that are slowing advances in semiconductor manufacturing as conventional planar
and advanced (FinFET) transistor technologies reach physical limits for
scalability. This project seeks to continue Moore's Law and advances the Silicon
metal oxide semiconductor field-effect transistor development using a new device
architecture. This design may enable more power-efficient electronics to advance
high performance computing, computer memory, mobile electronics, and the
emerging Internet-Of-Things applications.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will provide
successful validation of a new metal oxide semiconductor field-effect transistor
(MOSFET) device and manufacturing process can provide a cost-effective proof-of-
concept of the underlying device physics. The general challenge in developing
nanoscale MOSFETs is that device sizes are comparable to some critical quantum
physics material parameters and the channel length is approaching the mean free
path of carriers in silicon. This work seeks to validate the devices using
Technology Computer Aided Design (TCAD) modeling and simulation tools. Design-
of-experiments tables will also be developed to create effective test structures
for fabrication in follow-on work. Two-dimensional quantum screening and other
critical phenomena not properly modeled in TCAD will be corrected using
theoretical methods and experimental data from related research. This project
seeks to provide the scientific basis for optimal, manufacturable three-
dimensional nanoelectronic devices and characterization of the quantum effects
that dominate their operation in the ballistic regime. Phase I will
prove/validate device and processing concepts to motivate the fabrication and
characterization of devices and test structures.