* 1519044
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Political Stability in the Era of Global Capitalism
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Vivek Chibber, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 11,960.00

This project seeks to explain how political stability in the developing world in
the age of global capitalism is achieved. Recent Turkish political history
provides a unique case to test and extend theories on this issue. Between 1989
and 2002, Turkey witnessed 11 consecutive governments. This tumultuous period
ended only when the economic crises of 2000/2001 altered power relations,
resulting in unpopular reforms that led to the election of the Justice and
Development Party. The JDP has maintained its political hegemony since then,
winning consecutive landslide victories over the last 13 years. Why were the
short-lived governments of Turkey's lost decade of the 1990s unable to prevent
the breakup of their respective regimes? How was it possible for the current JDP
to maintain its rule since 2002? This research hypothesizes that: (1) The
dynamics between the banking sector and the public debt regime systematically
generated conflicts among the ruling elite, inhibiting political parties from
forming viable coalitions during the 1990s, and that (2) the successful
resolutions of these conflicts after the 2001 economic crisis account for the
JDP's ability to bring about stability. With a focus on finance and state-
capital relations, I seek to explore an overlooked, but potentially significant,
factor shaping political arrangements.

This project employs a qualitative research methodology, based on a detailed
within-case comparative historical-sociological analysis. The project uses two
research strategies that are widely used by sociologists: an extensive
historical investigation of archived materials produced by selected state
institutions and private organizations, and semi-structured in-depth interviews
with political and economic elites in Turkey. Combining these two primary
sources, I aim not only to understand micro-level dynamics of political
stability by scrutinizing incentives behind how elites reach (or fail to reach)
consensus under given economic constraints and political pressures, but also to
discover larger structural and institutional forces underlying political
decision-making processes at the state level. Therefore, this research will
produce reproducible, generalizable and falsifiable results since the findings
and claims can be tested against ?matching? (positive or negative) historically
situated and/or counter-factual cases. The project's analysis of how finance
shapes electoral politics and governing institutions can potentially offer
generalizable policy suggestions concerning developmental issues and democratic
governance practices.