* 1519124
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Population Neuroscience Approaches to Minority Discrimination and Health
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Elizabeth Straley, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2017
* USD 11,997.00

This project examines the relationship between perceiving/experiencing
discrimination and mental and physical health outcomes. Research in diverse
populations suggests that discrimination creates cumulative health effects over
time. Moreover, research on stress and stigma indicates that some populations
are at particularly high risk for developing mental disorders, suicidality,
self-harm, and substance dependence, especially those in 18-24 age range. This
project will advance scientists? understanding of how discriminatory social
interactions impact mental and physical health at a critical time in the life
course, with an emphasis on how social interactions produce neurological changes
in our brains.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The project employs social neuroscience
design principles, combining survey methodology with experiments and
neurophysiological measurements. Using Respondent Driven Sampling (RDS), a
representative sample of college-age students will be recruited to participate
in a survey that focuses on discrimination experiences, mental and physical
health and behaviors, and social support networks. As a case in point, the
sample will include individuals who identify as lesbian gay, or bisexual (LGB)
and demographically matched heterosexual students. From this larger sample, a
subsample will be drawn to participate in the second phase in which
participants? brain responses to experimental tasks will be measured using
electroencephalography (EEG) to capture neural event-related potentials (ERP) in
response to target-locked stimuli that simulate ostracism. By focusing on
health-related behaviors, self-reported mental health, and neurologically-based
biomarkers known to correlate with mental and physical health outcomes, this
study will advance scientists? understanding of the ways social interactions and
constructs impact health through their impact on our brains.