* 1519618
* SBIR Phase I:  Mobile Games Teaching Rational Number Operations Through Estimation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Dana Pagar, Teachley, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR phase I project offers a unique approach to teaching the difficult
content of operating with fractions through estimation. Extensive cognitive
science research shows the importance of estimating on children's sense-making,
especially within the often counter-intuitive topic of fractions operations.
Research also shows that estimating fractional numbers is highly predictive of
future success in mathematics, and early intervention in this area improves
long-term outcomes. This project aims to improve children's understanding of
arithmetic by focusing on estimation. Unlike other apps, which typically end
with just a score, this project will provide rich, actionable insight to help
teachers screen and monitor students' progress over time, thereby improving
teachers' instruction as well as student learning. Closely aligning with NSF?s
mission of improving mathematics education for all children, this project fills
an essential need in the marketplace for research-based, engaging software that
correlates highly with long-term academic outcomes. This software will be
designed especially for children with special needs and will meet the criteria
for RTI screening and interventions, further increasing its commercial value for
the school market and its potential to generate income.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to develop a prototype of a game
focused on the addition and subtraction of fractions through estimation, which
will encourage sense-making and bolster conceptual understanding. The app will
also provide data reporting to teachers to help them tailor instruction and
target interventions. Extracting actionable insight from children's gameplay
rather than from standardized assessments, is a novel innovation that has the
potential to dramatically change how kids learn. The development process will
include wire-framing the gameplay and developing app components and features.
The initial data architecture will involve a concept map of student learning
behaviors mapped onto teacher actions for classroom intervention. The
corresponding data structure will collect and store data during Phase I in
preparation for further analysis and reporting during Phase II. The project will
involve front-end component testing and follow an iterative design process,
observing student interactions with the software, making revisions and debugging
where appropriate. This project's research will include both informal design
research and components testing as well as a small learning study, a close
observation of 15-20 students with mathematics learning difficulties, exploring
the effects of using the fractions software on 5th graders' procedural and
conceptual knowledge of adding fractions.