* 1519048
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: Social Interaction As Determined Through Spatial And Technological Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Izumi Shimada, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 25,185.00

Kayeleigh Sharp of the Southern Illinois University together with an American
and Peruvian colleagues will undertake research to elucidate the nature of
relationships between two populations that coexisted in time and space on the
north coast of Peru. Previous studies have suggested various possible scenarios,
from the dominance of one entity which forced the other into a subordinate
social position, to the possibility that two ethnically distinct populations
each maintained social and political autonomy over time. How would the nature of
such interrelationships manifest in visible material culture including style of
their artifacts? What social mechanisms might have enabled such long-standing
coexistence? These questions are relevant to contemporary global issues of
social asymmetry and ethnic interrelationships. Their investigation will include
the exploration of various analytical perspectives and lines of evidence, with
emphasis on the social, cultural and situational factors that influence
organization and location of activities and choices people make in manufacturing
and using artifacts, or technological choices. Archaeology is well positioned to
study material culture, particularly ceramics, and analyze how people created
and organized in space their quotidian activities by means of qualitative and
quantitative methods of analysis. Their daily practices will elucidate how these
two populations saw themselves and inform on their relationships to each other.
Integrated spatial analyses that explore patterned differences in the
archaeological record, will yield better understanding of the physical
dimensions of their social interrelationships and coexistence.

Researchers will examine how technological choices and activity patterns are
related spatially, and explore how the relationship between people and things
contributed to the formation of archaeological identities and social
interrelationships. The research will be conducted in the residential sector of
the first-millennium Songoy-Cojal site situated in the mid-Za√±a Valley, which is
accessible to some of the north coast's most important monumental tombs and
urban centers. In this small valley, coexisting Gallinazo and Mochica artifacts
present the opportunity to study various types of social interrelationships that
were in place. The researcher and her team consisting of one American and a
small number of Peruvian archaeologists from a local university will undertake
the in-depth study of rural households to elucidate the nature of relationships
in this understudied region. At present, no in-depth effort of this kind has
been put forth to resolve long-standing debates. With the integration of
established methods borrowed from computer science and geographical information
sciences, these interdisciplinary datasets will increase understanding of
Gallinazo and Mochica coexistence. This work constitutes a major departure from
traditional studies that long relied on funerary and stylistic data. As an
alternative to such traditional types of technological and activity analysis,
the investigation will make a significant contribution to the analytical toolkit
for studying social asymmetries and the axes of social differentiation in
archaeological contexts.