* 1519660
* Expanding Collaborative Opportunities for Research in Archaeo-Geomatics and Archaeo-Geophysics at CAST
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* W. Frederick Limp, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 277,264.00

The University of Arkansas' Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies (CAST) has
been selected by the National Science Foundation to continue to serve as a
national center for innovative geospatial research and methods in archaeology
through the Spatial Archaeometry Research Collaborations (SPARC) Program. The
SPARC program began in August 2013 with a grant from the NSF Archaeometry
Program, and aims to expand the use of spatial analysis, 3D and geophysical
remote sensing technologies in archaeological research projects around the
world. The availability and sophistication of these technologies and methods has
begun to profoundly affect how archaeologists and other scholars work. The
things archaeologists study - from artifacts to sites to landscapes - almost
always have a spatial component and for many decades space has been viewed as
one of the central dimensions of archaeological study. The capabilities of
geospatial technologies to enhance the discovery and interpretation not only
offers new data, but also creates entirely novel means of engaging with the
archaeological record. Through the SPARC Program high impact projects seeking to
engage with geospatial technologies and methods are selected on the basis of
peer reviewed applications. Technical experts and research staff at CAST
actively collaborate with the selected projects, providing access to equipment,
methodological and domain expertise, and intensive training.

Established in 2013 to promote the effective application of advanced geospatial
methods the Program's goal is to: enhance the research productivity of
archaeological projects by making geospatial technologies available to
researchers who would not otherwise have access to the tools or skills needed to
collect and analyze these data; directly generate high value archaeological data
by participating in fieldwork and analytical projects to efficiently collect and
analyze geospatial data; provide training opportunities for students and
professionals seeking to use geospatial techniques in their own research;
promote the development of new geospatial methods and applications in
archaeology and the visibility of these innovations in the broader
archaeological community; and support good practice and promote innovation in
archiving and publication of digital geospatial data. The new support from the
NSF Archaeometry program will allow SPARC to continue building a program that is
increasingly visible - attracting top research projects; efficient - as project
staff build on their experience; high impact - as pilot projects build skills in
research teams around the world; and innovative - with broader collaborations
leading to significant methodological advancements.