* 1519186
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Within-Group Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Arthur Alderson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 11,881.00

The growth of income inequality has fast become one of the central concerns of
American society. While this growth has renewed scholarly and popular interest
in the causes and consequences of inequality, the nature of inequality growth
presents a challenge to social scientists and policy makers. A central component
of this contemporary upswing is within-group inequality, or inequality of wages
and income occurring among individuals and households who are otherwise similar
on those characteristics which social scientists typically study, such as sex,
race, educational attainment, household composition, and job characteristics.
This project examines the growth of within-group income inequality by
incorporating structural and temporal characteristics of the individual life
course and the social context into within-group inequality analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation will help identify mechanisms
influencing the growth of within-group inequality as well as critically examine
previous explanations of within-group inequality using three levels of analysis:
the individual level by examining life course trajectories, the country level by
comparing within-group inequality between the United States and other rich
western countries, and the meso (middle) level by examining within-group
inequality in relation to characteristics of local labor markets. Statistical
analysis will be conducted using three high quality datasets: the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics, the Luxembourg Income Study, and US Census microdata in
conjunction with multiple secondary sources of contextual data. The project also
will use state-of-the-art statistical methodological techniques to test
hypotheses including heteroscedastic regression models, repeated measures
multilevel models, and growth trajectory models. Results will provide a critical
assessment of existing theories of within-group inequality. This dissertation
will also extend the study of within-group inequality toward a longitudinal and
multilevel framework, allowing for the incorporation of macrosociological
theories into the study of within-group inequality. The project will not only
provide theoretical and methodological contributions for social scientists, but
also will provide broader high-quality information for policy makers as well.