* 1519668
* SBIR Phase I:  Regenerable Adsorbent Filter for Water Purification
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kalavathi Narayan, Amriton LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to offer a low cost solution to purify water for
reuse applications with higher effectiveness and superior performance than
currently available technologies. The global water scarcity, including some
parts of the US such as southwest, has led to a strong need for efficient
technologies to treat wastewater for direct or indirect potable reuse. Current
technologies such as carbon filters and chemical oxidation, have limited
efficiency and are expensive for the removal of trace organic contaminants from
wastewater for water reuse. To address this unfulfilled need, this project seeks
to develop a low cost, reusable filter unit for water purification to remove and
destroy hazardous organic contaminants. No secondary waste products or harmful
byproducts will be produced in the purified water. The proposed technology is
expected to be used by entities conducting industrial wastewater and groundwater
treatment, and wastewater utilities that have a focus on water reuse.

The objective of this Phase I research project is to develop this low cost,
reusable filter technology for water treatment. Specifically, the project will
evaluate and demonstrate: (1) long term stability and performance of the new
filter media involving a novel coated sand adsorbent (2) the non-
biodegradability of the filter material, and (3) the robustness of the
regeneration process. The work will confirm the stability of this new adsorbent
media for multiple (>100) regeneration cycles. The project will also seek to
demonstrate the stability of the adsorbent from bacterial attacks and if
necessary, develop methods to prevent biodegradation. Applicability of the
adsorbent to treat industrial wastewater, municipal wastewater and groundwater
will be tested, and pretreatment steps will be identified if needed. The
limitation of the technology with regard to certain specific organics will be
determined. The following contaminants, at trace levels, are the initial target
of this technology: 17beta-estradiol (representative of estrogenic hormones);
bisphenol-A (used in plastics); ibuprofen, mepbromate and iopromide
(pharmaceutical); and atrazine (pesticide).