* 1519784
* SBIR Phase I:  Design and validation of a novel skin-contacting electrode to provide pelvic floor toning for treatment of female stress urinary incontinence
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Gloria Kolb, Elidah, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the expedited development of a novel
non?]surgical medical device and therapeutic treatment for the approximately 1
in 3 women over the age of 30 who suffer from urinary incontinence, two thirds
of whom, in part due to notable deficiencies of available solutions, elect to
live without treatment while their symptoms progressively worsen. Urinary
incontinence, although a very private concern, has far?]reaching physical,
psychological, social, and economic implications. For example, urinary
incontinence has been found to reduce health-related quality of life measures on
par with depression, incontinence is the number one reason for admittance into
nursing homes, and the annual cost to the US healthcare system is estimated at
$25 billion. Through design and validation activities this project will
demonstrate the functionality of a wearable device that provides discreet,
comfortable, easy?]to?]use therapy for female stress urinary incontinence. The
technological understanding gained through this work lays the groundwork for
subsequent development of a commercially viable, FDA cleared product that will
enhance the lives of tens of millions of American
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project provides a new
framework for wearable therapeutics by enabling the patient to treat
incontinence via discreet surface electrical stimulation without interruption to
daily activity. Current non?]surgical care often involves electrical stimulation
via intravaginal probe, a treatment most woman are not willing to adopt or
maintain. The goal of this project is to demonstrate the ability of a contiguous
array of cutaneous electrodes placed proximate the perineal tissue to deliver
sufficient electrical muscle stimulation to promote pelvic floor toning, and
further to maintain this efficacy under conditions associated with continuous
wear. Building on a successful proof?]of?]concept prototype, multiple candidate
designs will be developed, fabricated and validated using benchtop models.
Testing will explore challenges with maintaining electrode?]skin contact during
patient mobility and effective management of bodily fluids (i.e. leakage).
Throughout the project, increasingly complex models will be utilized, concluding
with assessment in human cadaveric tissue. The project is expected to identify a
preferred candidate electrode design suitable for future evaluation in a human
clinical study, FDA clearance and product commercialization.