* 1519745
* SBIR Phase I:  Compact High efficiency Multilevel Motor Drive
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* David Leach, LCDrives Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be in enabling a new class of smaller, more
efficient, and cheaper motor drives to be built. Since the motors use 43% - 46%
of the world's electricity, any improvement in efficiency has the potential to
have one of the greatest impacts on overall electrical energy efficiency due to
the shear amount of power this application uses. Motors using this technology
will be variable speed enabling energy saving opportunities in many
applications. A decade ago, there was a push for integrated drive and motor
products, but this failed, at least in all but the smallest motors. The primary
reasons were the drive was more expensive and often larger than the motor itself
in high power applications. This created a situation where it did not make
technical or commercial sense to integrate the drive and the motor. Since that
point the cost and size of the drives has reduced significantly, but the
opportunity for widespread integration cannot be realized until significant
additional size and cost reduction is achieved. This proposal will show a path
that this integration works for many applications in the 40-1000kW size range.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project includes a new
approach to multilevel motor drives. This multilevel technology has not found
commercial applications in lower power, lower voltage (&lt;1000V) applications,
with traditional two level inverters dominating the market. This is driven by
the abundance of established designs as well as the simplification and
robustness of control. As control and semiconductor size and costs continue to
reduce, the size and cost of these devices are dominated by filters and
thermally driven packaging. With the advances in low size and cost digital
control it now becomes possible to implement multilevel technologies at lower
voltage and power levels. This implementation in a regenerative configuration
will dramatically reduce the filter requirements as well as improve efficiency
in both the drive and the motor. The efficiency improvement in conjunction with
distributing the switch heat more widely will allow smaller more compact thermal
solutions. Therefore, this approach will dramatically reduce the size and cost
of the largest and most costly items at the expense of increasing the size and
cost of the smallest and lowest cost items. This program will develop
methodologies and designs that can achieve power densities that are 5-10 times
higher than commercially available.