* 1519879
* SBIR Phase I:  Security and Privacy: Passwords for Real People
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Jacob Abbott, Neurocrypt
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable individuals and businesses to
create and manage the plethora of passwords required by today's information
infrastructure. The National Cyber Leap Year initiative identified the need to
change the game in cybersecurity, increasing costs for attackers and easing the
burdens of self-defense. A broader impact of the proposal is changing the game
in favor of defenders, against password guessing or masquerade attacks. The
company's technology builds on the human strengths of linguistic diversity and
contextual memory to solve the core challenges of passwords: lack of entropy,
reuse, and lack of contextualization. People are asked to create passwords
without thinking of the domain name, the purpose, the word "password", or the
keyboard in front of them. Thus people cannot secure their accounts. The high
potential of commercial payback is the protection of personal and commercial
assets. Aligning human behaviors and incentives is a promising approach in
designing technologies to address social engineering - a problem that has proven
intractable in the face of current education, awareness, and technological
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project offers a system that aligns human cognitive behavior with
technological requirements for security by engaging episodic memory. Today when
creating a password, people are presented with the requirements to create a
random phrase, not to write it down, not to reuse it, not to forget it, and not
use any available cues in this task. In short, it is not humanly possible to
create and remember strong, complex passwords. The approach being developed in
this project combines four innovative features. First, it is aligned with -
instead of in opposition to - natural cognitive processes. Second, the very
process of using photos to offer more randomness in passwords enables the
creation of a visual cue that is linked to a specific password and site. Third,
the technology's connection between that cue and the password makes identifying
phishing easier for the targeted person, because uncued recall is more difficult
than cued recall. Fourth, the creation of a domain-specific image that must be
obtained from a domain-specific server to cue the recall requires phishing
become a man in the middle attack. This increases attack difficulty and
decreases difficulty of detection.