* 1519251
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Process for the Manufacture of Iodine-131 for Medical Use
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Jeff Driscoll, SHINE Medical Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 149,743.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) project is to provide a domestic manufacturing source
of the critical medical isotope Iodine-131 (I-131). I-131 is the primary
therapeutic for several malignancies and is a key element of several new cancer
treatment medicines. Despite its highly attractive features, manufacturing a
high-specific activity I-131 product in conformance with strict pharmacopeial
requirements is extremely challenging; the high specific activity product is
only made by fissioning actinides, such as uranium. This route, although more
complicated than the neutron irradiation of tellurium, produces a more favorable
product in terms of ease of use and efficacy. SHINE Medical Technologies, Inc.
is working on a highly innovative, fissioning technology for manufacturing
manufacture several important medical isotopes here in the U.S. Due to the
transitory nature of medical isotopes, they have no meaningful shelf life and
cannot be stockpiled. Having a domestic supplier is critical to supply and
logistics issues. Alleviating such supply concerns will considerably reduce the
health risk to patients who rely on these beneficial healthcare products. With
manufacturing located in the U.S., SHINE could create a number of high-
technology, well-paying jobs for the economy of Wisconsin.

The objectives of this Phase I research project are to better understand and,
thus, control the oxidation state of iodine in an aqueous homogeneous nuclear
irradiation vessel so that it may be extracted and purified for medical use.
Iodine has a rich chemistry, particularly in an aqueous system and which is
subjected to considerable irradiation by alpha, beta, gamma and x radiation.
Without controlling its oxidation state, we cannot control its chemical
speciation and, therefore, its extraction and purification from the irradiated
aqueous solution. Extraction of the radioiodine is greatly complicated by the
need to preserve efforts to extract the more valuable Mo-99 and eliminate impact
on other safety and environmental concerns of the chemical plant (corrosion
control, waste management, etc.) Accomplishing these goals will allow SHINE to
become a domestic manufacturer of I-131 (as well as other medical isotopes)
relieving supply issues and risks for patients and healthcare providers.