* 1519056
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Determinants of Distress, Burnout, and Program Attrition Among Students of Color on the Premedical Track
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Matthew Grace, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 9,984.00

Although Hispanics and Blacks make up 17% and 13% of the U.S. population,
members of these groups comprised only 9% and 7% of medical school enrollees in
2013, respectively. While a portion of this trend can be attributed to recent
declines in affirmative action programs across a number of states, it has also
been suggested that the potential pool of minority applicants is diminished due
to academic and interpersonal experiences on college campuses that ultimately
discourage these students from pursuing careers in medicine. This study
interrogates how cumulative changes in social resources (social support, social
networks, and network-related material resources) at both the interpersonal and
institutional level influence students' experiences of psychological distress
and burnout, and contribute to racial and ethnic disparities in premedical
attrition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing research on the trajectories of
premedical students of color has relied on cross-sectional survey data and
institutional records limited to cursory information on students'
sociodemographic characteristics, SAT scores, and grades in required coursework.
Despite the utility of this information for examining academic trajectories,
these data are insufficient for understanding how interpersonal and social
structural factors contribute to leaks in the premedical pipeline. In order to
identify where this drop off occurs and why it happens, the proposed research
addresses previous methodological constraints by employing a longitudinal survey
design, in tandem with in-depth interviews, to create a fuller understanding of
the dynamic and complex social processes that shape premedical retention. This
research holds the promise of addressing inequities in educational opportunities
that pose serious consequences for projected healthcare shortages in the United
States. Given the consistent finding that underrepresented minority group
members who go on to medical school are significantly more likely than their
peers to practice in underserved inner-city areas, these educational disparities
have direct consequences for projected shortages in medical care.