* 1519518
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a biological barcode-based method for improved food traceability
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Antonios Zografos, DNATREK, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide a rapid method to identify the source of
contaminated produce. In 2011, the CDC estimated that in the USA 3,000 deaths
are caused each year due to foodborne illness. The total annual cost to the U.S.
economy, including recalls and other costs exceeds $70 billion. The ability to
rapidly and accurately trace the origin of contaminated food is critical because
it allows the implementation of targeted measures to prevent recurrences, and
also reduces the need for massive and costly recalls that are otherwise
necessary to protect public health. In addition, economically motivated food
adulteration and fraud are becoming very serious problems and the annual cost to
the global food industry is estimated to be $15 billion. In many cases,
detection of fraud or adulteration is either impossible or extremely costly or
time consuming, and, thus, impractical. Food fraud damages the consumers' trust
in the integrity of the food supply and diminishes the ability of producers and
retailers to guarantee the purity and to brand or differentiate their products.
This SBIR Phase I project proposes to establish the feasibility of developing a
biological barcode-based method to rapidly and effectively identify the source
of food, and detect fraud or adulteration of liquid goods. Existing food-tracing
technologies are generally ineffective because traceability information is
printed on the packaging, which is almost always discarded before the product
reaches the consumer. Trace back investigations are cumbersome, very time
consuming and often inconclusive. Advances in bio-engineering have produced a
material that enables the development of a very efficient, effective, and low
cost food tracing system. This offers the opportunity to trace food along
multiple steps in the supply chain, and ultimately to the consumer by applying
the product identification directly on many food products, at a cost
significantly lower than any other method. The goal is to demonstrate the
feasibility of this method by applying biological markers to trace one food item
that has been the cause of outbreaks in recent years. This food will be tracked
through the supply chain to demonstrate stability of the tracers, as well as the
ability to identify the source of co-mingled products from different origins.
This technology also will be used to demonstrate its feasibility for detection
of adulteration of olive oil.