* 1519383
* Meeting Proposal: Microbiomes for Sustainable Agriculture; Asilomar, CA - Summer, 2015
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2017
* Chinmay Soman, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2017
* USD 36,001.00

This workshop will bring together and international group of scientists to
synthesize research knowledge and identify research priorities about the
interactions between plants and their associated microbes. Plants obtain a
variety of benefits from microbes, including nutrient acquisition and
efficiency, disease resistance, and stress tolerance. However, the microbes
studied constitute a miniscule fraction of the diversity associated with plants.
New molecular and computational tools now make it practical to conduct
comprehensive, inquiry-based studies of plant-associated microbiomes. Improving
our understanding of microbiomes and optimizing them for domesticated crop
plants is expected to greatly enhance sustainability in agricultural systems. To
ensure that the outcomes of the meeting will be broadly used, it will include
scientists from the U.S., Europe, Africa, Asia, and South America, and
representatives of non-profit and governmental organizations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In the face of challenges posed by climate change and population
growth, the motivation for the proposed meeting is to make rapid progress in our
understanding of the potential contribution of plant-associated microbiomes to
agricultural productivity and sustainability. A focused meeting among leading
experts in a variety of related fields will be uniquely effective in initiating
collaborations that accelerate research on understanding and utilizing plant-
associated microbiomes. The objectives of the proposed meeting are: (i)
synthesize the current state of knowledge, and associated technologies, in crop
plant breeding and crop plant microbiomes; (ii) identify critical research needs
in these areas, set research goals, and identify new collaborations; (iii)
initiate publications to communicate the developed consensus around future
research objectives and priorities and develop new collaborative research
projects.