* 1519737
* SBIR Phase I:  Die Optimization Software for Coextruded Multilayer Plastic Products
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Mahesh Gupta, Plastic Flow, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the reduction in the development time and
cost of the dies employed for coextrusion of multilayer plastic products. The
die optimization software which will be developed in this project will reduce
the lead time for coextrusion die design by at least 50%, resulting in a saving
of $15,500-22,500 for each die design. The die optimization software from this
project will also improve the quality of the coextruded products. Coextruded
plastic products are used in application ranging from automotive parts, housing
and construction, to tubing used during medical operations. Optimized
coextrusion dies will improve the quality of products for all these
applications. The die optimization software will also be used by many
universities for academic research as well as to teach extrusion die design in
their plastics engineering curriculum. This optimization software will also
enhance the scientific understanding of the root cause behind various
complexities encountered in polymer coextrusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is development of a mathematical algorithm
which will be able to optimize the geometry of different types of coextrusion
dies including those used for extrusion of sheets, pipes, and complex profiles.
The main challenge in design of a coextrusion die is to develop a die geometry
which will give a uniform velocity distribution at the die exit and will also
provide the required layer structure in the coextruded product. If exit velocity
is different in different portions as polymer exits the die, the material is
redistributed after it comes out - which can distort the shape of the extruded
product. Coextrusion dies are still mostly designed using a "trial-and-error"
approach. For complex coextrusion dies, this fine-tuning by trial-and-error not
only takes 2 to 3 months to reach the final die design, but also requires highly
experienced engineers and rarely provides an optimum die design. The die
optimization software which will be developed in this project will eliminate
this trial-and-error approach, replacing it with a science-based mathematical
algorithm. To evaluate each die design, this optimization software will use a
recently developed flow simulation software that can accurately predict the
development of layer structure in coextrusion dies along with the post-die
distortion of multilayer coextruded products.