* 1519024
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Affordable Housing and Support Networks in U.S. Cities
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Isaac Martin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 11,843.00

This project will analyze how privately owned affordable housing - the most
prevalent type of project-based subsidized housing in the US - affects low-
income communities. Specifically, it will evaluate affordable housing's effect
on the formation of support networks or groups of individuals who depend on each
other for material, service, and information-based assistance. This project will
compare support network formation in affordable housing with support network
formation in market-rate rental housing. The objective in this comparison is to
identify the characteristics of affordable housing, such as the physical design
of housing complexes and the rules and regulations required for tenancy, which
may influence the formation of support networks among neighbors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comparison will be made using original survey and
interview data collected in a low-income neighborhood in the City of San Diego.
The survey data will be statistically analyzed to identify patterns of support
network formation within and between the two housing environments. The interview
data will then be used to explain the social processes underpinning the patterns
identified in the statistical analysis. The findings will contribute to
sociological theory of housing and social capital while also increasing
knowledge of the US social safety net. This project will help the providers of
affordable housing understand its residents' ability to access resources needed
for daily life and socioeconomic mobility. This project makes available to
affordable housing providers a method of collecting and analyzing data to
evaluate their housing services.