* 1519142
* Chemistry of Atmospheric Aerosols at Pacifichem 2015 Congress Conference in Honolulu, Hawaii; December 15-20, 2015
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Sergey Nizkorodov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2016
* USD 20,300.00

This project supports a symposium entitled "Chemistry of Atmospheric Aerosols"
at the 2015 International Chemical Congress of Pacific Basin Societies
(Pacifichem). The symposium will include a diverse group of presentations in the
form of invited, contributed, and poster presentations. This will be the second
time a symposium devoted to atmospheric aerosols is part of the Pacifichem
program and it will provide a unique opportunity for scientists from different
countries to gather in one place and discuss the cutting edge advances in the
cross-disciplinary areas of aerosol research. The broader impacts of this
project will be the sharing of knowledge about current research on atmospheric
aerosols related to air quality. Air pollution issues in western Pacific Rim
countries are the most apparent examples of the environmental impacts of
atmospheric aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Chemical Society, the
Canadian Society for Chemistry, the Chemical Society of Japan, the New Zealand
Institute of Chemistry, the Royal Australian Chemical Institute, the Korean
Chemical Society, and the Chinese Chemical Society are sponsoring the
conference. The American Chemical Society is the host society for the 2015
Congress. Pacifichem 2015 will be the seventh in the series of successful
cosponsored scientific conferences of Pacific Basin Chemical
Societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry of Atmospheric Aerosols will
consist of five half-day oral sessions, two evening sessions, and one poster
session. The session topics chosen by the organizing committee are: (1) Chemical
composition of atmospheric aerosols, fog and cloud water; (2) Multiphase
reactions of aerosols and environmental surfaces; (3) Optical properties of
atmospheric aerosols; (4) Impact of aerosols on cloud formation; (5) Frontiers
in modeling studies of aerosols; and (6) Frontiers in aerosol analytical
chemistry and spectroscopy.