* 1519933
* SBIR Phase I:  Audio Encyclopedia for Children: Supplementary Science Education Tool
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Marina Ratina, Art & Science Productions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop an audio encyclopedia for children, which
is simultaneously entertaining and educational. Each episode will explore one
science topic in comprehensive detail with the content presented in a dialogue
form. The audio format offers parents two important advantages over video: it is
much less expensive, and it reduces already excessive children's screen
exposure. An innovative dialogue education approach will be adapted for audio
edutainment purposes and optimized through extensive testing. The audio
encyclopedia will be sold through apps and marketed through mobile and social
media. Each episode will be produced in accordance with highest standards in
kids' entertainment, including professional script writing, acting, sound design
and music. Such audio program will target a need for supplementary education in
science and math, and its implementation will improve a fundamental base of
scientific knowledge in young listeners, and boost their interest in research
and discovery.

The educational methodology of this project is based on innovative adaptation of
principles of dialogue education to child learners. Generally, dialogue learning
requires the student to have enough life experience to be able to converse with
the teacher as an equal on a variety of subjects and to be able to relate new
information to his or her present knowledge. In order to allow young children to
experience benefits of such method, this project will simulate the process of
dialogue learning with fictional characters of a student and a teacher. The goal
of Phase I research is to establish feasibility of adaptation of the dialogue
education method to the needs of children. In order to test knowledge
absorption, encyclopedia episodes will run on the mobile application that will
include knowledge evaluation functionality. The pilot episode will contain
various ways of content structuring, dialogue style and sound design in order to
test effectiveness of different approaches for the mastering of predefined
learning objectives. The result of Phase I research will be development of
screenwriting guidelines, creation of database structure for feedback data
collection and evaluation of preliminary testing results of the educational
method.