* 1519938
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Natural Tactile Interaction Across the Internet
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Steven Domenikos, IERION INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable the
creation of new consumer products that incorporate tactile fingertip sensing and
tactile fingertip display, thereby bridging the digital divide and having a
positive impact on society. One application is touch-enabled content sharing,
which will let users download and feel objects that are beyond the reach of most
people, such as a stone from the moon or a newborn lion cub. The envisioned
technology will also have immediate relevance for consumers by enabling a richer
e-commerce experience, where buyers not only see but also can touch what they
plan to purchase. Other likely commercial impacts are to improve gaming and
virtual reality systems, to add interpersonal touch communication to video chat
applications, and to capture and analyze surface properties for industrial
applications such as remote materials characterization and product inspection.
This project will also provide insights on how currently available consumer
electronic components can be used to enable next-generation computer interfaces
and wearable tactile devices that enable unhindered use of the human
finger.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to enable high quality tactile communication between two
human beings across time and distance, essentially to make it possible to feel
what another person is touching across the digital divide. The research team
will address the essential questions of (1) how to record what the fingertip
feels when touching a broad range of surfaces and (2) how to convincingly
replicate these diverse tactile sensations for another individual to feel. The
intellectual merit of this project lies with the strong research team and the
focus on next generation haptic technologies that combine several different
tactile input data types and output modalities, rather than just a single
sensation type. Specific contributions of this work will include the design of a
wearable sending unit that accurately captures the broad-bandwidth experience of
natural touch-based interactions with real object surfaces and the design of a
stationary receiving unit that re-creates these sensations at the fingertip of
another person. Determining the efficacy of this approach will improve society?s
understanding of the way in which humans process certain types of tactile
signals and will advance scientific knowledge of human tactile interactions.