* 1519412
* IUSE/PFE: RED: An Engineering Education Skunkworks to Spark Departmental Revolution
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Anil Bajaj, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,993,490.00

Higher education institutions strive to improve the opportunities and
preparation they give to students, especially in crucial professional skills
like communication, creativity, and entrepreneurship. Very often, today's
engineering graduates possess exemplary technical skills for analysis and
design, but need further development of professional skills. American
competitiveness, national security, and leadership in innovation are at stake.
This project identifies the academic department as an organization whose
alignment with these goals needs to be improved. The modern imperative to add
value to a mechanical engineering (ME) education -- by focusing more closely on
professional skills -- stimulates critical self-examination of the ME
department. This project connects organizational dynamics to student outcomes,
inspiring changes in curriculum, the student experience, and most importantly
the ways that students, staff, and faculty interact with each other. This is
significant, because it is not currently known how an organizational model
promotes or inhibits development of these professional skills in students. By
remaking the organization to one based upon creativity and trust, using modern
approaches to manage this change, this project orchestrates revolutionary change
in student preparation for engineering careers.

This project engages the tools of engineering education research, ethnography,
social network and content analysis, change management, and a new, experimental
organization to manifest revolutionary change in how students are prepared for
engineering careers. Revolutionary change simply cannot occur until two crucial
facets of an academic organization are addressed: emotion and culture. Faculty,
students, and staff hold deeply personal, emotionally driven beliefs about what
higher education is - and should be. In turn, these beliefs shape the local
culture within ME in both positive and negative ways. This project takes a
systematic approach to revolutionize the ME department at Purdue by focusing on
both engineering education research and culture/change research questions. The
effort will answer critical research questions about engineering education and
appropriate approaches to achieve professional outcomes at large scale. The
vision emphasizes relationships, culture, and communication, along with
undeniable technical prowess, as cornerstones of professional skills. The
Engineering Dean has provided a strong institutional commitment to the project
and its investigating team, which is a unique coalition of experts in
engineering education research, change management, and cultural anthropology of
technical organizations.

The faculty development plan engages Strategic Doing, a modern approach
appropriate for the highly networked (not hierarchical) ME department
organization. The connection to professional practice leverages several
successful, on-going programs in ME for both domestic and international
experiences. Scalability and adaptation are central elements of the faculty
development plan, with special emphasis on assessing professional outcomes - at
scale. Project reliance on research in engineering education is robust, with one
of the members of the PI team holding a joint appointment between the ME
department and Purdue's School of Engineering Education. The project engages a
diverse group of experts in executing the work, and involves a scaling and
adaptation plan that allows the revolution blueprint to be adopted and adapted
by other interested institutions.