* 1519767
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive Radio Frequency Sensors for Catalyst Systems: Enabling Improved Efficiency and Advanced Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Alexander Sappok, Filter Sensing Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will address a currently
unmet market need, namely the development of a platform RF-based sensing
technology for direct measurement, control, and diagnosis of catalyst
performance. If successful, the technology presents a paradigm shift in
emissions measurements and catalyst control. Advanced sensors and controls are
required to enable emissions catalysts to meet strict regulations limiting the
emissions of pollutants from combustion engines to minimize their adverse
environmental and health effects. The proposed FST technology provides a single
solution to address both the requirements for on-board diagnostics and improved
catalyst operation. Driven by these regulations, the market for emissions
sensors is rapidly outpacing the markets for other types of engine and vehicle
sensors. FST?s technology is well-positioned to capitalize on this growth,
providing a robust and much lower-cost alternative to the use of multiple,
expensive, and specialized sensors. This technology is not limited to emissions
measurements, but is applicable to a wide range of industrial and process
control applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research, develop, and apply a novel radio
frequency (RF) sensing method to provide direct, real-time measurements of
chemical processes occurring on catalysts for vehicle applications. Strict
emissions regulations have driven the development of complex emissions control
systems to meet these mandates. Today's new diesel-powered vehicles contain
several different types of catalysts and filters, all monitored by an extensive
sensor network to achieve the required emissions reduction and diagnose system
failures. The current approach utilizes multiple dedicated electrochemical
sensors, each designed to measure a specific emissions component, which adds
considerable cost and complexity to the system. In addition, these sensors
provide only a local measurement of the exhaust gas composition, requiring the
use of on-board predictive models to indirectly estimate the condition or
performance of the catalyst. The proposed RF sensor overcomes these challenges
by monitoring the chemical processes on the catalyst directly. This project will
investigate the feasibility of applying RF sensing for control and diagnostic
applications with a range of catalysts to identify the most promising
applications which will be pursued in Phase II.