* 1519120
* Consequences and Context of Stunting in the Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Susan Tanner, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,398.00

Research in anthropology has provided important insights into the adaptive
nature of human growth, but more research is needed on how human growth may be
shaped by changing local conditions and cultural factors, in order to understand
the impact of early life factors on biological outcomes later in life. If
conditions during early childhood growth are connected to later-life outcomes,
then there should be a relationship between linear growth stunting early in life
(2-5 years of age) and adult body proportions and fatness, as well as later
measures of cardiovascular function (blood pressure) and metabolic rates.
Additionally, this relationship should be particularly visible among groups who
are experiencing lifestyle and nutrition transitions, or concurrent changes in
diet and activity levels. To test these predictions, this project will collect
data on diet, activity levels, household conditions (demographic information,
wealth), and measures of body composition (height, weight, body fat), resting
metabolic rate (a measure of energy use), and blood pressure in youth and adults
from the Tsimane' population, an Amazonian society of farmers and foragers
currently experiencing nutritional and socioeconomic change. Data from this
project, combined with earlier waves of data collection on this population, will
be used for growth curve modeling and statistical analysis to evaluate patterns
of growth during rapid social and cultural change. Further, the results may be
incorporated into disciplines such as developmental biology, pediatrics, as well
as global and indigenous health, and therefore may provide insights into global
nutrition transitions or contribute to understanding metabolic disorders in the
U.S. and globally. The proposed research will contribute to student training,
international collaborations, and science outreach in the research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human growth is fundamentally a biocultural process that
is best understood through a life-history perspective. Life history theory
explicitly grapples with how trade-offs between competing domains, such as
growth, reproduction, and maintenance serve to enhance survival and reproduction
in dynamic environments. Less research has focused explicitly on how growth
patterns may be shaped by local conditions and, by extension, the relationship
between early life growth trajectories and potential trade-offs that may result
in downstream health outcomes. The investigators will collect, from across
thirteen Tsimane' communities, demographic, economic, dietary, and nutritional
information, as well as anthropometric measures of body composition (height,
weight, skinfold measurements) for all participants, physical activity data and
resting metabolic rate on a sub-sample of youth and adults, and blood pressure
for all adults. Combining these data with a large, publically available
longitudinal data set (Tsimane' Amazonian Panel Study) will allow statistical
evaluation of hypotheses that build on the standard models of human growth, but
incorporate measurements of changing socioeconomic and nutritional environments.
Specifically, the hypotheses will evaluate: (1) the relationship between linear
growth stunting early in life (2-5 years of age) and later body proportions and
fatness, (2) the relationship between stunting and later measures of
cardiovascular health (blood pressure) and metabolic rates, and (3) the
relationship between household conditions, reliance on purchased foods, physical
activity levels, and measures of body fatness.