* 1520778
* EAGER: Developing an Application for Assessing Respondent Experiences of Their Surroundings in Real Time
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Lauren Krivo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/28/2018
* USD 51,847.00

Residential segregation is an important reality for different demographic groups
in the United States. Yet we do not know whether such segregation extends to the
places where people go during the course of their daily lives. We also do not
know how everyday travel to different neighborhoods affects individuals and
groups in ways that might increase or diminish segregation. This research seeks
to address these gaps by studying segregation in motion, throughout people?s
daily routine activities in relation to neighborhood experiences. We ask three
fundamental questions: (1) do the areas where people go during the course of
their days vary demographically and by the type of neighborhood where they
live?; (2) do the areas that different social groups go to during their days
vary systematically in terms of their available resources and social diversity?;
and (3) how do people?s experiences of the neighborhoods they go to, including
how welcome they feel and how they perceive access to resources, vary by their
race, ethnicity, economic status, and the type of neighborhood they live in?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, we will implement and evaluate
an app for smartphones to collect "live" information on people's movement and
neighborhood experiences as they happen. We will assess the feasibility of
obtaining immediate explicit and implicit (nonconscious) measures of experiences
in a place using the smartphone app. Pilot data will be collected for a small
set of respondents. We will use these data to develop measures of mobile
segregation and indicators of how people, in the moment, perceive their
surroundings and opportunities in the places they go. Detailed evaluation of the
app, its use in the field, and the ability to gain cooperation with the selected
sample will allow us to determine whether the methods for collecting dynamic
data during the course of everyday social life can be used in larger
representative samples. Using cutting-edge mobile technology to collect such
data will overcome the risk of recall biases in research that uses surveys or
daily diaries to measure how people spend their time and experience their
surroundings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have broad impacts in a
several important ways. Obtaining data on how people explicitly and implicitly
experience the places they visit, and how those experiences encourage or
discourage them from going to certain locales, can help inform policy
interventions that incentivize contact across demographic groups. The open
source smartphone app developed in the course of this research will be shared
with other researchers to advance knowledge on the connections between social,
spatial, and cognitive processes and should have broad application beyond the
specific study of social segregation in daily life.