* 1520926
* OCE-PRF: Metabolic Contributions to Climate Proxies and Untested Assumptions in the Hydrologic and Ecological Applications of Photoautotrophic Lipids
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* NONE NONE, Wolhowe                 Matthew        D
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Understanding how the Earth's hydrologic and carbon cycles will respond to
climatic changes, whether as a result of warming, ocean acidification, or other
trends, is an important charge of the oceanographic and Earth-sciences
communities. Human adaptation to changes in these cycles rests on accurate
prediction of those changes; accurate prediction, in turn, requires an
understanding of the mechanisms involved. One of the best ways to discern these
mechanisms is detailed investigation of past behavior via sedimentary records.
In this project, the fellow will investigate the hydrogen isotopic composition
of algal cell water in order to test important assumptions regarding
environmental proxies currently being developed for such studies of past
climate.

The participation-broadening goals include producing and teaching material
focused on the marine impacts of urban watersheds. This work will occur in
collaboration with the Seattle chapter of MESA, a national organization
dedicated to improving STEM education for economically disadvantaged youth,
under-represented minorities, and women. The sponsoring scientist is Julian
Sachs at the University of Washington College of the Environment.

Unicellular marine or lacustrine photoautotrophs (both algae and photosynthetic
bacteria) have generally been assumed to have internal water pools that are
isotopically identical to that of their growth environment. This has spurred
numerous attempts to develop hydrologic proxies from thehydrogen isotopic
composition of sedimentary lipids produced by these organisms, as these
compounds incorporate hydrogen from the intracellular water pool. It has also
become clear that, in certain settings, the large and variable vital effects
relating water and lipid isotopic compositions (quantified as the net
fractionation factor alpha) potentially record a wealth of ecological
information important for studies of the carbon cycle. The community faces a
challenge in further development of these isotopic proxies, however, as recent
work has suggested that growth or metabolic rate may exert significant controls
on intracellular hydrogen isotopic composition of water. To address this, the
fellow will run a series of experiments to determine the isotopic response of
intracellular water in photoautotrophs to growth. A series of chemostat culture
experiments will be coupled with the novel Kreuzer isotope enrichment technique
employed in previous metabolic water determinations. These experiments are
designed to isolate the effects of cell division, light intensity, salinity, and
growth phase on the hydrogen isotopic composition of the water available for
lipid synthesis, and to determine the degree to which any changes are propagated
into lipids. The proposed work may resolve an important open question regarding
the fidelity of a whole class of promising environmental proxies. The
quantification of isotopic differences between environmental and intracellular
water in photoautotrophs may open new avenues of research for biologists across
many fields, however, as these differences may trace cellular synthesis,
respiration, and water exchange processes.