* 1520197
* SBIR Phase I:  Structural Fuse - Sacrificial Energy Dissipation Mechanism for Structural Application
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Kyle Turner, Structural Fuse
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,830.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project surrounds the
development of a sacrificial energy dissipation mechanism for structural
applications with globally significant commercial potential. The structures that
are the intended initial application for the device represent over $2 billion in
annual shipments per year in the United States alone. However, these structures
exist all over the globe. This device will open up the market for these
structures in regions of high seismicity, where structures of other material
composition currently corner the market. Implementation of this device will also
create significant cost savings in comparison to competing structures, as the
speed of construction is much more rapid, reducing overall construction costs,
especially in low-income regions of the world that experience seismic activity.
The asymmetric axial response concept is unique in the field of structural
engineering and this research offers a novel addition to the existing body of
knowledge.

The intellectual merit of this project centers on a unique concept that will
allow certain types of structures, currently not permitted due to governing
safety codes, to be built in high-seismic regions. The concept is that of
asymmetric axial strength and stiffness, whereby a mechanical device loaded
axially in one direction provides a different response to that of the device
loaded axially in the opposite direction. Although this project's objective is
to develop this concept for a specific application, there exists the potential
for this concept to be developed for additional applications in the future.
Ongoing university research, funded by industry, seeks to find a solution to
this specific seismic design problem, but has not taken the direction that this
project intends to take. The ultimate research objective for this Phase I effort
is to determine a geometric configuration such that the concept can be
physically realized in the form of a working mechanical device. The research
will include finite element modeling and numerical simulations coupled with the
testing of physical prototype specimens through cyclic axial loading sequences.
It is anticipated that a working configuration will be discovered, tested,
modeled, and placed into a full-frame model for additional simulation.