* 1520748
* Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Jeffrey Harvey at the
University of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the recent discovery of the
long-sought Higgs boson, the theoretical framework underlying particle physics
(the so-called "Standard Model" of particle physics) is now complete. However,
there are still many important outstanding questions involving the fundamental
structure of matter and energy and their interactions. These include what sorts
of mathematical structures are needed to combine gravity and quantum mechanics,
as well as the origin of dark matter and dark energy. String theory provides one
possible framework to address these questions. Professor Harvey will pursue two
independent lines of research aimed at addressing these questions. The first
part of this project involves the study of "Little String Theory" - a theory
that has some of the same good features of string theory but is easier to
analyze. The second part of this project involves research in an area of pure
mathematics that has close ties to techniques that grew out of string theory.
This project thus advances the national interest by promoting the progress of
science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. This project will also have significant
broader impacts. The research will involve postdocs, graduate students and even
at times undergraduate students, thus providing critical training for the next
generation of physicists as they start research. The PI will also lecture at
international schools and workshops and also participate in public outreach
events in the Chicago area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the PI will
extend recent work on counting BPS states in Little String Theory to the study
of more general backgrounds with N=2 supersymmetry. He will also continue his
study of non-compact Conformal Field Theories and their connection to mock
modular forms. This work has implications for the study of BPS states in
supersymmetric field theories and to the study of string theory in a variety of
physically interesting settings. A third component of this project involves the
mathematics of some still-mysterious connections between sporadic groups and
various types of modular and mock modular forms. In particular he will extend
work currently in progress by extending techniques of Vertex Operator Algebras.