* 1520563
* SBIR Phase I:  Lithographic Patterning of Multiple Porous Crystalline Thin Films on Working Silicon Devices for Gas Sensing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Steve Yamamoto, Matrix Sensors Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,951.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable a new class of gas sensors for the
consumer market, specifically in wearables, Internet of Things and smartphones.
The technology proposed will sense multiple gases using an inexpensive, compact
device with small power requirement. Traditional sensing technology requires a
separate device for each gas, making wearable or portable devices impractical.
These new devices will be applied in indoor air quality monitoring products such
as thermostats, smart lighting, and surveillance cameras; and indoor and outdoor
air quality monitoring for wearables and smartphones. These are emerging
consumer use cases that could easily exceed 1B units by 2020. The importance of
distributed air quality monitoring has been highlighted by recent reports that
identify indoor pollution as a significant fraction of the overall pollution
exposure for many people. Indoor pollutants vary widely based on the appliances
and ventilation used in a particular home or commercial setting, which
necessitates continuous monitoring in order to address the problem. There is
currently no gas sensor technology capable of delivering this performance with
acceptable cost, size, and power requirement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will build a foundation for
the incorporation of porous crystalline hybrid materials into electronic
devices. Porous crystalline hybrids have emerged in recent years as a highly
attractive class of materials for a host of applications including sensing,
catalysis, gas separation, and low-k dielectric materials. For many of these
applications the materials must be incorporated into an electronic device as a
thin film coating. The techniques for lithographic deposition of these
materials, in particular the operating conditions they can endure after being
deposited, are almost completely unexplored. Deposition of multiple different
porous crystalline hybrids has not been demonstrated. This proposal aims to
overcome these obstacles by identifying conditions for reversible protection of
porous crystalline hybrid materials during subsequent deposition steps. We
anticipate that this work will form the basis for incorporating porous crystals
into devices both for gas sensors and for other applications.