* 1520453
* SBIR Phase I:  Cognitive Radio Small Cell for Pervasive Coverage and Sustained
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Kamil Agi, K&A Wireless, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 148,808.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes three market
segments and domestic/international collaboration in technology development and
engineering training. The first market segment will be to provide first
responders with a way to improve reliability in the communication for incident
management through the deployment of on-the-scene smart self-configurable
communication systems. This is expected to improve first responder reliance on
communications equipment at times of disasters and crisis. The second segment is
to target the proposed small cells to domestic carriers for use by enterprise
customers and consumers to increase capacity and coverage locally. Finally, the
third segment is to provide key spectrum management capability to the deployment
of a 4G/5G system in emerging markets through partnerships. The program will
also enable training programs for graduate students and complex research &amp;
development partnerships with domestic and international partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to develop a cognitive carrier-neutral small cell for mobile
communications. The ability to effectively use wireless spectrum is becoming
more prevalent, and even more of a requirement, as time goes on due to
regulatory issues and spectrum scarcity. However, current communication systems
are not sufficiently spectrum-efficient, which is why there is a land-grab for
spectrum. A critical improvement needed in communication technology to address
spectrum scarcity is smart spectrum reuse. This proposal seeks to develop a
cognitive small cell capable of providing smart reliable coverage, and sustained
data rates to users in the vicinity. The main advantages of this communication
system will be to: 1) Operate as a plug-and-play access point; 2) Provide
carrier neutral 4th generation/5th generation (4G/5G) wireless coverage; 3)
Provide seamless coverage and sustained data rates to mobile users when multiple
cells are deployed in contiguous areas; 4) Operate in multiple bands
simultaneously through bandwidth aggregation; and 5) Offload traffic from the
carrier network through an Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) backhaul.