* 1520807
* STTR Phase I:  Improving Biomanufacturing in Chinese Hampster Ovary Cells Using Structurally Interacting RNA (sxRNA)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Scott Tenenbaum, HocusLocus, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop the technology to power a more efficient
platform for the most common method of production of biological therapeutics,
the Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cell line. Each batch production cycle of a
given therapeutic is large and represents a significant investment and
significant profit, and any methods to increase, even incrementally, the yield
of such a batch would yield great profits. Currently, these cells split their
metabolic energy into producing both the therapeutic, and a protein used to
select for highest producers. The proposed system utilizes the transient
expression of a different kind of selection marker - one that frees significant
metabolic resources to focus solely on the production of the therapeutic once
the selection phase is done. Increasing yields will drive down costs, and make
these treatments available to a wider demographic. The biomanufacturing
companies are searching for new methods to increase product yield, and are ready
to spend significant time and resources to maintain their cutting edge status
and profitability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
develop a selection method to significantly increase CHO cell biotherapeutic
production. Current methods sacrifice yield because the cells must produce the
selectable marker as well as the product, at a heavy burden to the cells. The
proposed technology will use the transient expression of the selectable marker,
glutamine synthase, tightly controlled by and active only in the presence of the
gene of interest (GOI) through our structural interacting RNA (sxRNA)
technology. Once the selection phase is complete, metabolic costs of selectable
marker will cease and metabolic resources will go to GOI production. sxRNA links
the expression of the selectable marker on an ectopic mRNA to a miRNA in the
splicing product during GOI mRNA maturation. Stringency of selection is,
therefore, directly proportional to GOI copy number and production. The plan is
to optimize sxRNA technology through computational and empirical screens, and
use the most suitable candidates in a side-by-side comparison with the
traditional CHO cell glutamine synthetase system. Benchmarks for success will
include assays for gene copy numbers by real-time PCR, and active product yield
versus costs. Long-term stability of the GOI also will be monitored over many
passages following the termination of the selection phase.