* 1520288
* An Automated Technology-Based Personality Classifier
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Samuel Gosling, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 227,795.00

Individuals differ from each other in stable ways that have important
implications for their prosperity, health, and welfare. Personality traits
predict numerous consequential outcomes in the economic, social, and health
domains, such as work performance, relationship quality, and the likelihood of
getting sick. Despite personality's demonstrated importance, the predominant
technology for assessing personality-- "self-report questionnaires"--has
remained virtually unchanged over time. These self-reports are subject to an
array of limitations, such as being disruptive, time consuming, and vulnerable
to memory biases; these limitations potentially undermine the validity of
personality questionnaires. Progress in the field of personality assessment has
been constrained by the fact that the everyday behaviors and language through
which personality is expressed have been challenging to measure directly in the
natural stream of daily life. The few studies that have collected objective
measures of behavior have typically done so on a very limited range of behaviors
or within the artificial confines of a laboratory. However, the advent of
smartphones and their ubiquity in modern life offer the promise of
revolutionizing the field of personality assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
present research will use a smartphone that will automatically and unobtrusively
measure personality as it is expressed in daily life. The app will use embedded
sensors (e.g., accelerometer, light sensor, microphone, GPS) to gather
behavioral (e.g., activity type, sleep patterns, sociability, location) data
from participants. The research will collect data from up to 2000 participants
that is broad-based (many kinds of behavior), fine-grained (many assessments per
hour), longitudinal (many weeks of continuous behavioral data), and context
tagged. These data will have two primary uses. First, they will provide large-
scale objective records of how behavior unfolds in the context of everyday life,
allowing researchers to learn what kinds of behavior tend to co-occur in every
life and what kinds of temporal patterns they follow. Second, the data will be
used to generate an unobtrusive automated method for measuring personality via
smartphones in everyday lives. Using such data, the principal investigator will
determine whether the standard five-factor personality model adequately captures
the structure of real-world behaviors or whether a new bottom-up, empirically
derived revision of personality structure is needed. Methodologically, the
project will yield software, analysis tools, and classifiers that allow
researchers to move beyond their reliance on self-reports and artificially
constrained lab-based proxies of real-world behavior. The study will advance and
validate sensing techniques used to infer complex behaviors (e.g., situations,
conversation contribution) from continuous steams of sensor data, and the
resulting software and analyses tools will be made available for researchers to
use.