* 1520324
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrating the Physical Environment into Remote Collaboration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Steffen Gauglitz, Caugnate
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project results from the potential for the technologies
being developed to incorporate the spatial dimension into video-based
communication tools, allowing people to share their physical spaces with remote
participants, who can then independently explore and annotate these spaces,
providing new opportunities for remote collaboration. The commercial impact of
this innovation is potentially substantial. Such spatial telecollaboration
technologies could find practical use in a wide range of applications, such as
remote repair, training and instruction, disaster/emergency situations, real
estate, and many others. More compelling remote collaboration tools can open up
new opportunities for people to richly experience remote events and to share
personal experiences in a way that audio- and video-based communications cannot
achieve. These telecollaboration capabilities can significantly improve
opportunities for underdeveloped and underserved communities to participate in
location-specific events and activities, including remote medical assessment,
remote learning, and participation in situations where travel is prohibitively
expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project endeavors to build on prior NSF-funded research to develop
compelling, user-centered technologies that support remote collaboration in
contexts where the physical space around the user is important to the
interaction. The research plan focuses on two specific aspects that have not
been addressed in prior work but are important to commercialization of the
technology: initialization of the spatial modeling and handling of dynamic
scenes. The proposal suggests plausible solutions and details plans to explore
individual solutions and combinations for both problems, in order to provide
users with a system that requires minimal additional effort or focus to employ.
The results of the proposed research include a solution path for both of these
key issues and a prototype system that implements remote spatial-based
collaboration without encumbering the users with system-level details, while
allowing them to focus on the tasks at hand.