* 1520308
* IBSS:The Evolution of Social Networks and the Robustness of Human Societies to Population Growth and Environmental Change: A Deep Time Perspective
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Robert Hard, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 998,350.00

This interdisciplinary research project will combine the long-time perspective
of archaeology with perspectives from biology, economics, and demography to
identify reasons why complex human economies often persist but sometimes fail
under conditions of population growth, environmental change, and globalization.
Through mathematical modeling and a case study analysis, the project will
enhance knowledge about the social-ecological contexts that cause some
globalizing systems to experience tipping points and rapid social disruption.
The project also will contribute to understanding how the nature of social
networks evolve over time in heterogeneous environments and how specific
trajectories of evolution may lead to robustness-vulnerability trade-offs under
conditions of population growth and environmental change. New insights regarding
the conditions that led to different outcomes in the past will broaden analytic
perspectives and contribute to sound policy development. The project also will
generate new data about the diversity of the human genome and the evolution of
property rights and informal insurance markets. Students from traditionally
underrepresented groups will be directly involved in conducting research and
analyzing data produced during this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
employs the emerging science of complex systems to understand why some systems
display gradual change and others experience abrupt changes associated with
tipping points. The investigators seek to discover under what conditions the
social networks that link local human economies into a larger, regional economy
successfully cope with environmental change and population growth and under what
conditions such changes generate a domino effect through which the collapse of
one society causes others to collapse. The investigators will evaluate the
specific hypothesis that individuals on the prehistoric Texas Coastal Plain
developed property rights and denser social networks to maintain access to
complementary resources via an informal insurance market, which helped them cope
successfully with population growth and changing environmental conditions over a
6,000-year period. The increasingly dense social networks may have created a
hidden fragility; however, as groups on the Texas Coastal Plain may have become
so interdependent that resource failure in one local area cascaded from society
to society. To test this hypothesis, the investigators will combine bioeconomic
modeling, social network analysis, molecular genetics, and archaeological data.
The results will help elucidate the general design principles of dynamic
networks that are robust over long time scales to population growth and climate
change. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral
and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.