* 1520096
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time Software-based Cooling Optimization for Data Centers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Rajat Ghosh, AdeptDC co.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from development of a thermal
management technology that could save 20% of electricity consumption and
increase equipment life-time by 25% in data centers. In 2013, U.S. data centers
consumed approximately 91 billion kWh of electricity and caused 97 MMT of carbon
pollution. By 2020, the data center annual electricity consumption is projected
to increase roughly to 140 billion kWh and cause 150 MMT carbon pollution.
Inefficient operational energy usage and over-provisioned capacity in data
centers theoretically offer the potential for 40% energy savings. The proposed
technology improves data centers' energy efficiency and capacity utilization and
realizes half of the potential savings. A major barrier to realizing this
savings potential is the risk aversion toward data center downtime that costs
$7,900/min, with 91% data centers experiencing an average 86 min outage per
year. The proposed technology ensures reliability by safeguarding data centers
from downtime due to overheating. This SBIR Phase I project is poised to have a
far-reaching societal impact by implementing green methods in the ubiquitous
information technology and related service industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will demonstrate the feasibility of a software appliance (SA) that addresses
cooling optimization for data centers. Due to time-scale differences between IT
and cooling operations and diversity of interrelated equipment, data center
operators fail to determine reliable cooling set-points in real-time and are
compelled to operate with low IT utilization and over-provisioned cooling. The
company's software appliance determines the most cost-efficient cooling set-
points, that ensure reliable computing operations, in real-time and
automatically implements them through the building management system. Given that
the proposed SA promotes workload-proportional cooling, it avoids wasteful
cooling resource peak provisioning. The development of the proposed SA will
involve the following activities:&lt;br/&gt;- development of a real-time
predictive analytics framework;&lt;br/&gt;- extraction of critical data (e.g. IT
device temperature data) for different workload types and cooling set-points;
and&lt;br/&gt;- transferring optimal cooling set-points to the building
management system to control cooling systems.&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated result
for the project is an SA demonstrating proof-of-concept, and feasibility of the
proposed technology in cooling energy usage reduction and cooling capacity
utilization improvement of data centers.