* 1520690
* High-Resolution Imaging of Material Properties in the Cascadia Subduction Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Daniel Lizarralde, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 10/31/2019
* USD 429,990.00

The Cascadia Subuction Zone offshore of Northern California, Oregon, and
Washington is capable of generating devastating magnitude 9 earthquakes. Since
we have not observed one of these great earthquakes with modern instrumentation,
the seismological community has significant uncertainties about what such an
earthquake will look like in detail. Hazard estimates for this type of
earthquake are very dependent on how far onshore the rupture propagates.
Currently this is best estimated by computer models of the rupture which rely on
matching GPS data to validate the material property distributions that control
the model behavior. This study will use a new, combined onshore-offshore dataset
to investigate the detailed spatial variations in material properties along the
main Cascadia thrust fault. The results will hopefully inform the computer
models of future ruptures and will also provide new data to the entire
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the study is to
understand the distribution of strength on actively deforming faults within the
Cascadia subduction zone. Are the faults that rupture within the downgoing slab
really two orders of magnitude stronger than the immediately adjacent (~5km
away) and locked thrust interface? While we cannot measure stress directly, the
researchers can measure related physical properties that underlie the typically
strength distributions assumed in models of these faults. The primary project
goals are to determine if there is any evidence for a downdip change of fluid
pressure within the immediate (~1km) fault-zone producing thrust interface
seismicity. Leading fault mechanics models typically assume a discontinuity
(&gt;1 order of magnitude change) in effective normal stress at the base of the
locked zone. However, this has not been observationally evaluated at the
resolution need to see the fault-zone or across the locked-creeping boundary
which requires offshore data. They will also examine whether there is any
evidence for pervasive serpentinization within the fault-zones in the mantle of
the subducting Gorda Plate. Both of these types of studies will be made possibly
by the recently deployed, community seismic experiments onshore and offshore in
the Southern Cascadia subduction zone which cover the one region of the Cascadia
thrust interface with abundant microseismicity, and the use of a modern
techniques for determining earthquake locations, seismometer clock corrections
and ambient noise techniques.