* 1520482
* SBIR Phase I:  Additive Manufacturing in Construction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Robert Boyd, Branch Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the availability of an additive
manufacturing (3D printing) process suitable for full-scale building
construction. The construction industry represents a critical nexus in the
American economy. Building construction impacts nearly every economic sector,
particularly manufacturing, transportation, energy, consumer products and
appliances, and real estate. Simply, a building is perhaps the most essential
economic stimulus there is. Yet, the practice of building has seen little of the
technological revolution that has transformed virtually every other industry. As
a result, the construction industry produces significant material and financial
waste, and its productivity has steadily declined over the past several decades.
Additive manufacturing is the most efficient and cost-effective approach to
creating custom products, of which buildings are by far the most valuable and
most widely purchased. Customization is increasingly driving demand by today?s
consumers. Additive manufacturing in construction could reduce costs and
material waste while providing unparalleled design freedom and driving
innovation through the consolidation of many isolated industrial activities into
one highly flexible and efficient manufacturing process, which directly serves
industry professionals and clients at an individual
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project stems from
the vast potential of Additive Manufacturing to transform design and making. In
a broad sense, the proposed method of construction aims to make the complexity,
efficiency, and freedom of digital architectural design accessible to the
average consumer. Phase I research will serve to scale and develop a new large-
scale additive manufacturing process, and to evaluate the performance of the
physical products in their functions as building components. The proposed method
may potentially impact other types of large-scale manufacturing as well,
including aerospace and automotive. Our technology is rooted in observations of
the processes in which forms are created in the natural world. Structures in
nature have long fascinated scientists and engineers, due to their remarkable
efficiency and complex forms. 3D printing now allows us to manufacture products
of similar efficiency and complexity which reflect our observations of nature.
We believe that if the genius of natural organisms can be applied to the way we
create shelter, provide transportation, design infrastructure, or construct
cities, the resulting innovations could profoundly, and very literally, shape
the way our societies develop, and transform our relationship with the natural
world.