* 1520101
* CAREER: Giant Planets in Dusty Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/20/2014,07/31/2019
* Sarah Dodson-Robinson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 07/31/2019
* USD 293,748.00

The influence of dust grains on growing planets and their host disks extends far
beyond providing seed material for planet cores. Grains determine the disk
vertical structure, disk evolution rate, and dominant planet formation
mechanism. The PI and her team will incorporate dust settling and grain growth
into a time-evolving protostellar disk model and use the model to test three
hypotheses relating to the influence of dust on planet formation. First, grain
growth and settling, by lowering the scale height of the protostellar disk, may
restrict planets forming by core accretion to sub-Jupiter masses. Second, grain
growth and settling may trigger gravitational instability in a disk that was
previously stable by increasing the disk's transparency to its own radiation.
Third, olivine grain opacity increases with iron abundance and decreases with
magnesium abundance in the mid-infrared, where the disk radiates heat generated
by viscous turbulence. The dominant planet formation mechanism may depend on the
[Mg/Fe] ratio of the star-disk material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
translate her research on planet formation into educational enrichment for
first-year college students by starting the New Orbits program, a cohort of 20
students each year who will form a learning community centered on planetary
science. The New Orbits program is designed to help incoming students feel
confident in their ability to pursue a career in science. New Orbits students
will attend a weekly seminar with the PI and take astronomy and geology classes
together each semester to fulfill their general science requirement while
learning the basics of planetary science. The capstone of the New Orbits program
will be a yearly field trip to McDonald Observatory to learn about historic and
ongoing planetary research at the 82 inch telescope.