* 1520875
* High-resolution studies of seismicity and scattered wave imaging beneath Mt. St. Helens
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Brandon Schmandt, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2018
* USD 219,999.00

Subduction zone magmatic systems, such as in the Cascades Arc of the
northwestern U.S., underlie potential natural hazards near major cities and are
considered the primary agents of continental crust production. The significance
of these systems on both human and geological time scales merits a greater
understanding of how they function. Seismic imaging of the plumbing structure of
magmatic systems and detection of earthquakes can illuminate active and formerly
active melt pathways and reservoirs. However, the complexity of seismic wave
fields in volcanic regions challenges efforts to map the 3-D structure of magma
plumbing systems as well as efforts to detect, locate, and determine the
mechanisms of the diverse range of earthquakes that occur there. The challenges
largely reflect observational limitations. Typical seismograph networks for
observing volcanoes such as Mt. St. Helens are composed of ~10 long-term
seismographs. This project will analyze data from a short-term, two week,
deployment of 900 seismographs within 12 km of the summit crater of Mt. St.
Helens. The dense seismic data will be used to identify the fine scale spatial
and temporal distribution of micro-seismicity beneath Mt. St. Helens and
determine how that seismicity is linked to the 3-D prevalence of fluids and
cooled intrusions in the crust and uppermost mantle.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to resolve the 3-D magma plumbing beneath Mt. St. Helens with
scattered wave imaging and tomography of the uppermost 10-15 km. A major
component of the project will be testing and advancing methods for automated
detection of mirco-seismicity using continuous data from large numbers of
sensors, each with potentially high noise levels that prevent detection with
single-station methods. Deeper melting and deformation processes will also be
investigated through reflection imaging of the sub-arc Moho and investigation of
the prevalence of deep long period earthquakes in the lower crust. Moho imaging
will exploit both controlled sources and abundant local seismicity. Data
products will be made publicly available, and advancing hybrid active/passive
source 3-D studies with dense seismograph arrays is likely to be valuable for
the seismology community in the near future. The project will support the
training of a graduate student, an undergraduate intern, and a postdoctoral
fellow.