* 1520098
* STTR Phase I: Robotic mobile computer mount and desk for wheelchairs to enhance the educational experiences of students with disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Bradley Duerstock, Prehensile Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 204,136.00

This STTR Phase I project focuses on improving the independence and active
learning experiences for students with mobility impairments in typical
educational environments, including classrooms, libraries, meeting rooms,
laboratories, as well as nontraditional settings, such as breakout spaces and
conference rooms. Student wheelchair users rely on personal computer technology
for accessing assistive technology hardware and software for writing, note and
test taking, drawing, accessing digital information, and communicating. Mobile
computers provide these essential tasks anywhere they need to be allowing them
to be more productive and effective at interacting with their classmates without
disabilities during curricular activities. Unfortunately, being able to
efficiently retrieve and stow mobile computers is difficult for wheelchair
users, particularly for those with upper limb mobility impairments. Current
wheelchair computer mounts do not allow students with disabilities to
independently use them and access their mobile computers wherever they need to
be. The proposed robotic wheelchair platform allows students with disabilities
to access a mobile computer and work surface in order to be as productive and
self-sufficient as everyone else. This universal access to mobile computing
technology allows students with disabilities to more actively participate in
practice-based educational activities, including laboratory research, groups
study sessions, and science fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A robotic wheelchair
mount for a mobile computer and as a writing surface is developed to enable
persons with upper extremity mobility impairments to independently retract and
deploy using a single input. This device allows students with disabilities, such
as those with traumatic brain and spinal cord injury, cerebral palsy, multiple
sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and other conditions, to be able to go
underneath desks and tables when desired, to more naturally interact with
classmates, have the ability to use a mobile computer or desk anywhere they are,
and does not impede transferring in and out of the wheelchair. The design of
this device works seamlessly with power wheelchairs with motorized seats that
tilt in space, have reclining backrests, movable leg rests, and vertically
elevate while not compromising the functions and overall size of the wheelchair.
The versatility of this device in how it mounts and is operated by individuals
with severe disabilities is superior to traditional fixed mounting systems that
require assistance to remove. During this project production-ready devices will
be fabricated for human subject testing to assess usability, functionality,
reliability, safety, and user satisfaction during the performance of typical
educational and daily living activities.