* 1520788
* Pleistocene Paleointensity Record of Aleutian Island Volcanics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Scott Bogue, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 40,739.00

This project is a geologic investigation aimed at furthering our understanding
of the Earth's ancient magnetic field. The PI is working with the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) in Anchorage, Alaska to collect lava flow samples from
Tanaga Island in the Aleutian Island chain. Magnetic experiments on these lavas
will allow the team to recover the strength of the Earth's ancient magnetic
field in Alaska and use that information to evaluate the average behavior of the
geomagnetic field over the last 500 thousand years. Paleomagnetic data (such as
the paleointensity information collected as part of this project) play an
important role in many geologic and geophysical applications, such as:
performing plate tectonic reconstructions, determining the age of rock
formations and timing of tectonic events, and developing models of the Earth's
interior. This project will present the first high-quality paleointensity study
of Alaskan lava flows, and will allow researchers to better understand how the
geomagnetic field behaves at high northern latitudes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective analysis of ancient geomagnetic field structures
requires the collection of global paleomagnetic data that are geographically and
temporally distributed. Most published paleomagnetic data are from mid-
latitudes, with relatively few studies targeting localities at equatorial and
high latitudes (&gt; 50Â°). A search of the online MagIC paleomagnetic database
(http://earthreg.org/MAGIC) shows that only four studies are from Alaska, and
none of them present any paleointensity data. This project will be the first
high-quality paleointensity study in the region. The PI and students will sample
volcanic material from 35 Pleistocene-age lava flows from Tanaga Island. All
lava flows have been dated using 40Ar/39Ar geochronology methods by researchers
with the U.S. Geological Survey. Paleointensity experiments will be conducted on
all lavas, and the results will be compared to other high latitude data sets in
northern and southern hemispheres. Evaluation of our intensity results will
allow for new insights into the long-term regional behavior of the geomagnetic
field in Alaska and the variability of the global field over time.