* 1520684
* Deuterium Excess of Water Vapor in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Xuhui Lee, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 467,517.00

This research explores using water vapor isotope observations for attributing
the sources of water vapor to remote source regions, local influences, and
transport in the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL). The ABL is the lowest ~1 km
of the atmosphere and is a large reservoir of atmospheric water. The ABL water
pool supports convective cloud formation. Condensation in clouds depletes vapor
from the ABL. Entrainment or turbulent diffusion at the top of the ABL,
transports vapor to the upper atmosphere. While both these processes deplete
moisture from the ABL, new vapor enters this layer from land evapotranspiration
and advection of moisture from remote source regions. Understanding how water
moves between the ABL, the land, and the upper atmosphere is essential for
accurate prediction of precipitation processes and for climate modeling.
Deuterium and oxygen-18 are stable isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen. This study
will use "deuterium excess" (d-excess) of water vapor, a measure of the relative
abundance of the deuterium and oxygen-18 isotopes of water, to track the
movement of water among the three pools and to identify contributions of local
land and remote oceanic sources to the ABL vapor. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
fundamental premise of the project is that both remote water sources and local
ABL processes will imprint influences on vapor d-excess, but at very different
time scales. The investigators postulate combined use of the analytical tools
appropriate for these different time scales will unravel local influences from
those originating from water transport from outside of the local domain. The
proposal conceptualizes that the local hydrological cycle is composed of three
pools of water (terrestrial water, vapor in the ABL, and vapor in the free
atmosphere) and that exchanges among these pools will leave distinct signatures
on the d-excess temporal variations. The research methodology consists of data
analyses and ABL modeling. The experimental data are hourly observations made
with laser-based instruments in 11 climate zones in North America and in Asia.
An isotopic land surface model will quantify local evapotranspiration effects on
temporal variations in vapor d-excess. Equilibrium boundary layer calculations
and large-eddy simulations will be used to infer d-excess signal of the vapor in
the free atmosphere and the entrainment influence on the ABL d-excess.
Trajectory analysis will identify contributions from remote source regions. The
project will contribute to capacity-building in isotope hydrology and in
boundary-layer meteorology. Despite the recent explosive growth of laser-based
vapor isotope measurements, current ability to interpret water transport
processes with these measurements remains preliminary. The project could
transform the field from descriptive to quantitative. Hands-on modules, designed
from large-eddy simulation data and a simplified one-dimensional ABL model, will
enhance classroom learning on ABL and isotopic principles. These modules will
form the basis of an open online course on ABL techniques. A new data website
will promote sharing of high-frequency vapor isotope data. As the volume of
laser-based measurement continues to grow, a centralized data depository will
facilitate investigations that transcend disciplinary and geographic boundaries.