* 1520996
* Exploring New Frontiers in Flavor Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Stefan Meinel, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 181,799.00

Particle physics seeks to understand the laws governing the universe at the most
fundamental level. There are indications that our current best formulation of
these laws, the Standard Model, is still incomplete. A promising route to the
discovery of physics beyond the Standard Model is the precision study of decays
of so-called bottom quarks -- elementary particles similar to but much heavier
than the up and down quarks found inside protons and neutrons. In this project,
the properties of several types of bottom quark decays will be calculated. This
involves solving the equations of quantum chromodynamics on a space-time lattice
using supercomputers. The results of these calculations can be compared to
experimental data from the Large Hadron Collider and the future SuperKEKB
Collider to search for signs of new fundamental physics. This project will
provide training to students at the University of Arizona not only in particle
physics, but also in data analysis and in
supercomputing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lattice QCD computations will be performed
for selected decays of bottom hadrons that have a high potential for the
discovery of new physics, and whose theoretical description requires ab-initio
determinations of new types of hadronic matrix elements. The research will focus
on the following three areas: (1) Decays of bottom baryons, (2) Decays of bottom
hadrons with multi-hadron final states, and (3) Long-distance contributions to
flavor-changing neutral-current decays. This project will help understand recent
hints for deviations from the Standard Model, observed by the LHCb experiment in
rare decays of B mesons. It will also address an important puzzle concerning the
smallest element of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa quark mixing matrix.