* 1520808
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure:  Experimental Facility with Large, Mobile Dynamic Shakers for Field Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Patricia Clayton, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2020
* USD 3,760,349.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards research community with
access to research infrastructure that will include earthquake and wind
engineering experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure, computational modeling
and simulation tools, and research data, as well as education and community
outreach activities. NHERI will be comprised of separate awards for a Network
Coordination Office, Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center, and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response
research facility. Awards made for NHERI will contribute to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program. NHERI continues NSF's emphasis on earthquake
engineering research infrastructure previously supported under the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation as part of NEHRP, but
now broadens that support to include wind engineering research infrastructure.
NHERI has the broad goal of supporting research that will improve the resilience
and sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as buildings and other
structures, underground structures, levees, and critical lifelines, against the
natural hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order to minimize loss of
life, damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI resources will be
available on the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NHERI
Experimental Facilities will provide access to their experimental resources,
user services, and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and
education awards. This award will support a NHERI Experimental Facility, located
at the University of Texas at Austin, with large, mobile dynamic shakers and
associated instrumentation for field experimentation. This equipment can be used
to study and develop novel, in-situ testing methods that can be used to
determine in-situ soil properties, evaluate the vulnerability of existing civil
infrastructure, and optimize the design of future infrastructure. These advances
will result in communities that are more resilient to earthquakes and other
natural hazards. While there is a great deal to be learned from small- to large-
scale laboratory testing, there remains the need to field test a wide variety of
infrastructure, as constructed, in its current state. The facility equipment
will fulfill the need for in-situ testing and allow for transformative tools to
be developed in critical areas such as three-dimensional (3D) subsurface imaging
(with applications such as rapid levee evaluation and void/cavity detection) and
non-destructive testing (with applications such as advanced soil liquefaction
evaluation and soil-foundation-structure interaction studies for buildings and
bridges). Progress in these areas will lead the nation to the next frontier of
resilient and sustainable infrastructure, which will benefit society at large
and support continued economic, intellectual, and scientific
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This facility will enable researchers to address
three main challenges to making in-situ testing advancements that, if
accomplished, could transform the ability to rehabilitate and build more
resilient and sustainable communities. These three main challenges are: (1)
significantly improving the accuracy and resolution of shallow-to-deep (greater
than 1000 meters) two-dimensional (2D) and 3D subsurface imaging; (2)
characterizing the nonlinear dynamic response and liquefaction resistance of
complex geomaterials in-situ; and (3) developing rapid, in-situ methods for non-
destructive structural evaluations and for soil-foundation-structure interaction
studies. While more heavily weighted toward addressing earthquake hazards, the
ability to solve these challenges will also affect multi-hazard resiliency. For
example, the challenge of performing rapid 2D and 3D subsurface imaging will
apply directly to prioritizing rehabilitation of the nation's existing levee
systems, many of which are currently not resilient to traditional flooding,
hurricane storm surges, or earthquakes. The next frontier of natural hazards
research ultimately demands that engineers develop practical solutions for
complex problems, which will require testing of civil infrastructure systems
over a wide range of actual field conditions. This in-situ testing can be
accomplished using the large, mobile dynamic shakers and associated
instrumentation of this facility. Furthermore, to develop more resilient and
sustainable communities, it will be essential to engage and cultivate a diverse
and talented group of future engineers who can address the challenges that face
a rapidly growing population supported by aging infrastructure at risk to
natural hazards. This facility will team with K-12 teachers to create age-
appropriate, hazard-centered lesson modules that teach engineering concepts
related to developing a more resilient and sustainable world. This facility will
conduct three user workshops in year one and annual workshops in subsequent
years and will host Research Experiences for Undergraduate students.