* 1520367
* SBIR Phase I:  Avatar-guided system to develop mastery in mathematical problem solving.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* ATTILA MEDL, Mgenuity Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 107,097.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a prototype system that teaches children
how to solve seemingly hopeless mathematical problems. Problems differ from
exercises in that it is not immediately clear how to approach them. They require
hard thinking, not complicated calculations. For example, the system's
intelligent avatar will help students discover a method to calculate the Earth-
Moon distance with nothing more than basic geometry and a lot of thinking and
experimentation. Problems are presented by the avatar in 2D or in captivating 3D
virtual worlds. The joy of (guided) discovery is envisioned to increase
students' interest in math and other STEM disciplines and to significantly
reduce math anxiety. The new rigorous math education standards require strong
problem solving skills from each student including at-risk populations. The
steady increase of student population also puts enormous pressure on schools to
assist the work of their teachers. It is envisioned that the system's unique
advantages over competitive solutions could ultimately make it a "must have" for
the nation's 132,000 schools educating 58 million K-12 students. The project is
expected to contribute to a markedly better math
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important technical innovations of this
project are the emulation of natural-style teacher-student interactions in the
domain of mathematics education, the teaching of proven problem solving
strategies by an expert avatar, and the use of immersive 3D virtual worlds to
help develop deep insight and advanced problem solving skills. The goal of the
Phase I research is to develop a prototype system and scientifically evaluate
its promise to improve students' problem solving skills in grades 6-8 within the
context of the content domains and standards of mathematical practice specified
by the Common Core State Standards. The system's Socratic avatar asks students
purposeful questions in relation to a given problem. Students respond in a
variety of constrained ways: construct written answers by dragging and dropping
words into the right place, or by manipulating objects in the virtual
environment. Student reasoning skills are tested continuously and non-
intrusively during teach the avatar sessions in which roles are reversed and
students demonstrate to a novice avatar how to solve a given problem. This will
reveal a wide range of knowledge gaps in conceptual understanding and the use of
particular mathematical methods. The researchers will analyze students'
improvement in a pretest-posttest control group experiment.