* 1520991
* Advanced Photonic Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Paul Kwiat, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

The nascent field of quantum information promises amazing and important
capabilities, such as ultra-secure encryption, ultra-fast computation, and
ultra-precise metrology. Photons are excellent carriers of quantum information,
having been employed in numerous groundbreaking quantum information processing
experiments. However, although many approaches to realizing a reliable periodic
source of single photons - a critical resource for quantum applications - are
being pursued, to date none operates at a level sufficient for realizing
scalable optical quantum information processing. To date, nearly all experiments
have been limited by inefficient photon-pair sources and detectors.
Consequently, for example, a protocol needing five photons would be the
equivalent of rolling five die and getting a "6" on each one, with the
likelihood of only (1/6)(1/6)(1/6)(1/6)(1/6)= 0.00013. By incorporating time
multiplexing of the photon source - making multiple attempts (~20) until we get
a successful output, the success probability to create five photons is increased
in principle to 88%. Large-scale quantum information processing also requires
highly efficient detectors and high-fidelity photonic circuits. This project
will solve these needs, combining advanced technologies for periodic
single-/multi-photon sources, integrated photonic waveguide circuits, and highly
efficient single-photon detectors. The net result will be a new capability for
optical quantum information processing, greatly exceeding what has been possible
until now.

The realization of an efficient periodic source of indistinguishable photons is
an enabling technology for many quantum information protocols, including one-way
quantum computing, improved quantum cryptography, and quantum metrology. It
would immediately enhance almost all existing quantum communication protocols,
simultaneously increasing the possible rate while reducing the deleterious
effects of multi-photon events. Spontaneous parametric downconversion is well
known as a source of heralded single photons - detecting one of the daughter
photons indicates the presence of the other one. However, the downconversion
process itself is probabilistic, and therefore the resulting single photons are
not on-demand; furthermore, using a brighter pump pulse to increase the
likelihood of producing a pair automatically increases the unwanted probability
of producing more than one pair. By employing temporal multiplexing, allowing
photons created in any one of, e.g., 50 time slots to be mapped onto a single
final time window, the net efficiency for single-photon creation can be greatly
enhanced, while minimizing the likelihood of unwanted multi-photon events. The
benefit becomes even greater when intentionally trying to create states with
many photons: the methods developed here could enable rate enhancements over
five orders of magnitude (and for one experiment up to 12 orders!). A similar
improvement in optical circuitry (with regard to size and stability) is realized
using custom-fabricated waveguides written into low-loss glass. One key feature
of this work is the collaboration with Israeli researcher Yaron Silberberg, who
will develop the required photonic waveguide circuitry, and work with the group
on the final set of applications. The technology of 'integrating' a large number
of waveguides and optics such as beamsplitters and phase shifters into a tiny
glass substrate (approximately cross 5 centimeter area) will provide enhanced
stability and interference between multiple photons. Thus, the unique bi-
national connection in this proposal enables the development and implementation
of sophisticated quantum photonic systems well beyond those that have been
possible to date, until now limited to only a few photons. Combining the new
source with optimized photonic waveguide circuitry, the project will then
investigate several interesting photon-based quantum effects, including
potentially scalable optical quantum logic and quantum walks.