* 1520074
* IBSS: The Impact of Foreign Languages on Problem Solving: An Interdisciplinary Study of Language and Society
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2021
* James Evans, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

Communication in a foreign language has been shown to strongly affect decision
making. As communication and transportation technologies have increasingly
"globalized" the world, more people communicate with one another using languages
other than their native language, whether in business, politics, or casually.
This interdisciplinary research project will use a variety of methods to
evaluate the consequences of using a foreign language on individuals and society
in a range of different domains. The investigators will assess the effects of
foreign languages on strategic risk taking, auction market efficiency, public
opinion surveys, creative problem solving, scientific discovery, invention, and
entrepreneurship. The project will enhance basic understanding of the ways that
language changes thought and behavior by providing new insights into the
pervasive impact of language on intellectual activity, including mechanisms of
mind, brain, and social institutions. As such, the project will make
intellectual contributions across a range of the disciplines, including
psychology, economics, political science, and sociology. The project also will
have far-reaching social implications. For example, given that about one-half of
the internal medicine residents in U.S. hospitals are foreign-born, health-care
organizations can more precisely anticipate risk-taking trends among physicians
depending on whether or not they use a foreign language professionally.
Intelligence communities, diplomats, and businesses will be able to apply
project findings strategically in negotiation and problem solving situations
with foreign entities. The project also will help address central societal
issues by providing new perspectives with which to assess the value of
immigration and the innovation that accompanies it. With respect to education,
the project will provide tools to increase the effectiveness of education and
training for bilingual immigrant students and to better anticipate the benefits
of bilingual education on performance in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the ways through
which language changes thought and behavior. Theories of individual and
institutional behavior tend to be based strictly within disciplines and
typically ignore the role of language. This project will transform these
approaches by broaching the divide between individual decision makers and
institutional behavior. The investigators will employ a novel interdisciplinary
approach that involves collaboration among researchers from psychology,
economics, sociology, and political science. They will use experimental methods
and surveys to collect behavioral, physiological, and brain activity measures,
comparing tasks performed in native and foreign languages. They also will engage
in a large-scale, computational investigation of millions of publications and
patents to evaluate the consequences of using a foreign language on innovations
in science and business. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.