* 1520904
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure:  Experimental Facility with Large, High Performance, Outdoor Shake Table
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2022
* P. Benson Shing, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2022
* USD 6,421,734.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards research community with
access to research infrastructure that will include earthquake and wind
engineering experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure, computational modeling
and simulation tools, and research data, as well as education and community
outreach activities. NHERI will be comprised of separate awards for a Network
Coordination Office, Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center, and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response
research facility. Awards made for NHERI will contribute to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program. NHERI continues NSF's emphasis on earthquake
engineering research infrastructure previously supported under the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation as part of NEHRP, but
now broadens that support to include wind engineering research infrastructure.
NHERI has the broad goal of supporting research that will improve the resilience
and sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as buildings and other
structures, underground structures, levees, and critical lifelines, against the
natural hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order to reduce loss of life,
damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI resources will be available
at the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NHERI Experimental
Facilities will provide access to their experimental resources, user services,
and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education
awards. This award will provide a NHERI Experimental Facility with a large, high
performance, outdoor shake table (LHPOST), located at the University of
California, San Diego, to support research in structural and geotechnical
earthquake engineering. Earthquakes have had considerable destructive effects on
society in terms of human casualties, property and infrastructure damage, and
economic losses. Building a multi-hazard, disaster-resilient, and sustainable
environment requires the understanding and ability to predict more reliably the
system-level response of buildings, critical facilities, lifelines, and other
civil infrastructure systems to these extreme events. This facility will enable
research, with extensively instrumented large- or full-scale structural,
geotechnical, and soil-foundation-structural systems tested under extreme
earthquake loads, to produce the experimental data essential to advancing
predictive seismic performance tools. Research experiments performed at this
facility, which will provide life-size investigation of the performance of
structural, geotechnical and soil-foundation-structural systems under earthquake
hazards, will also educate undergraduate, graduate, and K-12 students, as well
as the general public, about natural disasters and the national need to develop
effective technologies and policies to prevent these natural hazard events from
becoming societal disasters. This facility will conduct annual workshops for
prospective users and will host Research Experiences for Undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The LHPOST, with a steel platen that is 12.2
meters long by 7.6 meters wide, has performance characteristics that allow the
accurate reproduction of near- and far-field earthquake ground motions. The
facility will support seismic testing, under near real-world conditions, of
large structural, nonstructural, geotechnical, and geostructural systems, as
well as soil-foundation-structural systems, up to a weight of 20 meganewton. Two
large soil boxes can be used in conjunction with the shake table to investigate
the seismic response of soil-foundation-structural systems. Software and
hardware are available to support hybrid shake table testing of structural and
soil-foundation-structural systems. Systems tested at the facility can utilize
extensive data acquisition and instrumentation capabilities, including a broad
array of state-of-the-art and advanced analog sensors and high-definition video
cameras, to support detailed monitoring, through hundreds of data channels, of
the system response. The landmark system-level tests performed using this
facility will provide fundamental knowledge and data to support the development,
calibration, and validation of high-fidelity, physics-based computational models
of structural, geotechnical, and soil-foundation-structural systems that will
progressively shift the current reliance on physical testing to model-based
simulation for the seismic design and performance assessment of civil
infrastructure systems. These simulation tools will directly benefit the full
realization of performance-based design to evaluate and reduce the risks of the
built environment to natural hazards. This shake table facility can provide the
validation tests for retrofit methods, protective systems, and the use of new
materials, components, systems, and construction methods for disaster-resilient
and sustainable civil infrastructure.