* 1520867
* Ground Motion Prediction Using Virtual Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Gregory Beroza, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2020
* USD 295,000.00

This research is motivated by the fact that there exist few quantitative
measurements of the strength of shaking close to the epicenters of large
earthquakes. Information on how strong the ground will shake is critically
important because structural engineers use this information to design
earthquake-resilient structures. We will further develop and apply a new
approach for predicting the strength of shaking in future earthquakes that
doesn?t rely on recording earthquakes directly, but uses the ambient seismic
field for that purpose. The ambient field consists of seismic waves in the solid
Earth that are generated by wave action in the ocean. We can use these to
develop ?virtual earthquakes? using ground motion sensors deployed at a location
on the Earth where we expect future earthquake rupture to occur. Virtual
earthquakes quantify the shaking that will occur when such an earthquake
happens. Specifically, our research will advance this method by improving the
calibration of the strength of shaking, applying it to areas of particular
concern where we expect the shaking to be strong and potential problematic for
buildings, and by extending the technique to shorter periods, which are
important for earthquake-resistant design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ground motion
prediction is an area of key importance for earthquake seismology as it is where
the multi-disciplinary endeavor of understanding earthquake behavior meets the
societal concern of mitigating earthquake losses. We propose to improve and
apply a new method for predicting spatial variations in ground motion using the
ambient seismic field to construct virtual earthquakes. The virtual earthquake
approach is possible because the waves that comprise the ambient field, and the
waves in large earthquakes, propagate through the same complex geologic
structure and are affected by it in the same way. While this approach does not
account for nonlinear effects, and does not address earthquake source
characterization, it does provide a genuinely new way to predict the complex
linear wave propagation effects that strongly influence the intensity of
earthquake shaking. The proposed research seeks to improve the accuracy and
applicability of the virtual earthquake approach by: (1) improving the
reliability of measured amplitudes, (2) exploring complex basin effects that
have not been incorporated into ground motion prediction equations, and (3)
pushing the technique to shorter periods that better overlap the period range of
primary earthquake engineering concern. Continued development of the virtual
earthquake approach for ground motion prediction is essential for it to realize
its full potential. We will continue our collaboration with scientists
at&amp;#8232;the Earthquake Research Institute at the University of Tokyo and at
ISTerre, Grenoble. We will also work to develop an emerging collaboration with
scientists and engineers at Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, in Mexico
City.