* 1520969
* Collaborative Research: Particle Tracking at High Luminosity on Heterogeneous, Parallel Processor Architectures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2020
* Peter Wittich, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 01/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Particle physics experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN seek to
explore fundamental questions in modern physics, such as how particles attain
mass, why gravity is weak, and the nature of dark matter. The large quantity of
data produced at experimental facilities such as the LHC requires the
development of complex pattern recognition algorithms and software techniques to
achieve the scientific goals of these physics programs. This project will
investigate new algorithms and techniques for data analysis using emerging
computing processor architectures. These activities will enable the LHC
experiments to take data more efficiently and improve the quality of the data
that is recorded in order to extend the reach of the next generation of
discoveries from planned hardware upgrades at the LHC over the next decade. The
results of this research will significantly reduce the cost of computing for all
LHC experiments. Software source code tools will be made available to the
particle physics community. The investigators will host workshops to train post-
doctoral fellows and graduate students from all areas of particle physics on how
to use these advanced techniques. This training is valuable preparation for
dealing with big data science in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support research focused on novel compute architectures for parallelized and
vectorized charged particle track reconstruction. This research will improve the
reach of energy-frontier particle physics experiments, such as the ATLAS, CMS,
LHCb and ALICE experiments at the LHC and any other fields where studying the
passage of charged particles is of critical importance. The science targeted in
this project includes studying the properties of the Higgs boson, probing dark
matter by searching for supersymmetry, and exploring the unknown by looking for
such proposed effects as large extra space-time dimensions.