* 1520292
* Particle Theory, Gravity and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* John Donoghue, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 390,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors John Donoghue and Lorenzo
Sorbo at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the most active areas in theoretical physics involves the connections between
general relativity, which is our theory of the gravitational interactions, and
the fields of particle physics and cosmology. The union of gravity and quantum
mechanics has fundamental problems to be addressed, and the connection of
fundamental physics to cosmology will allow crucial tests of our present ideas.
Professors Donoghue and Sorbo will conduct a research program which addresses
these new frontiers. Professor Donoghue will use the techniques of what is
called "effective field theory" to study quantum-gravity effects that are
reliably calculated at low energy. Professor Sorbo's primary research involves
novel effects in the study of the universe, including possible new ways of
testing proposed new theories. As a result, research in this area advances the
national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most
fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of the universe and its
fundamental properties. Professors Donoghue and Sorbo will also involve graduate
students and postdocs in their research, and thereby provide training for junior
physicists beginning research in this field. They will provide outreach to high-
school students and teachers, and develop a new book promoting the understanding
of quantum field theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Donoghue will use effective field theory to treat quantum problems in general
relativity in the region where the effective field theory is valid. He will also
conduct research at the frontiers of understanding in Soft Collinear Effective
Theory, Asymptotic Safety, and nuclear binding. Professor Sorbo will explore
various phenomenological aspects of primordial inflation, with a special
emphasis on the possible explanations of the anomalies observed in the CMB
spectra. He will also investigate the gravitational couplings of axion dark
matter, the behavior of four-form fields coupled to moduli, and various aspects
of massive gravity.