* 1520843
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Experimental Facility with Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel, Wind Load and Dynamic Flow Simulators, and Pressure Loading Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,03/31/2021
* H. Hamilton III, University of Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 03/31/2021
* USD 3,634,975.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards research community with
access to research infrastructure that will include earthquake and wind
engineering experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure, computational modeling
and simulation tools, and research data, as well as education and community
outreach activities. NHERI will be comprised of separate awards for a Network
Coordination Office, Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center, and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response
research facility. Awards made for NHERI will contribute to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program. NHERI continues NSF's emphasis on earthquake
engineering research infrastructure previously supported under the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation as part of NEHRP, but
now broadens that support to include wind engineering research infrastructure.
NHERI has the broad goal of supporting research that will improve the resilience
and sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as buildings and other
structures, underground structures, levees, and critical lifelines, against the
natural hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order to minimize loss of
life, damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI resources will be
available on the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NHERI
Experimental Facilities will provide access to their experimental resources,
user services, and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and
education awards. This NHERI Experimental Facility, located at the University of
Florida, broadly supports research for mitigating the impacts of extreme wind
and rain events on civil infrastructure. This facility will provide users with
access to a diverse suite of wind engineering experimental resources, including
an atmospheric boundary layer wind tunnel and specialized testing devices, which
can replicate damaging effects from tornadoes, thunderstorms, and hurricanes.
These experimental resources will support research to understand the
vulnerability of civil infrastructure to extreme windstorm events, refine
computational tools to predict performance of civil infrastructure, and advance
knowledge to improve building codes and standards. This research will aid
broader resiliency efforts to safeguard hazard-prone communities from extreme
weather. The facility will conduct annual user workshops and will host Research
Experiences for Undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combined with a
collocated high performance computing (HPC) cluster, this facility will offer
the experimental and computational capacity, staffing, domain expertise, and
end-to-end project services for users to conduct a range of wind engineering
research. The experimental resources at this facility will enable the dynamic
loads from extreme winds (hurricanes and tornadoes) to be properly characterized
and applied to full-scale components and systems, with durations reflective of
actual events. The facility will provide a flexible framework that offers
repeatability and scalability and is adaptable to many wind hazard scenarios and
infrastructure systems. The facility will include five experimental resources.
The atmospheric boundary layer wind tunnel has a unique, self-tuning flow
control system that dramatically improves the breadth of achievable flow. The
multi-axis wind load simulator can create dynamic wind pressure (up to a Simpson
Hurricane Wind Scale Category 5 hurricane or Enhanced Fujita Scale 5 tornado),
uplift, and shear loads on full-scale specimens (up to seven meters by five
meters). The facility also will provide a high-speed, dynamic flow simulator to
simulate surface winds, and two pressure loading actuator systems to evaluate
building component performance under dynamic wind loads. The computational power
and ultra-high bandwidth of the HPC cluster will offer remote use, hybrid
experiments, real-time analysis, automated back-up, curation and sharing of
data, and seamless integration with the NHERI cyberinfrastructure. These
capabilities will enable previously infeasible high-risk exploratory research
and will open pathways to solve outstanding wind hazard issues associated with
resilient infrastructure, lifelines, wind energy, and meteorology.