* 1520972
* Collaborative Research: Computational Faddeev approach to Nuclear Reactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Charlotte Elster, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2020
* USD 353,000.00

Nuclear Science is tasked with answering questions such as: (i) How did matter
come into being and how does it evolve? (ii) How does subatomic matter organize
itself and what phenomena emerge? (iii) How can the knowledge and technology
progress provided by nuclear physics best be used to benefit society? Providing
answers to these questions depends on a detailed theoretical understanding of
nuclear reactions, a field in which current approaches are either outdated or
limited to a small number of applications. In this larger context, this project
will focus on the theoretical study of deuteron-induced reactions. Due to the
short lifetimes involving exotic nuclei, direct neutron capture measurements of
relevance to the origin of the heavy elements are often not possible. Indirect
techniques like deuteron induced reactions are a common tool to extract the
relevant astrophysical rates. These reactions are part of ongoing experimental
programs at radioactive beam facilities, as well as programs at future
facilities such as the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB). As such, this
project will provide theoretical support to challenging experimental programs
and will provide a unique training opportunity for graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows.

A reliable reaction theory is critical for the understanding the data produced
at experimental programs using (d,p) reactions. From a theoretical perspective,
(d,p) reactions are attractive because the scattering can be reduced to an
effective three-body problem. One of the most challenging aspects of solving the
three-body problems for nuclear reactions is posed by the repulsive Coulomb
interaction. While for light nuclei the momentum-space Faddeev equations can be
treated by screening the Coulomb force, a similar approach is difficult to
implement for heavy systems. Indeed, for most of the new exotic nuclei to be
produced at FRIB, currently available computational methods are not adequate.
This project will address this critical need and provide an implementation of an
exact Faddeev method for the three-body nuclear reaction problem, in which the
Coulomb force will be treated without screening.