* 1520545
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of novel nitrogen fertilizers based on the endophytic microbiome
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Karsten Temme, Pivot Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a probiotic that can replace up to
$5B of chemical fertilizers used in domestic corn production. This novel
probiotic would reduce water pollution from fertilizer runoff, lower greenhouse
gas emissions, and conserve energy resources through lower production costs.
Globally, this product could have an impact in regions like China and India
where fertilizer demand outpaces available supply. This technology platform may
be used to rapidly create new probiotics for other crops, and focus on
applications beyond nitrogen fertilizer, in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
probiotic endophytes that provide fixed nitrogen to crops as an alternative to
chemical fertilizers. Microbes silence genes for nitrogen fixation in response
to fertilizer to conserve energy. This project aims to disrupt the genetic link
between sensing fertilizer and microbial nitrogen fixation, so that a probiotic
can produce nitrogen in fields today. This work will evaluate the persistence of
evolved microbes in field soils while assessing formulation strategies that
confer effective crop colonization and improved shelf life. If successful, this
work will provide a foundation for routine development of fertilizers from plant
endophytes. Further, these endophytes could serve as a model for understanding
how microbes establish robust relationships with plants and the surrounding
microbial community.