* 1520496
* SBIR Phase I:  Tacet: High-Speed TV-Band White Space Networks with Implicit Multi-User Beamforming
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Ryan Guerra, Skylark Wireless LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to develop a
scalable framework for increasing the spectral efficiency of wireless Multiple-
In, Multiple-Out (MIMO) systems in environments with long channel coherence time
by leveraging implicit channel sounding. To date, standards committees and
equipment vendors have avoided implicit channel sounding since key technical
questions regarding its use remained unanswered. By providing a zero-overhead
method for implicit channel sounding, the proposed system will be able to
provide rich environment and user mobility data to the Media Access Controller
(MAC) and application layer, with strong implications for the future design of
rate and group selection for MU-MIMO systems. With commercialization targeted at
unlicensed TVWS wireless devices, the proposed 4-antenna system will be able to
provide at least a 4-fold increase in network capacity compared to existing
single-antenna TVWS solutions, without suffering from protocol overhead
congestion typical in existing multi-user MIMO systems. Integral to this
approach is the ability to implement the technology on low-cost software-defined
radio hardware, placing this technology within the reach of underserved
communities looking for low-cost broadband data
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will demonstrate an innovative implicit beamforming protocol
that eliminates channel sounding overhead in TV-band White Space (TVWS) radio
channels, enabling efficient and high-speed, last-mile unlicensed wireless
network deployments. The project will develop and benchmark practical implicit
channel reciprocity calibration for software-defined radio arrays, while
utilizing an innovative software-defined radio signal flow that allows the
system to be implemented on low-cost commodity system-on-chip hardware. Both
approaches represent a departure from existing methods of beamforming in
commercial systems, which rely on both overhead-intensive explicit beamforming
and real-time parallel hardware for signal processing and beamforming
calculation. While shown to be feasible in academic research papers, both key
innovations have yet to be validated in an operational system and several known
barriers to implementation are investigated in this project. Finally, the
proposed implicit beamforming system will be validated on real TVWS channels
though trace-driven system emulation. To our knowledge, this is the first time
that an implicit beamforming system will be tested on commercial hardware and on
real wireless channels.