* 1520087
* SBIR Phase I:  Nurturing student learning by bringing relevant academic content to the consumer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Srilekha Srinivasan, Pedagogy World
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 149,990.00

This SBIR Phase I project is aimed at developing a web-based system that enables
students, educators and parents to discover standards aligned K-12 educational
resources that meet the strengths, needs and passions of students. The universe
of K-12 educational resources has rapidly expanded in the last few years through
the abundance of education technology products (including mobile applications).
Though mobile applications and online educational content have high levels of
engagement with students, they are not considered as curricular learning because
of their unstructured nature. In a study by the Gates foundation, 71% of high
school dropouts reported lack of interest by 9th and 10th grade and the study
recommends engaging learners through real-world, experiential learning. Students
who drop out of school do not qualify for 90% of available jobs. The solution
developed through this SBIR Phase 1 will empower students with choices and
variety in content, and will be aligned to student's passion, e.g., choice of
sound engineering videos and/or music-based math for an aspiring musicians. The
use of such technology which is standards aligned and tuned to the student's
passion is expected to improve student graduation rates and associated economic
growth for the communities at large.

The Phase 1 SBIR will provide a web-based system that is a first-of-its-kind
integrated and personalized learning solution that can curate various types of
educational resources for students and teachers and present these resources in a
manner that is tuned to student's passions. It will provide school districts and
families a sustainable and cost effective solution to make efficient use of
limited resources and budgets to procure standards aligned content that are
highly engaging to students. The resulting system will be organized as a
consumer application that can facilitate the discovery of standards-aligned
educational resources that work with the strength and the pace of a student, and
personalize learning at the student level. This system will enable, ALL
students, regardless of socioeconomic status to have access to relevant
educational materials both inside and outside the classroom. An initial alpha
launch, a pilot study and analytical data gathering involving teachers and
students will be conducted over Phase 1 to study the efficacy of the developed
solution. The goal of this research is to verify the system features, the ease
of use and understand if Phase 1 activities result in a prototype that offers
technical feasibility to solve the attempted problem.