* 1520569
* SBIR Phase I:  An automated tutoring software that teaches K-12 students coding through integration with popular video games
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Stephen Foster, ThoughtSTEM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project would result in the development of an intelligent
automated tutoring system for teaching coding to K-12 students. Millions of 6-14
year old students in the U.S. have an interest in learning how to mod ("modify")
popular video games, but lack the necessary skillset: coding. Coding is a highly
valuable STEM subject, but is not currently a core subject in U.S. schools.
Because the U.S. is not producing enough skilled workers in computing fields,
there will be 56,000 jobs that go unfilled by U.S. workers every year. This
project aims to expose millions of students to coding in the next 5 years by
making modding accessible to them. In order to teach millions of students at
scale, this project will develop a complex automated tutoring system which
intelligently guides students through their coding education, detects and helps
students when they run into errors, and provides students with a near-endless
supply of puzzles and educational content. This project plans to tackle ongoing
problems in the field of computer science education. The automated tutoring
system developed through this project will be a foundation for automated
tutoring systems that teach other STEM subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
technical innovation of this project is a browser-based IDE for writing code and
executing it within the runtime environment of video games. This inherently
gamified coding environment opens new doors in computer science education.
Around this coding environment, an automated tutoring system is being built.
This project aims to tackle several problems in computer science education.
These problems include: (1) a stealth assessment system that identifies when a
student does not understand a coding concept and that guides the student towards
understanding, (2) a novice-friendly error detection and reporting system that
points students to the part of their code where the error originated, (3) an
automated Stack Overflow-like resource for novice programmers that suggests
possible solutions when the novice encounters an error, (4) a random puzzle
generator that creates a near-endless supply of coding educational content for
different skill levels, (5) tutorials and puzzles that gamify the transition
from a visual programming language to a syntactically complex programming
language, and (6) teacher tools and APIs that allow teachers to integrate the
software into their classrooms. By solving these problems in computer science
education, this project aims to make an effective coding education tool that
scales.