* 1520681
* The nature of the Ediacaran to early Cambrian geomagnetic field
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* John Tarduno, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 295,465.00

The suggestion that the entire solid Earth rotated by 90 degrees, approximately
565 million years ago, and that this event sparked the explosion of life on the
planet (when most existing animal phyla and classes first appeared), is one of
the most controversial hypotheses in the geosciences. Ultimately, the veracity
of this idea rests on how well the past geomagnetic field is recorded in ancient
rock samples (the purview of the discipline of paleomagnetism). The PIs have
developed a method for obtaining paleomagnetic data from geologic samples -
known as the single silicate crystal approach - having higher fidelity than
standard procedures. Preliminary data applying this method leads the team to an
alternative hypothesis. Rather than recording a rotation of the entire solid
Earth, the data reflect a geomagnetic field 565 million years ago that was in an
unusual state: it was weak, and the poles reversed frequently. The team will
test their hypothesis through a single silicate crystal paleomagnetic study of
samples from three areas of southern Canada. Because the strength of the
geomagnetic field is a principal factor defining shielding of the planet from
the solar wind, this study will also help constrain the potential influence of
energetic solar particles on the atmosphere and biosphere during this critical
time in Earth history. The data collected will also be useful for testing if
continental plate velocities were higher than uniformitarian assumptions, in the
past. The work will support graduate students and undergraduates, who will
acquire valuable skills though training in the classroom, field studies and in
the laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The suggestion that the entire
solid Earth rotated by 90 degrees during Ediacaran to early Cambrian times
(approximately 635-530 Ma), and that this sparked the early Cambrian explosion
of life, is highly contentious. This is not a question of whether such an event,
known as inertial interchange true polar wander (IITPW), is theoretically
possible, but rather whether it occurred. Ultimately, the veracity of the event
relies on the fidelity of paleomagnetic data. The PI team has recently examined
this enigma using single silicate crystal paleomagnetic analysis, a method that
allows the isolation of single-domain magnetic carriers that are the best field
recorders, capable of preserving remanences on billion-year time scales. In
their study of the Sept-Iles (approximately 565 Ma) intrusion (Canada), they
have not found support for IITPW. Instead, they find evidence that the
geomagnetic field was reversing during cooling of the intrusion. Preliminary
analyses further suggest unusually low paleointensities. These observations
provide the basis for an alterative hypothesis: the Ediacaran to early Cambrian
geomagnetic field was unusually weak, and reversed frequently. The team will
study three areas in southern Canada to test their hypothesis. This work will
also broadly constrain the boundary conditions for biotic evolution during the
key Ediacaran to early Cambrian interval, and will have implications for the
core, mantle and surface environment. Specifically,the investigators hope to
constrain i. whether the geodynamo was in an unusual state (perhaps associated
with inner core growth), ii. if the magnetopause standoff distance was reduced,
allowing greater penetration of energetic solar particles, and iii. if
continental plate velocities were higher than uniformitarian assumptions. The
work will support graduate students and undergraduates, who will acquire
valuable skills though training in field studies in southern Canada and in the
laboratory. They will combine field excursions, classroom studies and summer
programs to give students a comprehensive research experience.