* 1520502
* SBIR Phase I:  Label-free imaging for real-time, intraoperative blood vessel visualization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Jonathan Gunn, BriteSeed, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2016
* USD 174,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel, intraoperative imaging
technology to addresse the problem of inadvertent cuts to vasculature during
minimally invasive surgeries. Patients who suffer vascular injury face increased
risks of developing nosocomial infections and, in up to 32% of cases, mortality.
These patients are burdened with longer hospital stays and corrective procedures
that add tens of thousands of dollars to their healthcare expenses. This is
compounded by obesity, a risk factor that is associated with higher rates of
conversion from minimally invasive to open surgery due to limitations in the
surgeon?s ability to visualize and navigate vasculature. Hence, there is a
critical need to identify and assess hidden vasculature in real time. The
proposed technology provides users with blood vessel visualization and size
metrics before a cut is made. Importantly, this system will be designed for
seamless integration into a suite of surgical instruments for multiple
applications. Long term, the company aims to provide surgeons with the
preeminent imaging platform to view, assess, and characterize a range of vessels
(i.e. arteries/veins, ureters and bile ducts) in real-time for improved surgical
guidance and outcomes.

The proposed project will develop a novel blood vessel detection and
visualization platform using low-cost optical imaging sensors and light-emitting
diodes (LEDs). The proposed technology will provide visual and quantitative
information about vessel presence and size in real-time that can supplement a
surgeon?s technique. This system will be simple, cost-effective, easy to employ,
and highly accurate, and will be based on science similar to that found in pulse
oximetry technology. Traditionally, the avoidance of blood vessels during
minimally invasive surgery is accomplished by visualization or costly
intraoperative imaging. The proposed technology will use pulsatile light
absorption characteristics of blood vessels to provide quantitative information
about vessel presence and size in real-time, supplementing a surgeon?s
technique. This project will also add significant value to the body of research
conducted in the areas of signal processing and image analysis. In addition, the
proposed technology will remove the risk of data loss due to artifacts in
general and motion artifacts in particular. The proposed technology will be
validated ex vivo and in vivo using a porcine animal model.