* 1520266
* Beyond elastic rebound: extracting permanent strain from interseismic deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Kaj Johnson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2017
* USD 120,000.00

One of the main uses of GPS data in studying the boundaries of tectonic plates
is to understand current rates for fault movements and understand how faults
interact. This kind of understanding can all feed into a better assessment of
earthquake hazards because it helps us better understand the longer term
behavior of fault systems. The researchers in the project will try to reconcile
two kinds of models, those that characterize single faults with those that look
at long-term evolution of a full plate boundary. The results of this work have
important implications for how fast plate boundaries are moving and how the
ground around faults deforms over time. The work will use two examples, on in
Taiwan, and the other in Southern California. Comparing and contrasting the two
areas will improve overall understanding of earthquakes
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the proposed research is to
develop dynamic models of geodetic data that extend traditional elastic models
to include permanent deformation. The approach is to develop viscoelastic-
plastic boundary element models in which the deforming crust is loaded by far-
field stresses and faults slip and the surrounding crust deforms in response to
the loads. They will employ geodetic data, stress state inferred from focal
mechanism data, and geologic and thermochronologic data to constrain the
deformation models. In Taiwan they will use the GPS-derived horizontal and
vertical velocity fields, an island-wide leveling network, and stress
orientations throughout the crust to address several key outstanding issues
about the fault architecture responsible for mountain building processes in
Taiwan. They will test several models of deep fault geometry and a proposed
deep-seated underplating process&lt;br/&gt;for uplifting the core of the
mountain range. Model results will be compared with low-temperature
thermochronology. In southern California the research will examine models of
long-term deformation across the strike-slip fault system to determine the
relative contributions of various pate-driving forces (plate boundary forces,
gravitational potential energy, mantle drag) and compare predicted long-term
fault slip rates with geologic slip rate estimates. They will focus on the
important outstanding problem of the portion of deformation that occurs as off-
fault inelastic yielding distribution through the crust versus deformation that
is accommodated by slip on faults.