* 1520952
* Chip-Scale Cavity Optomechanics for Precision Sensing: Science and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 336,000.00

Recent advances in nanofabrication and precision measurements in cavity
optomechanics have afforded remarkable new boundaries in quantum mechanical
ground state preparation, optomechanical radio frequency clocks and oscillators,
and precision sensing of motion and forces. Motion acceleration sensing is a
critical platform for seismic geophones monitoring with applications in
structural health monitoring, borehole and seismic underground imaging, inertia
navigation, as well as sensors in consumer electronics. Through optical driving
and readout, recent efforts in optomechanics have demonstrated remarkable
nanomechanical motion and force detection at and below the standard quantum
limits, supporting potential breakthroughs in sensing platforms. This award
supports next-generation chip-scale accelerometers through optomechanical
readout with unprecedented sensitivities, at 100× to 1000× better sensitivities
than state-of-the-art commercial accelerometers. This provides new platforms in
structural health monitoring, borehole and seismic underground imaging, and
inertia navigation. This program outreaches to targeted underrepresented
communities, delivering teaching modules to K-12 students and the high-school
science curriculum, while developing a new hands-on laboratory course on
mesoscale sensing and sensors to train the undergraduates and graduates on next-
generation motional and force detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this award we
will examine chip-scale cavity optomechanics for acceleration sensing, towards
the DC and ultralow-frequency regime and in an integrated chip-scale field
modules for precision sensing. Our efforts are described in three integrated
Thrusts: (I) Advancements of the chip-scale optomechanical accelerometers
through RF readout, including state-of-the-art optomechanical transduction and
sensing; (II) Precision measurements in the oscillation regime with DC external
acceleration perturbations, including fundamental noise limits; and (III)
Integrated precision accelerometer chipsets including detection integration and
dynamic range considerations. The project's efforts are realized in integrated
chip-scale CMOS modules while offering unprecedented sensitivities and in the DC
measurement regime, each supported by our preliminary measurements. The three
research Thrusts are integrated with an educational Thrust (IV) focusing
primarily on outreach to K-12 students through the Double Discovery Center for
first-generation college-bound youth, developing a high-school science
curriculum on modern sensors for the Harlem and lower Bronx community, and a new
"hands-on" undergraduate and graduate Sensors laboratory.