* 1520338
* Hazards SEES: Bridging Information, Uncertainty, and Decision-Making in Hurricanes using an Interdisciplinary Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Yue Ge, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,475,000.00

In order to respond more effectively to hurricanes, emergency managers need
better decision support tools that account for the response of populations to
uncertainty in hurricane forecasts, as well as the consequences of household
decisions on key infrastructure systems. For example, Hurricane Sandy is
estimated to have caused more than $70 billion in losses, and Hurricane Katrina
caused significant loss of life; in both cases, the situation was made worse due
to chaos in key transportation systems. We are addressing this need by
developing next generation data-driven tools for capturing and mitigating
uncertainty in hazards such as hurricanes. Using data from various sources, we
are developing new understanding of household level behaviors, how individuals
and agencies process uncertainty at different instances of the hurricane onset,
and the consequences of the household decisions on citywide traffic congestion.
We are developing data-driven modeling, social science, and computational
systems science approaches leveraging recent advancements in data gathering in
order to improve the effectiveness of evacuations and save lives.

We are collecting novel data through post-hurricane mail surveys, personal
interviews, web experiments, social media, and process tracing software and
developing new integrative scientific approaches to modeling household level
behaviors and social network effects across households and other stakeholders.
Using these data and methods, we are modeling evacuation logistics for
hurricanes, using computational sciences as a supporting discipline. We are thus
providing a holistic approach to characterize, measure, and analyze uncertainty
in various aspects of hurricane evacuation modeling, social networks, household
decision-making, and stochastic traffic modeling. The advances in knowledge from
this project will impact multiple disciplines including emergency management,
complex systems science, transportation engineering, and computational sciences.
Our research outcomes will assist emergency managers and agencies to anticipate
transportation and sheltering needs and to improve community planning prior to
hurricanes by integrating household behavior information with traffic
simulation. These improvements will lead to safer and more effective evacuations
at lower cost, reduced stress, and most importantly, with less loss of life.