* 1520976
* Quantum Computing with Cs Atom Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

Entanglement is an essential feature of quantum mechanics. For instance, if two
identical particles can each be in either state A or B, they can be in an
entangled state AA+BB, which means that the particles are in a superposition of
both being in A or both being in B, but never one in A and the other in B. These
highly non-classical states are central to the working of quantum computers. To
date, proto-quantum computers have been made with up to 14 quantum bits
(qubits), but their outputs can be readily reproduced with classical computers.
As entangled states become increasingly complex they can no longer be modeled on
classical computers. A quantum computer with more than 50 qubits could solve
certain kinds of problems that are otherwise
unsolvable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computing is being pursued using
several different types of qubits, including ions, superconducting Josephson
junctions, quantum dots, photons, nitrogen vacancy centers in diamonds, and
neutral atoms. Each candidate qubit has its strengths and weakness. Neutral
atoms trapped in optical lattices can be well-isolated from their environment,
so they have relatively long coherence times, an essential qubit feature.
Trapping them with light presents a relatively straightforward path to
scalability well beyond 50 qubits. Still, there has been less work on trapped
neutral atoms than on most other qubit candidates. The work proposed here is
directed toward developing neutral atoms for quantum
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental techniques needed for a neutral
atom quantum computer will be developed. Previously atoms in a 5 micron spaced
3D optical lattice have been trapped and cooled, with an atom at half the sites.
Using accurate site occupancy maps and the ability to address individual sites
within a 5×5×5 site volume, a procedure to arbitrarily sort the atoms within
that volume will be executed. For instance, perfectly occupied 3×3×3 cubes and
5×5 planes will be created. Since the atoms can be cooled to near their
vibrational ground state after sorting, the sorting procedure can be checked and
small errors corrected if need be, giving an ideal starting point for a quantum
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new technique for measuring the internal
states of a neutral atom qubit without atom loss by coherently splitting atoms
based on their internal states, and then locking them in place with a shorter
length scale optical lattice will be demonstrated. They can then be reliably
detected in this new lattice, where their location encodes their initial
internal state. A new type of single qubit microwave gate where atoms do not
need to leave their storage basis will be demonstrated, which promises
exceptionally high fidelity. Also work will continue to demonstrate two-qubit
Rydberg gates, taking advantage of the low temperature of the atoms and the
associated excellent localization. After all these techniques are developed, the
system will allow for the implementation of ~3000 gates on 25 atoms before any
atom loss is expected. This would constitute a sufficient proof of principle of
scalability in neutral atom systems to stimulate further work in error
correction and scaling in these systems.