* 1520382
* SBIR Phase I:  Kaiser Trigger: A Nano-Watt Powered Technology for Ultra-Low Power Fatigue Crack Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Mehdi Khandani, Resensys, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 178,915.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the introduction
of a new generation of low-power wireless sensors for detecting Acoustic
Emission events and crack formation in structures. According to the Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA), the US transportation infrastructure has 605,102
operational bridges, of which 66,561 are structurally deficient. The FHWA report
also indicates that more than 93% of deficient bridges are more than 30 years
old. Many other infrastructure systems such as energy pipelines also suffer from
aging. The unique features of the proposed technique, which utilizes a Kaiser
Trigger, are its low-cost and ultra-low energy consumption. Thus, its use in
low-power wireless sensors make it an ideal solution to this challenging
problem. The anticipated benefits and commercial applications of this project
are (1) a low-cost and easy-to-use mechanism for effective monitoring, early
detection, and timely repair of structural issues on infrastructure systems such
as highway bridges; (2) improved public safety, reduced maintenance costs, and
extended service life of critical and high-valued infrastructure systems; and
(3) commercial applications in monitoring the structural health and integrity of
other structures, including airframes, pipelines, cargo cranes, ships, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
addresses distributed structural health monitoring (SHM) of infrastructure
systems, particularly highway bridges, airplanes, and pipelines. Because the
creation of a crack in a structure is accompanied by the propagation of high
frequency acoustic emission (AE) waves, wireless AE sensors can be used to
detect such cracks. However, one of the main challenges for AE detection sensors
involves the AE amplifier, which typically consumes significantly more energy
than the amount available in a wireless device with limited energy. As a result,
conventional AE detection methods cannot be used with low-power wireless
sensors. This project proposes a novel technique, the Kaiser Trigger, which will
consume several orders-of-magnitude less energy than conventional AE detection
systems. After fabrication and successful testing, the Kaiser Trigger will be
integrated into structural health monitoring sensors. The wireless sensors
equipped with the Kaiser Trigger and AE detection capability will be a powerful,
yet low-cost solution for monitoring infrastructure systems.