* 1520031
* IBSS: The Spread and Impact of Moral Messages: Machine Learning, Network Evolution, and Behavioral Prediction
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2019
* Morteza Dehghani, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 640,267.00

In the immediate aftermath of the 2013 Boston Marathon tragedy, hundreds of
thousands of prosocial acts were evident on social media, such as reposted links
for blood donation sites, information regarding how to get in touch with loved
ones, and even offers to provide food and shelter for those in need. Far from
isolated acts, these behaviors occurred within social networks, amid shared
moral messages of empathy and solidarity. This interdisciplinary research
project will examine how people respond to public crises and how moral reactions
shape these responses in social networks. The project will contribute new
theoretical insights and methodological advances in moral psychology, network
sociology, computer science, and other fields. It will enhance understanding of
how moral concerns spread through social networks and explore new theoretical
frameworks dealing with human moral decision making and group dynamics. These
theoretical frameworks will guide the development of artificial intelligence
techniques for building descriptive models of morality, and the new methods of
sentiment analysis and machine learning will be used to assess theoretical
models of moral concerns and social influence in networks. By examining factors
influencing the spread of moral messages and participation in prosocial
activities, such as charitable giving, the project may help increase the well-
being of individuals in emergency situations. The project also will facilitate
future inquiry into how the public and persistent nature of social media may
provide new ways to understand and forecast social
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary science of morality has
developed well-validated measures of moral concerns using a number of different
approaches, such as Moral Foundations Theory and Schwartz's Values Circumplex.
Empirical research in this field usually has assessed moral judgments via
questionnaires gathering information well after actions have occurred, however.
Sociology has done more to assess behavior as it occurs but has used even more
limited measures. Recent innovations in computer science offer new ways to
gather information about the structure of moral judgments and large-scale
behavior in natural settings as well as the relationships between the two. The
investigators will employ these new computer-based methods to examine texts from
social media in order to examine the structure of moral concerns and values
without relying on preset questionnaires. They will investigate the network
dynamics of the spread of moral messages and behaviors, and they will determine
how moral content in social media can predict real-world behavior at both
individual and societal scales. The investigators will couple machine learning
and sentiment analysis techniques with theories about moral cognition and social
dynamics. Among questions they will pursue are how well everyday moral judgments
(made without researcher prompting) correspond with dominant psychological
theories of morality and whether it is possible to model and predict how moral
influence can lead to subsequent prosocial or antisocial behavior. This project
is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences
Research (IBSS) competition.