* 1520527
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable Performance Composites for Energy Efficient Transportation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Diosdado Banatao, Connora Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,983.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to improve and
expand the technology of recyclable thermosets by creating a new class of high
performance, cycloaliphatic polyamines that retain an acid-cleavable bond. If
successful, this effort will lead to a new class of high-performance composite
resins which can be recycled. Increased energy efficiency is leading
transportation to rely on lightweight, thermoset composites. But the
intractability of traditional thermosets limits the value of recycled
composites, and adoption in industry. Industry composites recycling experts
estimate the overall scrap cost for the composites industry is between $500 and
$750 million a year. Post-manufacturing scrap can range from 5 to 50 percent of
the input materials. The global auto composites market alone represents an
estimated $4 billion by 2017, while a small volume, composite car line
represents roughly 400 metric tons of polyamine curing agent. In the Phase I
effort, we will design and synthesize novel, recyclable cycloaliphatic polyamine
structures and further formulate them with various epoxy resins to meet the
performance and processing requirements for transportation composites
manufacturing. Doing so will help composite manufacturers improve costs and meet
regulatory compliance for recyclability and manufacturing waste disposal.

The intellectual merit of this project will be an expanded knowledge base and
chemistry platform for synthesizing and formulating recyclable thermoset resins.
Cyclic structures, by nature, provide higher structural rigidity of a molecule.
This rigidity translates to an overall higher mechanical performance of a
material. For example, composites of higher mechanical strength, glass
transition temperature, and faster cure speed can be achieved. New cyclic
structures will complement the initial generation of aliphatic polyamines, and
enable applications previously unattainable by recyclable aliphatic structures
alone, such as transportation composites. Our team has identified and pre-
screened target cyclic scaffolds for synthesis. Successfully synthesized
molecules will be further screened for physical properties and recyclability.
Candidate molecules will then be formulated into full resin systems and
optimized for an high pressure resin transfer molding (HP-RTM) process, to meet
the processing and cost needs of automotive manufacturers. Partners in the
automotive and aerospace industries will aid in testing and evaluating the
performance of the formulated material. By creating new recyclable molecules
that "mimic" other major industrial classes beyond aliphatic amines, the
addressable market for these materials will be expanded and the adoption of
recyclable thermoset composites will be accelerated.