* 1520274
* SBIR Phase I:  Interference Mitigation for Broadband Wireless Backhaul Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Yanhua Deng, Bascom Hunter Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable wireless
industry carriers and equipment providers with an affordable technology solution
to meet the continuing explosive societal/customer demands for data access. The
expected technical and commercial outcome from the project is an active
interference mitigation capability with product features including a
significantly improved quality of service, simplified network equipment design
and installation, and reduced requirements for many components such as antenna
and filters. This in turn will reduce the overall cost per data link, as well as
reducing the size, weight, and power requirements of the system. It is projected
that the cost per 80 MHz link with the active interference cancellation system
for the wireless backhaul application will be approximately $2,000. At this cost
value, the technology can be implemented into a variety of commercial
applications including video surveillance, smart grid, and mobile
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project provides a unique solution to the challenging interference problem in
many wireless networks. This problem is particularly troublesome in the emergent
market of the unlicensed 5GHz range for wireless backhaul systems. Unlike
conventional radio frequency (RF) and digital interference mitigation or
cancelation techniques, the proposed interference cancellation system (ICS)
generates unmatched levels of cancellation by using analog signal processing
with electro-optic components. The ICS is the key approach that can enable high
quality of service in backhaul networks. Taking advantage of the already
developed prototype, the proposed system configuration will be demonstrated with
representative signal types and components. In addition, as an alternative to
the off-the-shelf mechanical delay line, an interferometric based delay line
will be investigated for faster tuning speed. Based on the investigations, the
product design for backhaul application will be analyzed for commercialization.
The anticipated key performance parameters of the product could provide maximum
of 80 dB of cancellation over narrowband (&lt;10kHz) and 40 dB over broadband
(&gt;80MHz) for co-site interference.