* 1520346
* SBIR Phase I:  Predictive Modeling and Automatic Control of Landfill Gas Collection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Andrew Campanella, Loci Controls, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to improve the
collection of landfill gas by applying a real-time control system and developing
advanced models of gas generation and extraction. It has the potential to
improve the economics of the Landfill Gas to Energy (LFG-E) market and reduce
the environmental impact of landfills. With industry-wide implementation, annual
revenues from existing LFG-E projects could be increased by over $450 million.
The additional energy produced would power over 350,000 homes. Methane is a
powerful greenhouse gas, and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates
that in 2011, emissions from landfills accounted for nearly 17.5% of all human-
generated methane in the US. The associated reduction in Green House Gas
emissions from improved landfill gas collection would be equivalent to cutting
the consumption of over 3.6 billion gallons of gasoline or 76 million barrels of
oil. Furthermore, because of the improved economics, this Phase I project could
encourage the development of new LFG-E projects, further expanding the size and
value of the landfill gas to energy market. According to EPA estimates,
currently undeveloped sites could account for an additional 850 MW of power
generation, enough to power over 508,000 homes.

Landfill gas collection systems are currently operated manually and lack the
embedded feedback capabilities to properly match the rate of gas extraction to
the rate of generation in response to changing environmental conditions. The
proposed control hardware is a wireless, fully automatic sensor and actuator
device able to measure key characteristics of landfill gas and adjust gas
extraction rates on individual wells in real time. The research objective is to
utilize these capabilities to collect data and develop a deeper understanding of
landfill gas generation and the complex interactions within the extraction
system. A series of experiments will quantify the strength of interactions
between different wells in a landfill. The data will be used to develop a model
describing how gas characteristics change in response to modulations in gas
extraction pressure. A successful outcome of this research would be the
development of a basic control model that can be used to analyze recent trends
in extraction data and incorporate real time information about environmental
conditions (temperature, barometric pressure, precipitation, etc.), in order to
maximize energy extraction.