* 1520674
* Collaborative Research:  Reversal frequency versus ancient field strength: Clues from the Jurassic and Cretaceous
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 282,237.00

Much progress has been made in our understanding of the variation of Earth's
magnetic field strength through geological time, but some rather fundamental and
far-reaching questions remain. One key question bears on the relationship
between magnetic field strength and its tendency to change sign in a process
known as reversing. Records of individual reversals clearly show that they are
associated with low magnetic field strength. This observation lead to the
hypothesized relationship of average field strength with reversal rate in which
periods with few reversals (e.g., the Cretaceous Normal Superchron) would have
higher average field strengths and periods with rapid reversals (e.g., the
Jurassic Quiet Zone) would have lower average field strengths. While existing
data provide some support for the existence of a long period of reduced average
field strength in the Jurassic (the Mesozoic Dipole Low, or MDL), the recovery
from the state of extremely rapid reversals apparently was not accompanied by a
recovery in field strength; the low field strengths apparently persisted well
into the Cretaceous, long after reversal rates returned to 'normal'. The problem
is that nearly all of the data on which the MDL hypothesis is based are based on
poorly documented data from Armenia, published in the 1980s. High quality data
derived from modern paleointensity experiments combined with direct radiometric
dates from the Jurassic and Cretaceous are essential to resolve whether and for
how long the geomagnetic field was depressed during the Mesozoic. The PIs will
be collaborating with Armenian scientists, and will collect samples in Armenia.
ISE is providing co-funding for travel.

Funding from this grant will allow the team to resample the key Armenian baked
contacts and new data will help constrain the age and nature of the termination
of the Mesozoic Dipole Low. Additionally, high quality age data from the
Armenian arc sequences in which there are marine sediments interbedded with
datable lava flows may allow direct calibration of the Jurassic biostratigraphic
time scale, a period in which such calibration is rare. Samples will be
collected from the Mesozoic arc sequences exposed in Armenia and samples will be
subjected to complete paleointensity experiments whereby the original thermal
remanent magnetization (TRM) is progressively replaced by a TRM induced in the
laboratory under known conditions of the applied magnetic field. Such data,
along with checks for chemical alteration and non-ideal behavior provide the
basis for determining the ancient field strength. Successful samples will be
radiometrically dated using the 39Ar/40Ar method. Samples will also be subjected
to a host of rock magnetic tests designed to characterize the suitability of the
samples for paleointensity experimentation.