* 1520363
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel process technology to convert paper-mill solidwaste into useful bioproducts
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Bhavin Bhayani, Avatar Sustainable Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2016
* USD 149,700.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to use the waste fiber rejects from paper mills to
make bioproducts and thus improve the sustainability of the paper industry.
Paper mills currently landfill waste solids for anywhere between $20-60/ton*;
This project proposes a process to convert paper mill waste it into fermentable
sugars that can be converted to downstream commercial products, including
biofuels and bioplastics. The proposed process not only provides greener,
degradable and economical alternatives but also sustainable ones by using a
resource that is currently being landfilled.

The objective of this Phase I research project is to saccharify waste rejects
from recycled containerboard mills. The presence of inhibitors requires the
hydrolysis to be carried out in a process that negates their impact. Also the
removal of these inhibitors from the hydrolyzate will increase the
fermentability of sugars to economically produce various biochemicals including
biofuels and bioplastics. Due to presence of several inhibitors finding a
technically viable and economically feasible option is a major challenge.
Expected results from this study will provide optimal process operational
windows for yields, purity and downstream bioconversion efficacy, in terms of
the independent variables including process time, temperature, solution
chemistry, biomass concentration and enzyme application technology