* 1520680
* Imaging the Fine Structure of Earthquakes and Faults with High-Precision Aftershocks
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Felix Waldhauser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 10/31/2019
* USD 298,000.00

The geometry and structure of active faults, breaks in the Earth's crust along
which movement takes place during an earthquake, are believed to play a
controlling part in how earthquakes start, how big they become, and how they
stop. Only where faults break the Earth's surface can we study the zones of
active faulting directly; the rest, and often more complex part of the fault is
buried deep underground. This project studies the fine-scale details of the
structure and geometry of fault zones at crustal depths using aftershocks of
larger earthquakes in California. Using highly accurate locations of aftershocks
along faults that just broke in big earthquakes, the internal makeup of fault
zones can be imaged at the meter scale. This will enable detailed studies of
fault features such as the thickness of damage zones and irregularities in the
fault surface, which are essential for understanding how faults work and which
factors control the evolution of rupture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
characterization of three-dimensional fault zone structure and its evolution is
essential for understanding how faults work and which factors control the
evolution of rupture. This project studies the ultra-fine, three-dimensional
structure of active faults in California, how it evolves with fault maturity,
and how it ultimately governs the initiation, propagation, and termination of
earthquakes. Geological studies of fault outcrops have provided a generalized
and highly simplified, one-dimensional picture of faults in which the fault
core, including the principal slip surface(s), is surrounded by a damage zone of
fractured rock. In three dimensions faults appear to be much more complex and a
complete description of them, even an idealized one, does not exist. This
project?s main goal is a systematic and comparative analysis of over 150,000
high-precision aftershock locations and additional parameters associated with 78
large (M &amp;#8805; 5.5) strike-slip and thrust earthquakes in California that
have the resolution power to image the internal structure and properties of
fault zones at the scale of tens of meters or better. These data are used to
investigate the evolution of fault zone structure with fault maturity, and to
measure features of fault maturity such as the evolution of the smoothness of
the fault and growth (or shrinkage) of the damage zone with fault displacement.
We expect this study to recognize common factors in the fine structure of these
faults and the earthquakes that occurred on them as well as how these features
change with fault maturity. Furthermore, fault segmentation, jogs, and step
overs will be characterized and their role in the nucleation and arrest of
rupture as well as in fault growth and interaction investigated.