* 1520847
* Hazards SEES: Land Management Strategies for Confronting Risks and Consequences of Wildfire
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Andrew Plantinga, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,724,821.00

A team consisting of natural scientists and social scientists identifies land
management strategies that will reduce the risk and the impacts of wildfires.
Federal and state agencies apply fuel treatment techniques such as thinning and
controlled burns that often generate unintended consequences for humans and
ecosystems because neither the agencies nor the research community fully
understand the interactions among fire, vegetation, and ecosystem services.
Furthermore, agency decision makers may make decisions about fuel treatments on
the basis of public attention, economic considerations, and political dynamics.
This research combines an analysis of agency decision making with an
understanding of the consequences of fuel treatment for fire risk, water
provision, wildlife habitat, and carbon storage. In addition, there are a series
of meetings with land managers to ensure that the research helps land managers
to improve the management of wildfire in the public lands that border urban
areas.

This project involves an integrated model of fuel treatment decision making,
fire risk, and watershed ecology and hydrology. The model combines empirical
analysis of agency decision making with a stochastic model of fire spread and
the Region Hydro-Ecologic Simulation System (RHESSys), a spatially distributed
mechanistic model of ecosystem growth and hydrology. The research team uses the
model to analyze the impact of fuel treatment decisions and prescribes optimal
fuel treatment strategies according to criteria that reflect interactions among
climate, vegetation, hydrology, and land management actions. The team uses a
series of stakeholder meetings to obtain land manager input in the development
of these criteria. The project includes testing the integrated model at Critical
Zone Observatory sites in New Mexico and the southern Sierra and at a Long-Term
Ecological Research site in Santa Barbara. The team uses state-of-the art
computing to develop integrated modeling tools, workflows, documentation, and
visualization that support the use of the model by a broader research community
and its integration into larger scale earth system models. The work directly
facilitates sustainability by helping land managers to optimize fuel treatment
strategies for their watersheds to reduce the risks, the frequency, the
severity, and the costs of wildfires and support other watershed-scale ecosystem
services such as water provision, habitat and carbon sequestration.