* 1520760
* The Spectrum of Fault Slip Behaviors and the Mechanics of Slow Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Chris Marone, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 395,000.00

Earthquakes represent a sudden release of elastic energy that is stored in the
rocks adjacent to tectonic faults, driving catastrophic failure. In normal
(fast) earthquakes the rupture zone expands at a few kilometers per second, and
fault slip rates reach 1 to 10 meters per second. However, tectonic faults also
fail in slow earthquakes with rupture durations of months or more and fault slip
speeds of a of small fraction of an inch per second or less. Recent work shows
that tectonic faults fail in spectrum of slip modes that includes slow
earthquakes, normal (fast) earthquake, and many other forms of slip. These slow
modes of slip can transfer stress to the fast earthquake zone and potentially
trigger damaging, normal earthquakes. However, we know very little about the
mechanics of slow earthquakes. This research effort will address questions such
as: what determines the rupture speed of slow earthquakes? A central element of
this work is carefully conducted laboratory studies of repetitive, slow stick-
slip events with continuous measurement of acoustic emission, elastic wave speed
and amplitude, and fault zone friction behavior. Hypotheses to be tested
include: 1) does slow slip failure represents prematurely arrested normal (fast)
slip for a range of materials and 2) can the same fault zone can host slow and
fast slip behaviors.

Slow earthquakes are one form of transient fault slip that may load seismogenic
portions of fault zones and abet damaging earthquakes. The origin of slow
earthquakes and related forms of transient fault slip is poorly understood. The
project will take a systematic approach to investigate: 1) the underlying
processes of slow slip, with focus on the frictional mechanisms and continuum
coupling that may explain the spectrum of fault slip behaviors in nature, 2)
microstructural studies of the laboratory samples to assess how shear
localization and strain distribution compare between normal (fast) and slow
stick-slip, and 3) acoustic measurement of fault zone elastic properties, with
particular focus on precursors to failure. The proposed study will extend the
analogy between frictional stick-slip and normal (fast) earthquakes to include
slow slip events. The results will provide insight on the mechanics of slow
earthquakes and other forms of quasi-dynamic fault slip. All data and results
obtained will be published in peer-reviewed journals and made available via
public websites.