* 1520285
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Device for monitoring brain hemorrhage using radio waves.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Daniel Kincaid, Sense Diagnostics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,410.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the reduction of deaths and long-term
disabilities in people suffering from bleeding in the brain caused by
hemorrhagic stroke or traumatic brain injury. The presence of blood outside of
the brain?s vessels and arteries creates a characteristic change in the radio
signal used by the device. Currently, physicians are alerted to worsening
bleeding only when a patient fails to respond appropriately to a clinical exam
that consists of a series of questions and commands. The problem this presents
is that by the time the exam uncovers the additional bleeding, much of the
damage to the brain has already occurred. A large proportion of patients
suffering either hemorrhagic stroke or TBI die or are left severely disabled.
Each year over 70,000 people suffer hemorrhagic stroke, with over half of them
dying. TBI is responsible for over 1 million emergency department visits,
225,000 hospital admissions and 50,000 deaths. Using radio waves to non-
invasively detect brain bleeds will reduce the time it takes to start treatment,
which will save lives, reduce disabilities and result in significant savings to
the health care system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will test the
ability of the SENSE device to detect small amounts of blood (as little as 2 ml)
in both a gelatin model that mimics the electrical properties of the human brain
and in a well-established porcine intracranial hemorrhage model. The gelatin
experiments will place blood at various locations throughout the model. The
prototype device will scan both before and after blood insertion and the results
will be compared to the known location and volume of blood to determine the
ability of the device to accurately detect the blood. Once confirmed in gelatin
models, the device will be tested in a porcine ICH model using an institution
IACUC approved protocol to ensure humane treatment of the test animals. Under
general anesthesia, a small volume of the pig?s own blood will be surgically
infused into the brain. The device will scan the pig?s brain both before and
after insertion of the blood. After the scans are complete,the animals will be
euthanized. The brain will be frozen in liquid nitrogen and sectioned. The scan
results will be compared to the sectioned brain to determine the device?s
ability to accurately detect the location and volume of blood.