* 1520432
* SBIR Phase I:  Large Scale Cultivation of Phytoplankton via Novel Photo-Bioreactor Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Georgiy Vozhdayev, Pure Biomass Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be to develop a sustainable, low-cost, and
replicable method for large-scale production of micro-algal biomass. Microalgae
production is a form of aquaculture capable of producing valuable products
including nutraceuticals, specialty chemicals, pharmaceuticals, feed for
finfish, shellfish, and livestock, as well as food for human consumption.
Moreover, it can be used as a feedstock for biofuels while simultaneously
removing CO2 from the environment. However, for algae cultivation to achieve its
full commercial potential, the technology must be improved. While typical algal
cultivation relies on high-density cell growth, this project will focus on the
science of low-density algal cultivation to achieve high productivity, while
minimizing process requirements for supplemental energy and concentrated CO2. In
addition, the development of a closed-system photo-bioreactor with emphasis on
low cost and modular design will allow the process to be easily replicated
across the country on a variety of lands with otherwise marginal value. As such,
the system can become the basis for a robust aquaculture and biofuels industry,
leading to greater economic development in marginal communities and a source of
sustainable products for the growing world population.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a large-scale algal production
system. Current methods of large-scale microalgae production are limited by
technological problems, which prevent them from being reliable and scalable.
These problems include frequent contamination, low productivity, and increased
operating costs due to inefficient use of water and energy. The goals for our
system are to maintain a low-density algal culture with high productivity for
greater than two months without contamination, while requiring little or no
additional cooling and CO2 supplementation. With the use of a specially designed
harvest apparatus, the plan is to perform periodic harvest cycles in order to
maintain the culture in a low-density state. Using gravity settling, the biomass
will be concentrated by a factor of 100x prior to removal in order to minimize
the loss of water from the system. To characterize the performance of the
system, cell growth rate, batch temperature, pH, and dissolved CO2 levels will
be monitored. Nitrogen/CO2 sparging tests will be used to determine the gas-
liquid mass-transfer coefficient of the reactor. Productivity rates will be
compared with and without the supplementation of concentrated CO2, and culture
purity will be assed daily via microscopy checks.