* 1520425
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering an Industrial Synthetic Microorganism for Lower-Cost  Chemical Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Derek Greenfield, Industrial Microbes, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be a fermentation-based technology capable of
converting abundant American natural gas supplies into valuable building-block
chemicals that will advance economic and security interests while encouraging
innovation in manufacturing. This project focuses on engineering microorganisms
that can convert natural gas into green chemicals via fermentation. Natural gas
is the least expensive raw material available for chemical production. The use
of this inexpensive raw material will open up multi-billion-dollar fuel and
chemical markets for green manufacturing methods that have been previously
disregarded as unprofitable. Commercialization of these projects will increase
innovation, investment, and job growth in the clean technology, manufacturing,
and construction industries. If successful, natural gas-based fermentation
technology will reduce carbon pollution; a lifecycle analysis for production of
a target chemical shows a six-fold reduction of carbon dioxide emissions
compared to the current petroleum and coal process. Finally, this project aims
to discover new enzymes that may find applications in treating hydrocarbon
spills in the environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to engineer an ethane-consuming pathway into an industrial
microorganism in order to reduce the cost of manufacturing chemicals. The
solution centers on identifying ethane-oxidizing enzymes from environmental DNA
samples. The vast majority of bacteria have never been cultured, but recent
technological advances now allow millions of previously unknown DNA fragments to
be extracted from diverse environments and tested. Screening environmental DNA
samples for novel functionality has identified new pathways to bio-based
chemicals. This proposal outlines a selection-based strategy to enrich a large
library for enzymes that can oxidize ethane. The outcome of our Phase I research
will be the world's first industrial strain engineered to grow on ethane. This
strain will serve as a platform for: (1) accelerating the growth rate on ethane,
using directed evolution, (2) producing industrial products, including a
valuable four-carbon building block chemical, and (3) developing a pathway that
consumes methane. This powerful selection scheme could lead to the discovery of
entirely new classes of enzymes, which may function via novel catalytic
mechanisms. Successful, functional expression of such an enzyme in a well-
studied strain would accelerate biochemical characterization of these
fascinating and complicated enzymes.