* 1520570
* RUI: Studies of Lorentz Violation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Matthew Mewes, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 105,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew Mewes at
California Polytechnic State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lorentz invariance
is the basis of Special Relativity and is thought to be an exact symmetry of
nature. It is a feature of both the Standard Model of particle physics and
General Relativity. Consequently, any violation of this basic principle would be
a signal of new physics. Moreover, attempts to unify the Standard Model and
General Relativity suggest Lorentz invariance might be slightly broken at low
energies. The research of Professor Mewes focuses on the theoretical description
of Lorentz-symmetry breaking and the identification of possible experimental
signatures. The goal of this project is to extend existing theory to include a
very broad class of Lorentz-invariance violations. To date, most studies of
Lorentz violation have focused on the simplest minimal violations. This project
aims to understand the theoretical and experimental significance of more general
nonminimal violations. Research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new physical law. Moreover, parts of this work
will be accessible to undergraduates and will provide research opportunities for
physics majors at Cal Poly, a primarily undergraduate institution. Students
involved in this research will gain valuable exposure to theoretical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, this project seeks to
fill in several major gaps in the theoretical framework known as the Standard-
Model-Extension (SME). The SME aims to provide a general description of Lorentz
violation in any system. The generality of the approach implies that the full
SME contains an infinite number of violations. To keep the problem tractable,
most studies have focused on the minimal SME, which restricts attention to
operators of renormalizable mass dimension. However, there are reasons to
suspect that nonrenormalizable violations may dominate. Recent studies have
systematically examined nonrenormalizable violations in photons and free
fermions. This project will build on this work by studying violations in gauge
interactions between photons and fermions. It will also extend our understanding
of potential violations in gravity by considering higher-order nonminimal
violations in General Relativity.