* 1520917
* A Workshop for Cooperative Studies of Earth's Deep Interior
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Catherine Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2017
* USD 93,549.00

Study of Earth's deep interior is a multidisciplinary and international
activity. The Cooperative Studies of Earth's Deep Interior (CSEDI) program was
conceived in the 1990s to facilitate multidisciplinary research activities in
this area by US researchers. The last update to the research plan was produced
in 2004. Numerous advances over the past decade make this a good time for the
deep Earth community to revisit the CSEDI science plan and articulate future
directions for the CSEDI program. This award will support a community-wide
workshop in January 2015. Studies of Earth's deep interior provide the key to
the evolution of our planet to its present state, and inform us about its role
and deep impacts on climate the hydrosphere and biosphere. The proposed workshop
will provide the opportunity for multidisciplinary discussions around the
following themes and subtopics: (1) Evolution of Earth and Planets, Path to the
Present: Initial Conditions; Planetary Formation; Early Life; Early Tectonic
Regimes; Thermal evolution. (2) Deep Earth Engine, Present state and dynamics:
Structure and Origin of Major interfaces; Geodynamo; Pattern of large scale flow
in the Mantle; Core structure. (3) Deep Impacts on Climate/Hydrosphere/
Biosphere and the Future: Role of volatiles; melt; mass and heat fluxes. The
role of research infrastructure and community organizations in CSEDI will also
be discussed.

Breaking down barriers to doing truly multidisciplinary research is particularly
important for improving our understanding of the way the Earth works. The
proposed workshop will engage the CSEDI community at all levels from early
career researchers to senior participants fully aware of how deep earth research
has evolved over their careers. It will not only evaluate where our science is,
but will also consider the question of how best to do multidisciplinary science
to solve the problems that face us. Deep Earth topics also have a strong appeal
to the public, since they include planetary evolution on time scales ranging
from accretion of the Earth through origin of the geomagnetic field, development
of early life, formation of Large Igneous Provinces and present day hazards
related to volcanic process and climate change.