* 1520189
* SBIR Phase I:  The Advancement of a Novel High Efficiency Single Cell Protein for Aquafeeds
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Larry Feinberg, KnipBio Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project is to develop an alternative to fishmeal for the fast
growing aquaculture industry. Fishmeal is the main component of aquafeed, and
there is an urgent need to find alternatives. Aquaculture, the fastest growing
animal protein sector, is poised to double by 2030, and represents one of the
most effective ways to feed the world's growing population. Two out of every
three fish consumed will be raised on a farm. Captured fisheries and aquaculture
supplied approximately 154 M tons of fish in 2011 with a total value of $217B.
Farm raised fish outpaced beef production in 2013 for the first time ever. The
overexploitation of &gt;75% of our natural fisheries has created shrinking
supplies of the critical feed ingredient, fishmeal. The continued growth of the
industry is vitally tied to generating innovative protein alternatives. In
addition, carotenoids like astaxanthin, lycopene, and beta-carotene, provide
pigment to color important farm-raised species, but also have an essential
nutritional role for immunity as a powerful anti-oxidant. While feed represents
the single largest operating cost to the farmer, carotenoids can be the most
expensive ingredient within aquafeeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to develop engineered, methanol-utilizing bacteria that convert
natural gas into a novel carotenoid-laden single cell protein capable of
dramatically lowering the cost of carotinoids, and serving as a suitable
replacement for fishmeal. The goal is to commercialize an economically viable
source of carotenoids, amino acids, and alternative protein. The project uses
advanced genetic tools that enable rapid iteration for strain development to
meet the goals of increasing efficiency by 50%. The economical co-production of
protein and carotenoids leads to a healthier, advantaged feed, while combining
high-value functional ingredients with high-efficiency bioconversion.