* 1520293
* RUI:  Casimir Forces From Scattering Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Noah Graham, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Noah Graham at Middlebury
College.

Microelectromechanical devices --- tiny machines that can be embedded within an
integrated circuit chip --- can trigger car airbags in a collision, detect the
movement of a video-game controller or the orientation of a smartphone, sense
low air pressure in a car tire, and provide the feedback necessary to stabilize
car suspensions and flying drones. As these devices shrink toward sizes of a
micron or smaller, a special quantum-mechanical force called the Casimir force
will begin to play an important role in their design and function. In contrast
to the more familiar electric attraction and repulsion between opposite and like
charges, the Casimir force arises from quantum-mechanical fluctuations inherent
in Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle. While the physical mechanism underlying
the Casimir force has been well understood for many years, until recently
precise calculations were only possible for the most elementary examples. New
techniques, in which the Casimir force is expressed in terms of information
about the reflection of light from each individual object on which the force is
acting, have greatly expanded the range of potential applications. The research
supported by this grant will formulate and implement numerical calculations of
this scattering data, making it possible to calculate Casimir forces in a broad
range of systems relevant to experimental physics and nanotechnology. These
general-purpose computational tools will also be applicable to other problems in
science and engineering. Research in this area thus advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of science with many potential technological
implications. And because this approach is centered around fundamental concepts
in quantum mechanics and electromagnetism, it will be possible for undergraduate
students to make meaningful contributions to this research at the same time as
they build scientific and computational skills that will serve them well in
graduate or professional work, both within physics and across a wide range of
fields in science and engineering.

The technical approach to this problem will be based on the variable phase
method, which this research program is applying for the first time to
electromagnetic scattering. High-performance parallel computation will make it
possible to go beyond objects with a high degree of symmetry to calculate full
T-matrices in multichannel scattering, for materials with position- and
frequency-dependent dielectric response. These tools will then be applied to
calculations of Casimir forces in cases of current experimental interest, such
as dielectric gratings with deep corrugations, for which existing techniques
based on the Rayleigh expansion are insufficient.