* 1520546
* SBIR Phase I:  Chris Cross Cylinder Head Validation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Shawn Chriswell, DC's Machining, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in terms of the reduction of emissions and
the fuel savings on any motorcycle with this cylinder head design, and possibly
also any internal combustion engine with this cylinder head design. A vast
majority of the world's internal combustion engine-driven fleet today are
operated without requiring any emission-improving devices such as catalytic
converters or fuel injection. The proposed technology reduces emissions and
increases gas mileage without requiring any emission-improving equipment. The
proposed cylinder head design could also increase the engine performance as an
added benefit. This project has the potential for producing progressively local,
national, and even global impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is in the whole new way of thinking about how fuel burns inside the
internal combustion engine. Additionally, there are new ideas about the flow of
air and the combustion process of the cylinder head. This project is a newly
designed, divided combustion chamber cylinder head, in which more of the fuel is
burned inside the chamber, resulting in significantly lower output of emissions
gases; namely hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and carbon dioxide
greenhouse gases. The objective of this research is to prove these results on a
500cc motorcycle with the newly designed cylinder head installed. The motorcycle
will be taken to an emissions lab to be tested for emissions as well as for gas
mileage. It will be tested with catalytic converters installed, and again
without catalytic converters, to show results using emission-improving devices
as well as results of its stand-alone merit.