* 1520306
* SBIR Phase I:  A Modular Hardware Ecosystem for Hands-on Cybersecurity Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Andrew Hennessy, HAKHAM SYSTEMS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project focuses on developing a modular, flexible, and simple
hardware ecosystem for cybersecurity education and training of students at all
levels including undergraduate and high school students as well as industry
professionals. The ecosystem will consist of custom-designed hardware modules,
associated software, and instructions. Currently, there is no integrated
hardware platform for cybersecurity education and training that is available at
a price point acceptable to the educational sector. Existing hardware platforms
fail to serve this purpose since they are not designed with security issues in
mind. The proposed ecosystem can meet the critical need of effective
cybersecurity education and training through a unique product line that builds
on a distinctive hands-on approach. It will enable student to build complex
computer systems; then "hack" them to implement diverse security attacks and
countermeasures. The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR project
primarily lies in creating a well-trained cybersecurity workforce to meet the
increasing market demand and contribute, as well, to a secure and safe nation
that can reliably defend against cyber-attacks. The project is expected to
create new jobs for design and development of the educational modules as well as
significant revenue by selling these products.

This SBIR project develops a set of innovative education and training products
that will fill an important gap in the cybersecurity education, providing
training for both our current workforce as well as our nation's next generation
with the science and engineering of cybersecurity. A distinctive feature of the
products is that they comprehensively cover all aspects of security encompassing
hardware, software, network and information security. While high-level software
security has been considered for many years, low-level hardware and embedded
firmware security education is not adequately addressed. Growing number of
attack instances are relying on low-level hardware vulnerabilities. These
products will enable students to build a computer system of selected capability
by adding various components (e.g. sensors, communication units) and connect
multiple units to create a network. It then allows them to implement various
security attacks ranging from attacks on software and network (e.g. man-in-the-
middle, impersonation attacks) to hardware (e.g. hardware Trojan, bus snooping).
The experiments can be highly effective to demonstrate the complex nature of
system security and understand the defense mechanisms. Furthermore, they will
encourage students not only to learn and design solutions against known attacks,
but also to discover novel threats and defenses against them.