* 1520226
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel cathode for long-cycling capacitive deionization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* James Landon, PowerTech Water
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 178,676.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in improving the energy efficiency and
environmental sustainability of drinking water treatment. This project develops
a new low-cost and environmentally friendly water treatment technology, called
inverse Capacitive Deionization (i-CDI), that uses small amounts of electricity
to soften or desalinate drinking water and industrial process water. i-CDI is
more environmentally friendly than salt-based water softening, which adds salt
to drinking water, and potentially much less expensive than reverse osmosis
systems (RO) to install and maintain. New low-cost water treatment technologies
are of increasing importance to densely populated communities at risk from
drought or dwindling groundwater supply the Southwest United States, as well as
large areas of Africa, Asia, and the Middle East. A similar water treatment
technology using electricity to soften and desalinate drinking water, called
Capacitive deionization (CDI), suffers from oxidation and fouling which
deactivates the carbon electrode surface, severely limiting the operational
lifetime. This deactivation can take place over the course of 24-72 hours.
Therefore, while CDI may have energy benefits over RO, deactivation prevents CDI
from being practically useful in the commercial or industrial water treatment
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is based on materials innovations that directly address the deactivation
mechanism that previously made CDI systems impractical for commercial use, and
without adding costly secondary components. In this i-CDI development project,
the carbon electrodes used to separate salt from water will be treated to
increase efficiency and lifetime of i-CDI. With this new i-CDI electrode
technology, the benefits of CDI: high efficiency, low system cost, and less
maintenance, can be achieved while maintaining long operational life. As the
importance between energy and water continues to increase and fresh water
supplies become further strained, the development of more efficient desalination
technology will be crucial. This i-CDI process, with its stable salt separation
capability, will see implementation in a variety of desalination applications
including home, municipal, and industrial water softening and wastewater
treatment.