* 1520856
* Variations in Hotspot Volcanism as a Key to Understanding Deep Mantle Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Eric Mittelstaedt, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 219,987.00

Averaged over millions of years, the rate of lava production at a seamount or
island controls its final shape and size. Along long seamount chains, such as
the Hawaiian-Emperor chain, observed seamount and island volumes change
episodically indicating changes in the lava production rate responsible for
their formation. The source of lavas forming these islands is believed to be the
melting of mantle plumes: upwelling, stationary conduits of hot, chemically
enriched material that originate from deep within the Earth's mantle and rise
continuously to the surface. However, in contrast to observations, a
continuously upwelling conduit would produce a nearly constant lava production
rate; this project aims to address the processes that interrupt or perturb a
continuously upwelling mantle plume, and, thus, the rate of lava production
along hotspot island chains. Understanding the processes that control changes in
lava production rate through time will provide insights into the fundamental
connections between volcanoes at the surface and the dynamics of the deep Earth.
There are two locations within the mantle where upwelling plumes are likely to
be perturbed: 1) the core-mantle boundary, where anomalously dense material may
be incorporated into the plume source and change the upwelling rate, and 2) in
the mid-mantle, where abrupt changes in the phase, or mineral structure, of
mantle rocks can alter the density and, thus, upwelling rate of plumes passing
through these transitions. Changes in the upwelling rates will likely differ
between these mechanisms and will result in time-varying changes in lava
production rate at the surface that differ depending upon the mechanism
responsible. The purpose of the proposed work is to use a combination of
laboratory experiments and 3D numerical simulations to quantify the magnitude,
length, and time scales over which variations in mantle plume upwelling caused
by deep mantle processes will affect lava production and compositions at the
Earth's surface, changing the shape and size of island chains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry and flux of erupted lavas differ strikingly
between hotspot seamount chains; some hotspots have nearly uniform chemical
sources and volcanic output (e.g., Kerguelen), others vary episodically over
millions of years (e.g., Hawaii), and yet others appear to decrease slowly with
time (e.g., Louisville). The processes that control this inter-hotspot
variability, as well as intra-hotspot variations, are poorly constrained. The
proposed work will quantify the degree to which two deep-mantle mechanisms
affect plume upwelling and, in turn, observed surface manifestations of
hotspots: 1) entrainment of material from Large Low Shear-wave Velocity
Provinces (LLSVP), and 2) interaction with the mantle transition zone. This
project will constrain the impact of these two mechanisms through combined
laboratory and numerical experiments to quantify how deep mantle dynamics lead
to predictable magnitudes, length-, and time-scales of variations in mantle
plume upwelling and, consequently, melt production and erupted lava compositions
at the Earth's surface. The first objective will be to document the range of
surface variability in nature by assembling a global database of excess hotspot
magmatism, spacing between volcanoes, and geochemical data (major and trace
elements, and radiogenic isotopes) along age-progressive hotspot tracks. Next,
the investigators will conduct complementary laboratory and numerical
experiments to quantify the physics of each of the above mechanisms
individually. Finally, numerical simulations including both mechanisms will
assess their impact on surface manifestations of mantle plumes. Laboratory
experiments will be conducted in glass-walled tanks filled with glucose syrup as
an analogue for the mantle. Using a 3D, finite-difference, marker-in-cell code,
two sets of numerical simulations will be run for each process: 1) initial
simulations with identical conditions to the laboratory experiments to verify
the numerical approach, and 2) extension to more Earth-like conditions.
Throughout the proposed work, the compiled database of observations from natural
hotspot tracks will constrain the laboratory and numerical results.