* 1520137
* SBIR Phase I:  Area and Energy Efficient Error Floor Free Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Decoder Architecture for Flash Based Storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Paul Budnik, TexasLDPC Inc., dba Symbyon Systems
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be a substantially more effective and
efficient error correction scheme for flash memory than exists today. This will
provide better reliability and extend the life of flash memory and will have a
major impact on several technologies and markets such as enterprise storage at
data centers, solid state drives, tablets, smart phones, and other consumer
electronics. The flash memory market was estimated to include $30.1 billion in
production and sales in 2013 and is expected to grow to $43.9 billion by 2018.
The enterprise storage market is estimated to be $1 billion in 2014 and a robust
growth is expected over the next few years. A substantial fraction of this
market is related to error correction controllers for flash memories which are
playing an even more important goal than ever considering the rapid scaling down
and increasing capacities of flash memories which introduce more read errors
than before.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address and
develop tools to overcome problems that have traditionally prevented low-density
parity-check (LDPC) codes from being deployed in flash memories and error
correction controllers. A major problem is that these codes have error floors
which prevent them from achieving very low error probabilities required in flash
memories. In order to overcome this deficiency, new algorithms will be developed
to understand the nature of the problem and to eliminate it using advanced
signal processing methods. Area and energy efficient decoder technologies will
be developed that make LDPC codes suitable for flash applications. This will
include research optimizing LDPC based error correction systems for area and
energy efficiency and elimination of the error floor problem. It will also
include research on optimizing the detailed circuit design.