* 1520873
* Hazards SEES: Advancing Resilience to Compounding Disasters: An Integrated Natural-Human Systems Assessment of Wildfire Vulnerability
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Jeffrey Hicke, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,775,000.00

This project seeks to increase resilience to wildfire hazards by modeling and
mapping community and ecosystem service vulnerability to wildfire. The hazards
of wildfire have increased significantly over time as a function of communities
expanding into more rural areas adjacent to the urban interface and the
increasing prevalence of conditions for large and rapid wildfire growth. Both
initial wildfire events and the post-fire floods and landslides that often
follow them are considerable threats to the growing population in fire-prone
environments, the infrastructure associated with that populace, and the
ecosystem services it relies upon, such as clean water or an economic base such
as timber or tourism. However, the manner in which other environmental factors,
such as drought and bark beetle outbreaks in forests, contribute to wildfire
spread and the potential for post-fire flooding is poorly understood and not
currently modeled in an integrated way that supports policy development and
community adaptation planning. This project focuses on the Pacific Northwest
region to develop a fire component to the existing BioEarth model that will
improve our understanding of factors that contribute to wildfires becoming
disasters, and prioritizes stakeholder and involvement and public engagement to
identify management actions that will increase adaptive capacity and overcome
social and political barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although periodic
wildfires are important for a healthy ecosystem, a combination of biophysical
and socioeconomic factors can turn a fire into a disaster, with negative impacts
in socioecological contexts. These impacts can last for decades, and can include
increased vulnerability to subsequent, cascading hazards such as flooding,
landslides, and the potential for local to regional economic collapse.
Increasing community resilience to these compounding, wildfire-related disasters
requires specific attention to social, economic, political, and environmental
dynamics at spatial scales ranging from local to national and at temporal scales
ranging from minutes to multiple decades. There is a growing understanding of
isolated interactions between fire, climate, ecosystem structure and function,
forest management activities, and their impacts at multiple scales. The complex
and dynamic coupling of these interactions into an integrated human-natural
systems model that includes links to policy, resource management, and adaptive
capacity, however, is poorly understood. This lack of synthesis limits wildfire
resilience in the context of a changing global environment. The overarching goal
of this project is to support policy and other decision-making processes at
local, regional, and national scales to reduce the risk of wildfire becoming a
disaster and increase community and ecological adaptive capacities. This will be
done by 1) advancing the understanding of wildfire risk and associated impacts
in the context of interactions between regional climate and other forest
ecosystem perturbations (e.g., drought in future climates, insect outbreak, and
a history of fire management) through new developments in integrated
environmental modeling, 2) improving the ability to assess and predict
vulnerability and resilience to wildfire using a scalable regional approach, and
3) coordinating with a stakeholder advisory group to develop a decision support
system for providing spatially-explicit feasible actions to increase local,
regional, and national wildfire resilience.