* 1520463
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Humanization of Antibodies Directed to Protein and Carbohydrate Antigens
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Monica Berrondo, Macromoltek
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 178,700.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to develop an online, fully automated platform
for designing high-affinity antibodies for use as potential drug candidates. The
success of antibody-based drugs has generated interest in faster and more
efficient methods to discover and optimize antibodies. The goal of this project
will be to develop and implement a computation method for producing protein
sequences of humanized antibodies. This will be achieved by providing software
that allows scientists to move some of their initial experiments into the cloud,
and achieve results much more quickly by using computational methods. The
typical experiments that will be replaced by this method take about a month of
time and cost tens of thousands of dollars. With the aid of such a method, this
time can be cut back to the click of a button. The expected savings in time and
cost for new drug development will improve the features of drug candidates,
enhancing the success rate of clinical studies, and accelerating the
commercialization of new drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes the development of a platform for antibody design that maximizes human
content, retention of affinity, enhancement of developability, and generation of
intellectual property. Immunogenicity is a critical concern when developing an
antibody-based drug. Humanization is designed to increase the human content of
an antibody originally obtained from sources other than human, such as mouse or
rabbit hybridomas. The objective is to simplify the design of humanized
antibodies, which currently involves many labor-intensive steps. The strategy is
to offer clients online prediction services precisely designed and focused on
antibody analysis. Secondly, the goal is to address the emerging need for
humanizing antibodies directed against both protein and carbohydrate antigens.
Current prediction software is biased towards training series that are specific
for protein antigens. The plan is to use a pool of anti-Burkholderia mouse
monoclonal antibody candidates have been derived from protein and carbohydrate
targets. This will result in the ability to assess the utility of the training
series under development to perform humanization of antibodies directed against
both classes of antigens, and use the information obtained to further optimize
prediction procedures.