* 1520762
* Collaborative Research: Changes in river-aquifer exchange induced by groundwater pumping, and their effect on arsenic contamination in the Red River Delta, Vietnam
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Charles Harvey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 149,970.00

Collaborative Research: Changes in river-aquifer exchange induced by groundwater
pumping and their effect on arsenic contamination in the Red River Delta,
Vietnam

Abstract

At least two billion people in the world, including an estimated 40 million in
the United States, use domestic wells for potable drinking water. The quality of
this groundwater can have a large impact on human health, yet we know little
about how extensive groundwater pumping, primarily for agricultural and urban
water supplies, impacts groundwater quality. This project studies the effect of
groundwater pumping on the sustainability of water quality in aquifer systems
affected by arsenic, a naturally occurring carcinogen. In South and Southeast
Asia, extensive pumping has influenced the spatial extent and concentration of
arsenic contamination in groundwater. This field-based project examines how
hydrological changes impact the biogeochemistry of aquifers and, subsequently,
the arsenic levels in groundwater. Specifically, this project investigates how
urban water use in Vietnam is changing aquifer hydrology and river-groundwater
interactions that mobilize arsenic. The results of this study will provide
generalizable insights leading to more effective management of groundwater
resources impacted by naturally occurring contaminants in other settings. The
research activities will involve undergraduate and graduate students from
Columbia University, Barnard College, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and engage underprivileged high school students in New York City.

In northern Vietnam, the reversal of groundwater flow along the western bank of
the Red River has been induced by groundwater pumping for the city of Hanoi.
This flow reversal draws high-As groundwater from a gray Holocene aquifer into
an adjacent low arsenic, orange Pleistocene aquifer, and the orange Pleistocene
sands are turning gray as iron oxyhydroxides are reduced by advected dissolved
organic carbon (DOC). This project examines how pumping influences the source
and composition of aquifer recharge at the riverbank, where labile arsenic is
available and high levels of DOC are released by freshly deposited sediments. To
quantify the impact of urban pumping, the hydrology and biogeochemistry of the
western bank aquifers of the Red River influenced by pumping are compared to the
eastern bank aquifers that are insulated from the effects of pumping. This
controlled study quantifies the extent to which human perturbations have
affected the chemical composition of groundwater and aquifer sediments.