* 1520455
* SBIR Phase I:  Tailored Thermal Expansion Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* James Monroe, Thermal Expansion Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,992.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop new alloys
whose thermal expansion properties can be tailored for critical applications.
For example, tailored thermal expansion alloys will prevent shifts in laser
output frequencies, i.e. laser color, by preventing the natural temperature-
induced thermal expansion and contraction that occurs in lasers. This
temperature stability is extremely important for fiber-optic systems that are
the backbone of the telecommunications industry. According to Strategies
Unlimited, the telecommunications laser market was $3.515 billion in 2014, and
it is expected to increase with the increasing number of mobile devices and
growing demand for high-speed internet. The alloys to be developed in this
project also have potential to add value in a number of other industrial and
electronics applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies in a new method to exhibit unprecedented control over thermal
expansion properties in a variety of metal alloys. The discovery that mechanical
deformation tailors or "programs" the thermal expansion of a bulk metal to match
that of other common materials (polymers, ceramics) will change the way
scientists and engineers design for thermal compensation. These alloys can also
be tailored not to expand or contract with temperature changes. This wide range
of tailored alloy responses is achieved without chemical changes or composite
fabrication methods upon which competing technologies rely. This Phase I project
will reduce the risks facing new applications of this tailored thermal expansion
alloy technology by developing scalable processing schemes for cyclically-stable
properties in affordable bulk alloy systems. Alloys will be purchased,
mechanically tuned to a specific thermal expansion value and tested for cyclic
stability. The expected outcome of this work is the realization of tailored
thermal expansion alloys that can be easily integrated into lasers.