* 1520557
* SBIR Phase I: A transformative gesture-based application for learning and doing mathematics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Andrew Randono, Alef Omega, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I Project researches a new category of interactive math
software, and develops a gesture-based mathematical application for doing
symbolic derivations. The project targets a broad audience consisting of
students, educators, scientists, and engineers. The application provides a
novel, touch-based user interface allowing for an unprecedented connection
between the user and mathematics. Research will focus on developing an
application that is structured from the ground-up around how people actually
learn and do mathematics. The project develops an application environment for
discovery-style learning of basic math that increases retention by pairing motor
memory with mathematical operations. It is scalable to accommodate advanced math
for scientists and engineers, and structured around the way professionals do
analytic derivations with pen-and-paper. The project's larger societal impact is
to show students that mathematics is an interactive activity, and to expose the
dynamical beauty of equations by bringing a human touch to math. For the
professional, the application increases productivity, reduces human errors, and
enhances collaboration. It creates a new market category closely related to the
already thriving industry of computer algebra systems, and addresses a market
need for a mathematical tool lying in the empty space between pen-and-paper and
existing computer algebra systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of modern
touch-based devices such as tablets and smart phones paves the way for an entire
new category of interactive math software for symbolic manipulation. By pairing
gestures to mathematical operations the need for the traditional syntax-heavy
command-line interface can be fully avoided. The new interface retains many of
the calculation advantages of existing computer algebra system, while giving
users the step-by-step control to finesse a derivation as they would with pen
and paper. Focusing on elementary, stepwise algorithms the core math engine can
be lightweight and fast. This not only ensures that the interactive interface is
responsive, but also allows the application to be sold at an extremely
competitive price-point. While eliminating frivolous human errors, the math
application also turns learning mathematics into dynamic and interactive play.
The goal of Phase I consists of developing a proof-of-concept version
programmed, using a modern game engine and taking full advantage of advanced
graphics capabilities and cross-platform functionality. Care is taken to
optimize the user interface allowing for rapid, yet intuitive, stepwise
manipulation of equations. Research will focus on constructing a core math
engine that is scalable, allowing for future integration of more advanced math
functionality.