* 1520647
* Melt segregation in a deforming partially molten rock - an experimental investigation of the consequences of viscous anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* David Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2018
* USD 234,779.00

Melt segregation in a deforming partially molten rock ? An experimental
investigation of the consequences of viscous anisotropy Kohlstedt -
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extraction of melt from mantle rocks composed of solid
grains plus 1 or 2% melt results in eruption of magma at Earth?s surface. This
process controls the chemical and physical evolution of our planet. Since
processes occurring at great depths are not directly observable, much of our
understanding of the dynamics of partially molten regions of Earth?s interior
relies on numerical/computer models of the behavior of partially molten rocks.
The starting point for models of a mechanically weak melt in a strong but
deformable rock is known as two-phase flow theory. Application of this theory to
large-scale processes occurring far below Earth?s surface requires equations
describing the viscosity (strength) and the rate at which melt flows through a
rock. An important test of the validity of models used to describe the
interactions of deformation, melt distribution, and melt migration in the mantle
is their ability to explain phenomena observed in laboratory experiments on
partially molten rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental breakthrough in the
theory describing the dynamics of partially molten rocks occurred with the
publication of three fundamental papers in 2009. These papers explored the
implications of anisotropic viscosity (i.e., the directional dependence of the
strength of a rock) on melt distribution during deformation. It was hypothesized
that viscosity (strength) should be anisotropic because pockets of melt become
aligned during deformation. Based on this anisotropic grain-scale melt
distribution, it was predicted that melt-rich bands should develop in deforming
rocks, consistent with previously experimental observations. This analysis also
predicted that solid and melt should segregate from regions of low stress to
regions of high stress. Our recent experiments, in fact, demonstrated this
behavior in partially molten samples deformed in torsion in our laboratory. A
key aspect of our research is a synergistic collaboration with scientists at the
University of Oxford (computer models) and Tokyo (theory). Through our
cooperative efforts, models based on two-phase flow theory will be tested
against experimental observations in order to advance our understanding of how
melt flows in Earth?s mantle. While agreement between theory and experiment is
clearly important, discrepancies represent an avenue for progress in refining
theory. Discrepancies between theoretical prediction and experimental
observation represent an opportunity to refine our understanding of the grain-
scale mechanics of partially molten rocks. Thus, well-designed experiments with
detailed analysis of melt distribution, melt segregation, and mechanical
properties are essential. A unique aspect of this research is our involvement in
STEM outreach in Mexico though ?Clubes de ciencia MÃ©xico?, an organization of
science outreach and mentoring for high school and undergraduate students in
Mexico. The science clubs are one-week long, very interactive workshops designed
to initiate students to science and research; special focus is given to
scientific reasoning and ethics. A recent workshop on ?How do rocks flow??
illustrated the necessity of experimental studies for understanding our planet?s
evolution. Outreach will continue through a website and outreach workshops,
using our current experimental investigations to explain the implications of
experimental research for understanding large-scale dynamics of our planet.