* 1520825
* Hazards SEES: Advanced Lagrangian Methods for Prediction, Mitigation and Response to Environmental Flow Hazards
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Shawn Shadden, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,811,000.00

Environmental flow disasters occur when hazardous material is released and
dispersed into the environment by the natural processes of air and water. Recent
catastrophic examples include: the spread of oil during the Deep Water Horizon
disaster, the passage of the ash cloud from the Eyjafjallajokull volcano through
commercial air space, and the trail of radioactive waste from the Fukushima
reactor disaster. These types of hazards are common and many have profound
impacts on society. When hazardous material is released, accurate predictions of
where the material is likely to go can greatly improve emergency response and
significantly reduce negative consequences. Preparedness and effective response
can save many lives, untold environmental damage and enormous financial cost.
However, predicting where materials go in complex environmental flows remains a
formidable scientific challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to
transform science's environmental flow predictive capabilities by exploiting and
advancing recent fundamental breakthroughs in four-dimensional (3D+time)
Lagrangian methods. This research will integrate theoretical, computational, and
observational approaches to develop and utilize cutting-edge Lagrangian methods
with data driven modeling for the purpose of uncovering, quantifying and
predicting key transport processes and structures during regional flow-based
hazards in the ocean and atmosphere. This project will (i) exploit and advance
mathematical methods for four-dimensional (3D+time) Lagrangian Coherent
Structures (LCS) in order to elucidate unsteady Lagrangian flow transport; (ii)
test and develop LCS methods on historical data sets; (iii) produce efficient,
accurate, distributed and web-based software to support LCS analysis and
visualization; (iv) integrate LCS methodology into numerical models and non-
Gaussian data assimilation; (v) perform field testing and a proof-of-concept,
coupled ocean-atmosphere field experiment; and (vi) respond to a hazard of
opportunity during the tenure of the project.