* 1520485
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Bioprocess for Lipid Production from Industrial Byproducts
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Thomas Jeffries, Xylome Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be to enable the biochemical conversion of sugars
into fatty acids that can be used to make fuels such as biodiesel. Xylome
Corporation is using biotechnology to engineer a yeast platform that will
produce fatty oils. This will facilitate conversion of existing biofuel and
biomass byproduct streams into useful commercial fatty acids while reducing
processing costs. The production of fatty acids will facilitate production of
the initial downstream target which is biodiesel, but longer term, the
technology could enhance production of higher value second-generation biofuels.
Xylome?s proposed technology could produce approximately 1.2 million gallons of
biodiesel/yr. worth about $4 million from the byproducts of a single 70 million
gallon ethanol plant. Beyond sugars from byproduct streams of existing ethanol
plants, Xylome?s technology platform could facilitate fatty acid production from
cellulosic and hemicellulosic sugars serving as a feedstock for cellulosic
biofuel production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this Phase I
research project is to enable lipid production during growth. The second will be
to relieve cellular capacity constraints. The project will alter regulation of
genes that limit production and introduce pathways that expand capacity. Yeasts,
and fungi synthesize lipid when given excess carbon and limiting nitrogen, but
low levels of lipid synthesis occurs during cell growth. Normally lipid only
accumulates in cellular vacuoles after cell division has stopped. This requires
extended cultivation times, and the amount of lipid that can be formed is
constrained by the cell volume. The proposed approach will overexpress the
enzymes for lipid synthesis so that the engineered cells will produce oil during
growth while maintaining high levels of metabolic activity. New pathways will be
introduced along with processes that will enable continuous lipid recovery.
These modifications should enable a) lipid production in continuous high-density
culture, thereby overcoming inherent low rates of lipid synthesis, and b)
continuous separation of lipid, thereby alleviating the need for cell harvest,
rupture and extraction.