* 1520102
* SBIR Phase I:  A program to develop scientific reasoning skills in K-3 students
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Dmitry Borovikov, MindWick, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
an innovative program to spark elementary school students? interest in and
passion for science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields and to
prepare them for success in STEM education at the middle and high school levels
and in their later careers and lives. The program is designed to develop basic
scientific reasoning, problem-solving, and critical-thinking skills that are
central to academic achievement and workforce readiness in the twenty-first
century. According to data from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, eight out of
every ten new jobs created in the United States through 2025 will require some
STEM skills. The innovation thus addresses a critical need to raise students'
STEM proficiency and improve the economic health of our nation. The program's
simple math and science content supplements rather than replaces standard
curricula, making it attractive to elementary school teachers and supporting
widespread distribution to schools across the United States.

The project's primary innovation is a novel program of STEM education that aims
to develop scientific reasoning skills in elementary school students, long
before they start intensive content-oriented STEM education in middle and high
school. The project is based on two recent observations made by educational
researchers: that elementary school children are quite capable of reasoning
processes, and that scientific reasoning skills have a long-term positive impact
on students' academic achievement. Successful outcomes of the SBIR Phase 1
project will extend this prior research by demonstrating the feasibility of
implementing the early scientific reasoning development program in a regular
elementary school environment. Using common facts and knowledge available to all
kids in their everyday lives, this program will help students develop scientific
reasoning skills: observing, making predictions and comparisons, developing
hypotheses, designing experiments, and drawing conclusions. During the six-month
period of the SBIR Phase I project, a prototype of the course will be developed,
120 second-grade public school students will participate in a ten-week pilot
course, students' and teachers' levels of acceptance will be evaluated, and the
feasibility of carrying out a full-scale randomized controlled trial (RCT) to
study the program's efficacy will be tested.