* 1520689
* Stopping an Epidemic of Misinformation: Leveraging the K-12 Science Education System to Respond to Ebola
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Patrick Smith, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 02/28/2017
* USD 199,430.00

The Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) program supports projects that enhance
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics by
preK-12 students, teachers, administrators, and parents. This project will
contribute to that mission by developing resources for teachers and
administrators that will provide instructional guidance for teaching about the
Ebola virus and other epidemics of infectious diseases that may arise. The
resources to be developed will include guidelines for administrators and
teachers, and these resources will be distributed both in print form and through
the Web portals of project partners, including the National Science Teachers
Association (NSTA), the National Science Education Leadership Association
(NSELA), and the Council of State Science Supervisors (CSSS). Policy briefs
related to teaching and learning about Ebola and will be tailored for specific
organizations, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the
National Institutes of Health, and the National Education Association. The
informational needs of teachers and administrators will be determined through
large-scale surveys of teachers and science supervisors of school districts and
states. The resources developed by the project are expected to have broad
impacts nationwide in helping schoolteachers and administrators respond
constructively to the spread of misinformation that often accompanies outbreaks
of infectious diseases, such as Ebola.

To determine the informational needs of teachers and administrators, the project
will develop and administer three surveys: a teacher survey, a survey for school
district science supervisors, and a survey for state science supervisors. The
surveys will probe knowledge about Ebola and infectious diseases, where
respondents get their information, how such information is incorporated into
instruction, and what factors affect their responses. Survey items will be
validated through expert review and follow-up cognitive interviews with a subset
of responders. The project intends to survey 3,000 teachers and all members of
NSELA and CSSS. Findings from the surveys and related interviews will be used to
develop informational materials and policy briefs that can be used by teachers
and districts to guide instructional practices and policies related to teaching
about Ebola and related epidemics. Science teachers are uniquely positioned to
counteract the spread of misinformation that often accompanies quickly emerging,
science-related issues, and this project has the potential to provide much-
needed guidance in providing reasoned, constructive responses.