* 1520353
* III: Student Travel Fellowships for the 16th IEEE International Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM 2015)
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Le Gruenwald, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 01/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This project provides travel support for undergraduate and graduate students
enrolled at universities in the U.S. to attend the 16th IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM 2015) on June 15-18, 2015 in
Pittsburgh, PA. MDM is a premier conference sponsored by the IEEE Computer
Society. It encompasses all aspects of mobility. Given the broad sense of
mobility, MDM brings together researchers from databases, networking and
ubiquitous and pervasive computing, to present and discuss the progress of
science in these areas of critical national needs. The conference relies on the
experience of senior members of the community, but also aims to generate fresh
ideas, foster new collaborations, and expose new people to emerging research
opportunities. Attendance at MDM is very beneficial to students. The conference
makes for an excellent forum for exchange of ideas and future collaborations.
Students also have opportunities to meet distinguished researchers and be
inspired by them to follow careers in mobile data management research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference provides opportunities for four days of
exciting discussions on topics of mobile data management. The theme of MDM 2015
is the Internet of Things (IoT) and Mobile Cloud Computing. In addition to
research paper presentations, MDM includes tutorials, demos, workshops and
panels on emerging topics and industrial applications. To encourage students to
participate in the exciting technical program, this project provides support to
defray the travel expenses for student attendees. Calls for MDM 2015 student
travel support applications are advertised nationwide through the MDM 2015
website (http://mdmconferences.org/mdm2015/index.html) and other venues
including DBWORLD. Students from underrepresented groups (women, minorities and
disabled students) are especially encouraged to apply. The project details can
be found at the project website http://www.pitt.edu/~kpele/nsf-mdm.html.