* 1520803
* Hazards SEES: Enhancing Emergency Preparedness for Critical Infrastructure Failure during Extreme Heat Events
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Matei Georgescu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,349,000.00

Extreme heat is among the leading causes of weather-related deaths in the US.
Electrically-powered air conditioning can reduce heat exposure and thus protect
human health. Due to rising demand and more frequent severe weather, electrical
blackouts have become increasingly common. More frequent and intense heat waves
are expected with climate change, so future blackouts may result in significant
risks to public health, especially among children, the elderly, and the poor.
Being prepared for blackout emergencies and reducing hazards may have important
health benefits during heat waves. This research estimates the human health risk
of concurrent heat wave and blackout events in the cities of Atlanta, Detroit,
and Phoenix and examines the potential benefits of specific actions to reduce
the impacts of extreme heat, including environmental changes, technological
improvements, and behavioral changes. Models of regional climate, building
interior heat exposure, and human health effects combine to simulate human heat
exposure under heat wave and electrical grid blackout scenarios, quantify heat-
related illness, and evaluate the potential for individual and institutional
adaptive strategies to lessen the impacts of extreme heat. This project
estimates the human health risk of blackouts during periods of extreme heat,
which already take a heavy toll on public health. The outcomes of this research
advances the progress of science through the development of a new approach to
measuring indoor heat exposure and enhances national health through the testing
of electrical generation, passive cooling, and behavioral adaptations to protect
health during extreme weather hazards. This research further supports the
development of new protocols for emergency response planning pertaining to heat
risk monitoring and evacuation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
are to estimate mortality and morbidity associated with simulated grid failure
events during heat wave conditions in the cities of Atlanta, Detroit, and
Phoenix in response to current and future climate conditions, and to assess the
effectiveness of specific environmental, technological, and behavioral
adaptations in mitigating a growing heat hazard. These cities were chosen for
their different climatic, demographic, and urban form profiles. The research
makes use of a modified health impact function to capture the effects of
concurrent heat wave and grid failure events on mortality and morbidity. Through
the linking of regional climate and building energy models, in combination with
information on the residential building stock and grid infrastructure in each
region, the study assesses the relative benefits of emergency preparedness and
hazard mitigation strategies drawn from several distinct fields: urban
climatology, architecture, electrical engineering, public health, and urban
sociology. The study supports the advancement of knowledge and methodological
innovation in three principal areas. First, the development of a new heat
exposure metric - individual experienced temperature (IET) - enables for the
first time an individualized assessment of heat risk responsive to daily
patterns of heat exposure. Through the monitoring of both ambient and indoor
temperature and humidity for occupants of classified building types, in
combination with data collected through wearable sensors, it will be possible to
substitute individualized measures of heat exposure for regional ambient
temperature observations in health impact functions, improving the
quantification of heat risk. Measurement of IET further enables quantification
of the elevated risk of heat illness during periods of grid failure, when air
conditioning systems are inoperable. Second, the integration of regional climate
and building energy models will enable assessment of environmental,
technological, and behavioral adaptations hypothesized to reduce IET. The
testing of specific heat adaptations directly informs emergency preparedness and
hazard mitigation planning undertaken by local and state governments. Finally,
the collection of survey data on behavioral responses to extreme heat expands
our understanding of how populations with variable access to continuous air
conditioning cope with conditions of extreme heat and provides a basis to
identify and promote effective personal adaptations.