* 1520373
* SBIR Phase I:  Impact Bonding of Near Net-Shaped Ceramics to Metals Driven by Hydrogen Produced from Rapid Oxidation of Aluminum
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Peter Lohr, Advanced Hydrogen Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 179,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it removes the limitations of the
previous methods used to join ceramics and metals and allows for new ceramic and
metal bonded parts to infiltrate novel markets. Many new ceramic and metal
bonded parts will be fabricated for the automotive, aerospace, chemical,
defense, excavation and nuclear industries where they are in high demand due to
the favorable properties of both materials being joined. One immediate
opportunity for this type of bond is the impact chisel market. Long term
opportunities from this project will result in superior products being created
for the cutting tool market, armor, wear plates, thermal insulation, electrical
components, and many others. This new capability will change many manufacturing
processes and allow engineers more design possibilities. In addition to aiding
the educational experience of university students involved in part testing, this
project will ultimately result in the creation of U.S. manufacturing jobs for
the mass production of ceramic and metal bonded parts.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to utilize and
greatly expand upon the findings of impact bonding dissimilar metals from
previous bodies of work to advance the scientific understanding of how ceramics
impact bond to metals and how these bonded joints survive or potentially degrade
when undergoing intense impact fatigue cycle testing. Although fatigue cycle
testing on metal/ceramic interfaces has been documented when the joint is formed
through other methods, the PI and team seek to perform fatigue cycle testing
when metal/ceramic interfaces are optimized for strength and durability by the
use of near net-shaped impact bonding. Previous methods of attaching ceramics to
metals have been limited to brazing and adhesives, each of which is limited by
temperature and strength. Other mechanical methods of joining ceramics and
metals will simply not hold up during impact fatigue cycling due to the
different compression properties of the joined materials. This project aims to
produce pioneering publications on impact bonding ceramics and metals and will
also further enhance the knowledge of high velocity impact bonding systems. Of
particular interest is the impact bonding of ceramics/composites such as
tungsten carbide to hardened steel because of immediate industrial applications.