* 1520449
* SBIR Phase I:  Customized Computing for Big Data Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Peng Zhang, Falcon Computing Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will result in a significant
reduction in the energy usage of datacenters worldwide, which is increasing at
an alarming rate. Some of the large Internet service providers employ several
million computing servers in their datacenters with an annual total energy usage
in the order of multi-billion kilowatt hours. For many big data applications
that constitute a significant portion of workload in datacenters, using field
programmable gate array (FPGA) as a customizable computing device can provide
significantly better performance and energy efficiency. Using the software tools
and IP solutions developed from this project, one may replace several computing
servers with one server augmented with one or more FPGA acceleration cards,
resulting in significant cost and energy reduction. The wide deployment of
customized computing technology in datacenters as enabled by the solutions
developed in this project will lead to substantial energy savings, significant
reduction of carbon emissions, and more importantly, more sustainable growth of
computing infrastructures so that they can better scale in the future to meet
the rapidly increasing computing demands as our society embraces further digital
revolution in the coming decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on enabling energy-efficient
customized computing for big data applications in datacenters. The most
significant barrier for widespread adoption of FPGA-based customized computing
is the difficulty in programming FPGAs. The innovation of this project includes
the development of a set of highly automated compilation, runtime scheduling and
resource management tools, as well as high-performance FPGA acceleration
libraries to enable efficient and transparent utilization of FPGA resources at
the datacenter scale for acceleration of many large-scale distributed computing
applications. The software and IP solutions developed under this proposal will
enable widespread use of FPGAs in datacenters by a wide range of application
developers, resulting in significant improvement in programming productivity by
the application developers and substantial energy and cost reduction by the
datacenter operators (while delivering the same performance). The goal of this
project is to demonstrate the viability and advantage of FPGA-based customized
computing in datacenters for some big data application domains against modern
multi-core servers and GPUs in terms of performance, energy-efficiency,
programmability, and ease of use.