* 1520284
* SBIR Phase I: Development of a barrier film to prevent post-operative internal scarring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Erik Robinson, Sintact Medical Systems, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 179,999.00

Phase I project is to improve the quality of care for patients who suffer from
internal scarring triggered by abdominal surgery. Patients with severe scar
formation often require a follow-up surgical procedure called adhesiolysis.
Adhesiolysis is performed to cut away the internal scars that have bridged
different organs or caused intestinal obstructions. Annually, 540,000
adhesiolysis procedures are performed in the US. These secondary surgical
procedures can also cause additional scar formation resulting in cycles of
repeat procedures. While current barrier products reduce the severity of
internal scarring by 51%, they all degrade after a few weeks. Furthermore, none
are approved for use during laparoscopic procedures, a preferred technique for
adhesiolysis. Traditionally, products used for scar reduction have been made
from materials that degrade. In contrast, the proposed device is made from a
nondegrading material that has been safely used in the body for the past 40
years. This stronger material enables laparoscopic use and ensures separation of
internal organs. As such, this proposed device has shown promising results in
pilot studies and could lead to a new standard of care for patients at risk for
severe internal scar formation.

The proposed project aims to develop an implantable barrier film to reduce scar
formation inside the body after abdominal surgery. Current conventional thinking
in biomaterial selection for scar reducing barrier films has relied primarily on
resorbable materials. However, these barriers do not perform well enough to be
utilized in severe adhesion cases nor laparoscopic procedures. The
implementation of a permanent barrier in this space stems from the development
of non-resorbable synthetic meshes for the repair of abdominal and pelvic
hernias. Furthermore, the non-degrading property of the permanent film ensures
long-term control over the surface topography, which has been shown to play a
substantial role in cell adhesion. The project goals are to evaluate a non-
resorbable barrier that maintains an extremely smooth, mildly hydrophobic
surface in the healing process of internal tissue surfaces. A twelve week
definitive animal (rabbit) study utilizing an established surgical adhesion
abdominal model will determine the efficacy of the proposed device to reduce
surgical adhesion formation as compared to a control group and a commercially
available product. If successful, the results will influence decisions
concerning material composition for future anti-adhesion, anti-scarring, and
other implants in addition to providing a better understanding of internal wound
healing pathways