* 1520694
* Collaborative Proposal: Understanding Subduction Systems by Linking Anisotropic Seismic Imaging and Geodynamic Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Douglas Toomey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 08/31/2018
* USD 168,000.00

Recordings of distant earthquakes will be used in this project to infer the
velocity at which the waves traveled beneath the Earth's surface. In turn, we
use this information to understand the Earth's structure and, in particular, how
subduction (the descent of an old tectonic plate into the Earth's mantle)
produces volcanism and affects surface topography. When conducting this type of
study, it is currently common to assume that the speed at which the waves travel
is independent of their direction. In reality, seismic waves travel at different
speeds depending on what their direction is relative to the orientation of
minerals in the mantle. This phenomenon is known as anisotropy, and when not
taken into account, it can bias the image of the subsurface in ways that can
compromise the understanding of the subduction processes. In this project,
seismologists will investigate ways to reduce this problem by incorporating
physically-based estimates of the distribution of anisotropy into the imaging
procedures. In this way, more accurate images of the subsurface will be
determined advancing the understanding of how subduction affects the surface,
including the distribution of volcanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
combine travel-time tomography, SKS splitting observations and geodynamic flow
modeling to produce self-consistent models of mantle structure (isotropic and
anisotropic) in the vicinity of two subduction zones. The new approach will
allow us to fully integrate mantle anisotropy into teleseismic tomography of
subduction zones. By incorporating estimates of the anisotropy field into
travel-time tomography the scientitists will significantly reduce major
artifacts stemming from the isotropic assumption and obtain a physically-based
model for the strain in the mantle wedge and beneath the subducting plate. The
improved imaging will allow to better recover the mantle physical state
(temperature, composition and melt fraction). This methodology will be applied
to existing data from the western Mediterranean and Cascadia subduction zones.