* 1520598
* SBIR Phase I:  Early detection of Bulking and Foaming in Wastewater Treatment using Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Joseph Nadolski, Yosemite International Consultants LTD, DBA Neptune Diagnostics
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is the development of a low-cost diagnostic to end
bulking and foaming events in wastewater treatment plants (WTTP) by providing
early warning to plant operators allowing preventative action. The activated
sludge process the modern method to treat sewerage was developed in the early
1900 to prevent the spread of disease as people moved to the cities during the
industrial revolution and waterborne disease caused many deaths. Activated
sludge relies on a biological process to remove suspended solids from wastewater
for treatment so clean water or effluent is returned to surface waters for human
and environmental use. Bulking or foaming occurs when certain culprit bacteria
grow out of proportion to total bacteria, resulting in raw sewerage being
discharged with the effluent. An extreme event can cost a wastewater treatment
plant several hundreds of thousands of dollars in compliance fines, damage to
plant or equipment, and operational costs. Broader economic costs occur if
beaches or marinas are closed during an event. Early detection of bulking and
foaming events will provide for powerful tools to facilitate more effective
operation of wastewater treatment plants.

The objective of this Phase 1 research project is to develop a molecular test
using Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) techniques that can be done on site by
wastewater treatment plant (WTTP) personnel to provide early warning of bulking
and foaming events - up to three weeks advance warning allowing WWTP operators
to take preventative action to avoid economic costs, loss of energy production
and threats to public health. Bulking and foaming is caused by 28 culprit
bacteria. Currently the industry relies on microscopy which is subjective;
requires significant study and training; and provides at most a day or two of
warning -not enough time for preventative action. In reality, most often,
detection is not made until the WWTP begins bulking or foaming. The proposed
diagnostic tools to be developed in this project will investigate molecular
identification techniques to specifically target these bacteria and provide an
analytical test that yields real time results at reasonable costs to help
effectively operate and optimize processes in wastewater treatment plants.