* 1520520
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Advanced Composite Materials for Athletic Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Chris Kaffer, Mallinda, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,686.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is for the development
of end user-moldable advanced polyimine composite inputs for the athletic
protective gear market (which is valued at $16.6 billion). Currently, plastic
products must be produced using industrial manufacturing techniques that have
high tooling costs. As a result, manufacturers produce a small range of
predetermined sizes and shapes, which do not provide a custom fit for end users.
In the case of athletic gear, there is a growing market for hard-shell
protective equipment which can be custom molded for a better fit. Polyimine
polymers and advanced composites offer a compelling blend of strength and
malleability in order to create more user-friendly lightweight and durable
advanced composites that may be shaped by the end-user. In addition to creating
greater user customization, both the virgin polyimine polymer and advanced
composites that incorporate polyimines are easily and economically recyclable.
The total U.S. composite materials market is a $30 billion market, representing
36% of the global composites sector. Polyimine polymers and advanced composite
derivatives will reduce environmental waste and increase manufacturing
efficiencies across a broad range of vertical markets in the composites sector
including personal protective equipment, aerospace, automotive, and
infrastructural materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project derives from the development of the unique chemistry of polyimine
polymers. Polymers can be broadly grouped into two categories, thermosets and
thermoplastics. Thermosets are strong due to the chemical characteristics of the
plastic. However, once cured, thermosets cannot be reshaped. As a result,
thermosets are neither repairable, nor are they efficiently recyclable. In
contrast, thermoplastics, which are weaker than thermosets, may be molded and
remolded. However, remolding requires very high industrial temperatures of
between 400 and 600 deg. F. Polyimine polymers are moldable and remoldable
thermoset materials. Importantly, these polymers combine high rigidity and tough
mechanical properties with mild molding temperatures. This Phase I research
project will include developing end user moldable composite materials that are a
maximum of Â¼ inch in thickness and meet industry standards for limb joint
protective equipment. Material testing and mechanical characterization will
relate to testing requirements arising from composite prototype development
including but not limited to: delamination, fiber-dependent moldability, fiber-
dependent flex, fiber-dependent tensile, fiber/resin-dependent pass-through
impact force, and failure analysis.