* 1520481
* SBIR Phase I:  Microfluidics-Enabled Interfacial Capacitive Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Baoqing Nie, TacSense, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes the development of novel microfluidic-
enabled interfacial capacitive sensing solutions for a wide range of existing
and emerging applications, including medical devices, robotics or consumer
electronics. Upon successful completion of this SBIR Phase I project, the
interfacial capacitive sensors could offer a transformative solution to various
medical and industrial applications, where high sensitivity, flexibility and
miniature footprints are required. By translating the early-stage laboratory
discoveries into commercial pressure sensing products, the initial applications
target two clinical challenges in cardiovascular medicine, fraction flow reserve
measurement for patients with coronary artery stenosis and interface pressure
monitoring for patients with chronic venous disease. The sensors proposed here
offer unique advantages and features over the existing medical products on the
market. For embedded FFR-measurement pressure sensors, these advantages include
reducing the surgical time, complications, and therefore, risks during coronary
cauterization. For interface pressure monitoring of compression therapy, the
advantages include provides patients with more affordable, accurate, accessible,
easy-to-use and comfortable-to-wear pressure sensing solution for better
therapeutic outcomes.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at
developing the pressure sensors based on microfluidic-enabled interfacial
capacitive sensing for cardiovascular applications. These include a miniature
pressure sensor embedded in a coronary guide wire for fraction flow reserve
evaluation, and a wearable pressure sensor with wireless transmission for
interface pressure measurement in compression therapy. The proposed sensor
integrated with the guide wire, once developed, allows significant reduction in
electrical wiring complexity and easy procedure for surgical operations, in
addition to improved structural integrity by replacing hollow wires with solid
constructs. For the application of the interface pressure measurement, the
interfacial capacitive sensor, upon its successful translation, would become a
viable solution capable of simultaneously measuring interface pressure at
multiple compression positions as well as providing real-time measurement data
to both patients and clinicians. Research will be conducted on system design and
manufacturing scalability of the sensors, electrical and mechanical
characterizations of the sensor performance, and proof-of-concept demonstrations
of potential medical sensing applications.