* 1520726
* Aluminous phase at high-pressures & temperatures: Elasticity and Energetics of hydrogen incorporation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Mainak Mookherjee, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2016
* USD 101,230.00

Geophysical and geochemical observations provide insights into the physical and
chemical states of the Earth's interior. However, only by comparing mineral
physics data (physical properties) with geophysical (seismological) observations
can we disentangle the thermal state of the deep Earth from its chemistry.
Conventionally, as a first order approximation, the Earth's mantle is thought to
be composed of a homogenous pyrolite. However, the distinct trace element
signatures in mid ocean ridge and ocean island basalts reveal the heterogeneity
in the Earth's mantle. Although the scale of the heterogeneity is unknown, it is
likely that large regions of the mantle are composed of a depleted harzburgite
and enriched crustal fractions. We have limited knowledge of the thermodynamics
and physical properties of mineral phases in these subducted crusts at high
pressures.

In this proposal, the PI intends to use first principles calculations to
investigate how chemistry influences crystal structure, energetics, and
elasticity of aluminous mineral phases which are likely to be stabilized in
deeply subducted oceanic and continental crusts. He will also investigate the
energetics of hydrogen incorporation within these aluminous phases. The results
will be relevant for geophysics, mineral-physics, geodynamics, petrology, and
geochemistry sub disciplines. The PI will also train undergraduate student/s in
Solid Earth Geosciences/Mineral Physics.