* 1520862
* Collaborative Research:  Numerical Simulation of the Morphosynthesis of Polycrystalline Biominerals
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Natasha Sharma, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 159,999.00

Polycrystalline biominerals are thermodynamically stable crystal polymorphs of
biogenic minerals featuring stacked layers of crystals with mineral bridges
between adjacent layers. The unique crystal texture gives rise to specific
material properties such as toughness, corrosion resistance, and temperature
resistance, which makes these crystals highly attractive for optical
nanostructures (photonic band gaps, diffraction gratings) and for special
coatings (e.g., in semiconductor device technology). Therefore, many material
scientists are currently trying to realize the synthesis of such biominerals.
The aim of this project is to provide both a mathematical model for the
crystallization process and algorithmic tools for numerical simulations in order
to understand the mechanisms of the process, to enable the experimentalists to
optimize their laboratory settings, and thus to pave the way for an industrially
relevant production line.

The morphosynthesis of polycrystalline biominerals follows a multistage
crystallization process including a polymer-induced liquid-precursor (PILP)
phase, the occurrence of spherulites due to nucleation, and the
recrystallization of mosaic mesocrystal thin structures. The PILP phase consists
of an aqueous solution of the biomineral and an anionic polymer mixed with
ethanol and features a liquid-liquid phase separation in terms of polymer-rich
PILP droplets in the liquid mixture. The mixing is taken care of by a surface
acoustic waves (SAWs) manipulated fluid flow where the SAWs are generated by two
tapered interdigital transducers operating in dual mode. The polycrystallization
sets in with the formation of spherulites that spread across the substrate to
form a uniform spherulitic thin film. Continuous cooling leads to a
recrystallization of the spherulitic thin film into a mosaic polycrystalline
thin structure. The liquid-liquid phase separation characterizing the PILP phase
can be described by a coupled system consisting of the incompressible Navier-
Stokes equations and a Cahn-Hilliard equation. For the numerical simulation, the
project will use a splitting scheme based on an implicit discretization in time
and C0 Interior Penalty Discontinuous Galerkin (C0-IPDG) methods for
discretization in space with respect to simplicial triangulations of the
computational domain. The research will study the convergence of the splitting
method and realize space-time adaptivity by the goal oriented dual weighted
approach. As a mathematical model for the polycrystallization the project
investigates a phase field model consisting of the dynamic equations for the
measure of local crystallinity, the concentration field for the biomineral, the
orientation field, and a heat equation for the evolution of the temperature
during the cooling process. The equation for the concentration field is a fourth
order Cahn-Hilliard type equation. Again, discretizing implicitly in time and by
C0-IPDG methods in space, the project will use a splitting method and dual
weighted residuals for space-time adaptivity featuring a desired crystallinity
at final time as the objective functional. A model validation will be based on
experimental data provided by cooperating laboratories and a systematic
parameter study will be performed to investigate the influence of various
process parameters.