* 1520732
* A Combined Experimental and Theoretical investigation of reactive flow in brittle media with applications to solid Earth geodynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Heather Savage, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2019
* USD 409,036.00

Many important processes in the natural and engineered world involve the
infiltration of fluids into materials that then react to form new materials with
significantly larger volume. These large volume changes, in turn are thought to
induce fracturing which opens up new avenues for fluid infiltration, potentially
leading to a cascade of pervasively cracked materials in a process dubbed
?reaction induced cracking?. While many natural systems give indirect evidence
of these processes, very little is understood about the physics and efficiency
of these mechanisms (or if they even work). The purpose of this proposal is to
develop a fundamental understanding of the reactive cracking process by
combining laboratory experiments, theory and advanced computational models of
reactive brittle materials. A better understanding of these processes could lead
to new engineering methods for efficient carbon sequestration or hydrocarbon
extraction, could give insight into induced seismicity as well important Earth
science processes in the natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this award,
we will combine laboratory rock mechanics experiments on simplified systems with
computational models that can be used to test and validate a range of hydro-
mechanical failure theories directly against the experiments. Lab experiments
will be conducted in Lamont?s tri-axial deformation apparatus, with control of
fluid flow and monitoring of stresses, pore pressures, acoustic emissions and
permeability changes. Experiments will investigate both hydration and
dehydration reactions on analog materials chosen to provide large volume changes
in a simplified geometry. We will explore the behavior of nested cylinders of
materials with an interior reactive cylinder that can either produce or ingest
hydrous fluids, surrounded by an outer cylinder of brittle rock under various
level of confining pressure. The modeling will be a collaborative effort across
multiple departments and schools at Columbia and use an open-source
computational framework developed by the PIs. Direct modeling of the experiments
will provide the needed control for testing hypotheses, validating theories, and
calibrating constitutive relations and failure models. Improved theoretical
models of fluid-brittle solid interaction can then be extended to explore their
consequences for large-scale geodynamics such as volatile cycling through
subduction zones.