* 1520993
* Development of a relativistic atomic code for accurate treatment of complex correlations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Marianna Safronova, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2016
* USD 90,000.00

This project will continue a code development for accurate calculations of
atomic properties relevant, for instance, to studies of fundamental
interactions, analysis of astrophysical data, plasma science, studies of quantum
degenerate gases and production of ultracold molecules, atomic clock research,
and quantum information, the latter two of which have important applications to
modern communication systems. In all these areas, accurate theoretical methods
in atomic, molecular and optical physics are indispensable to the design and
interpretation of experiments, especially when the direct experimental
measurement of relevant parameters is not feasible. The end-goal of this project
is to elevate the treatment of complicated atoms to the same level of accuracy
that is afforded currently only to simpler systems, thus opening up much of the
Periodic Table to applications that heretofore could only be pursued with the
simplest atoms. The code package will be documented and made available to the
scientific community as an open-source code that will be suitable for the use by
the non-expert in many-body theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to continue the development of a broadly applicable and accurate code
for predicting properties of open d- and f-shell atoms. This code is based on
the combination of configuration interaction and all-order linearized coupled-
cluster methods (CI+all-order) and the code will be documented and made
available to the scientific community. The present CI+all-order implementation
does not include the quantum electrodynamics (QED) correction. Owing to recent
advances in the development of model QED potentials, QED can be incorporated
into both the coupled-cluster and configuration interactions parts of the
method. As many plasma and astrophysics applications require the properties of
the highly-charged ions, this development will significantly expand the code
applicability.