* 1520005
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Metal-Organic Framework Material for the Separation and Recovery of Unprocessed Natural Gas During Oil and Gas Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* OSMAN OZDEMIR, framergy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
provide a usable stranded and associated gas collection capacity for oil & gas
exploration companies. During drilling operations, valuable gas is lost through
intentional venting and flaring, causing losses in natural gas delivered to the
power plant or city gate. With the sector's expansion into more remote low-
volume sites, these losses are increasing dramatically. Through this project's
proposed novel Metal-Organic Framework (MOF) based storage technology, framergy
will deliver a re-usable and transport ready intermodal container, to store gas
at low pressure, eliminating the need to use expensive gas capture, purification
and multi-stage compression systems. An economically feasible unprocessed
natural gas storage technology would provide a useful tool for the domestic oil
& gas industry in capturing what would be flared or vented and delivering it to
the American economy. Taking framergy's novel MOF technology to the bench and
pilot scale will show the feasibility of a flexible, transportable, low-cost
infrastructure to abate flaring and venting. Beyond Phase I, framergy and its
Automotive OEM-supplier partner will extend its novel Adsorbed Natural Gas (ANG)
technology into large-scale versions of its vehicular tanks to allow for rapid
implementation.

The objectives of this Phase I research project are the development of stable
and low-cost Metal-Organic framework (MOF) based storage technologies for the
collection of usable stranded associated gas during drilling operations. In
order to harness point source emissions, before being vented or flared, framergy
will develop a nano-engineered, MOF based sorbent for low-pressure capture and
storage of unprocessed natural gas. During the Phase I period, framergy and
Texas A&M University will develop a robust and scalable method to synthesize new
MOFs containing other high-valence transition metal ions such as Al3+, Fe3+ and
Cr3+. Furthermore, the project will screen a range of organic ligands for
improving MOFs' surface property and storage capacity. Finally, by following
alternative synthesis routes with low cost catalysts, framergy and Texas A&M
University will identify sorbent synthesis cost reduction strategies. The
sorbent material will be tested with simulated vent/flare-gas compositions in a
cyclic pressure range and the sorbent stability will be verified by an
assortment of X-ray, spectroscopy, and microscopy methods.