* 1520314
* SBIR Phase I:  Technology for Individualized Pathways to Reading
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Robert Dufresne, Pioneer Valley Educational Press, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will advance the state
of the art in interactive reading instruction, fundamentally reorganizing it to
respond to the needs and strengths of the individual learner, and to support the
classroom activities of each teacher. Almost two thirds of U.S. 4th graders
score below proficient in reading. Given that early reading ability is a major
predictor of academic achievement across all subjects, improved reading
instruction would have a tremendous positive impact on many lives and on the
country as a whole. This project aims to harness the power of the tablet
platform in new ways to bring new flexibility and transparency to the process of
learning to decode the written word. To achieve this, the project will develop
and evaluate a prototype of multi-component software capable of adaptive
assessment, instruction and practice. The project's R&amp;D is aimed toward the
eventual widespread use of products that can help each child be ready to meet
the literacy demands of the curriculum, and level the playing field in subjects
such as science where nonfiction reading plays a growing role.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's core innovation is a new, fine-grained way
of modeling each child's reading knowledge. This model represents a new answer
to the question of what information a phonics tutoring system needs to maintain
in order to provide optimally individualized instruction. The project will
develop ways of tracking the progressions by which individual students come to
understand spelling patterns and recognize them in words, with particular
attention to how students make use of similarities and differences between
words. The project will map additional word characteristics such as familiarity,
complexity, regularity, ambiguity of spelling, and resemblance to known words
that influence a student's readiness to learn and master new words, from initial
engagement up to fluency. Additional project work will develop and evaluate the
logic of tutoring decisions, investigate ways to gamify the process of learning
to decode written language, and demonstrate novel ways of integrating software
use with other activities in a classroom's balanced literacy program.