* 1520864
* Hazards SEES: Improved prediction of geomagnetic disturbances, geomagnetically induced currents, and their impacts on power distribution systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Thomas Overbye, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,670,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant solar storms cause
disturbances in Earth's magnetic field (geomagnetic disturbances or GMDs), which
in turn induce currents in electric power transmission systems. These
geomagnetically induced currents (GICs) pose a potentially catastrophic threat
to the power distribution systems on which society depends. For example, a solar
storm in March 1989 triggered GICs that caused cascading transformer failures
and widespread blackouts that affected millions of people in Quebec. This
project is developing a quantitative understanding of the impacts that GICs and
GMDs can have on the power grid, which is critical to helping the utility
industry plan ahead and reduce risk. Through developing a comprehensive modeling
and analysis approach, beginning with space weather and ending with impacts to
grid operation, we are driving new useful analytic tools and insights. We are
also improving the scientific community's understanding of the Earth through
analysis of coupling between direct magnetic field measurements and transformer
neutral currents. Finally, our outreach efforts are providing information to the
public about critical concepts related to the sun, the upper atmosphere, space
weather hazards, Earth's geophysical properties, and the power grid.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project is intended to
improve the scientific understanding of the processes governing the impacts on
our power distribution system of severe solar storms. The team is studying the
relationship between solar wind drivers and magnetic field perturbations on the
ground, developing improved models of induced electric fields, and enhancing
prediction capabilities for GIC hazards. The team is developing algorithms that
both advance the science of induced electric fields and operate as a predictive
tool of GIC hazards in the bulk power system, including transformer heating and
damage and loss of voltage stability. Impact models are being developed,
enhanced, and validated to provide better prediction of the effects of GMDs on
power systems for both real-time response and longer-term resilience.