* 1520683
* Hazard SEES: An Integrated Approach to Risk Assessment and Management in Responding to Land Falling Hurricanes in a Changing Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Guy Nordenson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,734,526.00

Hurricanes, through their strong winds, heavy rainfall, and storm surges, cause
much damage and loss of life worldwide. Recent disasters (e.g., Typhoon Haiyan
in 2013; Hurricanes Sandy in 2012, Irene in 2011 and Katrina in 2005) underscore
the significant vulnerability of the U.S. and the world to land-falling
hurricanes. The impacts of these storms may worsen in coming decades because of
rapid coastal development coupled with possibly increasing hurricane activity
and sea level rise. This project is developing a new framework for assessing and
managing hurricane risk based on fundamental physics. The framework will be
applicable to all hurricane-afflicted coastal areas. We are carrying out case
studies for the coastal areas in New York, New Jersey, North Carolina and
Florida to assess and compare hurricane hazards in these areas, estimate how
these hazards may evolve in the future, and develop engineering and policy
strategies for coping with these hazards. This research involves several
disciplines, including geosciences, engineering and architecture, and social,
behavioral and economic sciences, and is helping to prepare next-generation of
specialists in the fields of natural hazards. The results from this research
will support the rebuilding and increased resiliency of coastal areas in the
U.S. and around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics-based hurricane risk
assessment is challenging, due to multi-scale features of the phenomena. This
research is advancing hurricane and climate science, with the objective of
fundamentally enhancing hurricane risk analysis. We are developing two
independent hurricane climatology models to investigate how hurricane frequency,
intensity, and size will evolve in a changing climate. We are applying
observational analysis and numerical modeling to study hurricane wind, surge,
and rainfall hazards, including their spatial and temporal structures, their
interaction, and effects of the coast, land, extratropical transition, and
changing climate. We are developing physics-based, observationally-evaluated,
and computationally-efficient hazard models to assess joint hazard probabilities
under various climate scenarios; we are also creating a multi-hazard model of
wind and water vulnerability describing the compound impacts of hurricane
hazards. Combining the improved estimation of the joint hazards and
vulnerability, risk assessment can then be carried out to support advanced risk
management from various perspectives. The risk management component of this
project is focusing on the policies of the U.S. National Flood Insurance Program
and engineering designs for coastal flood mitigation. These instruments are
critical in mitigating hurricane risk and increasing coastal resiliency, and
this project will develop them in the new context of changing climate.