* 1520723
* IBSS: The Impact of Online Technologies on Interpersonal Communication and Perceptions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Jeffrey Hancock, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 851,462.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine the ways in which the media
used by people to communicate with each other may alter perceptions of
themselves and others, thereby reshaping interpersonal dynamics among those
individuals. The project will focus on analyses of changing interpersonal
dynamics as a result of the use of online technologies for identifying and
making direct contact with others. This project will advance basic understanding
of how popular online systems affect people's perceptions about technology,
relationships, and themselves as well as how these perceptions affect behavior.
The project will enhance knowledge about the ways that technology affects
relational decision making and interpersonal behavior. It also will provide new
insights regarding the ways that online systems designed to facilitate
interpersonal contact impact the self-concepts of the people who use them, and
it may provide new information and insights that can facilitate improvements to
the design of popular forms of social computing technology. Although this
project focuses on one form of online interpersonal communication, project
findings will provide more generalizable insights regarding the complex
interactions between communications media and the content of communications as
well as their impact on communicators in many other
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will integrate perspectives and
approaches from communication, psychology, and information science to develop a
new research approach focusing on the development and testing of a source
multiplicity, attribution, recognition, and transformation model of online
interaction. This new modeling approach will represent a paradigmatic shift in
the way that such forms online interaction is investigated, in part because it
draws on research conducted by scientists across disparate fields. The
investigators will use scientific experiments, participant interviews, and
behavioral measurements to investigate answers to the following types of
questions: (1) How do people evaluate information communicated by algorithmic
and human sources when making attributions within online systems? (2) Do people
recognize how technology influences their decisions and attributions in the
online communication process? (3) Given that online platforms produce a wealth
of feedback to participants, how do these kinds of information from others and
from the online system itself create feedback loops that affect individuals'
self-concept? The investigators will assess how online systems influence
multiple facets of human behavior, including formation of new relationships,
information processing, decision making, interpersonal judgments/attributions,
and self-perception. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary
Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.