* 1520205
* SBIR Phase I:  Heat exchanger coating retrofit pre-treatment feasibility study
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Adam Paxson, DropWise Technologies Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,564.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the
challenge of retrofit cleaning and pretreatment of steam condenser tubes prior
to the deposition of a performance-enhancing coating. By eliminating the buildup
of the insulating film of liquid that normally forms on condenser surfaces, the
coating increases the vapor-side heat transfer coefficient by more than a factor
of seven, allowing the condenser to pull more steam through the turbine. The
successful application of this coating would enable significant increases in
cycle efficiencies of in the installed base of steam power plants that generate
the vast majority of national electricity, leading to substantial reductions in
fuel costs, greenhouse gas emissions, and thermal pollution. This coating
technology can be extended to other systems including desalination and heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, and refrigeration (HVAC/R), which also rely on
condensers to operate efficiently. The intellectual merit of this project
comprises the acquisition of systematic knowledge of metal-oxide fouling and
deposits in industrial environments, and the development of scalable
pretreatment strategies to bridge the gap between laboratory and field-deployed
coating depositions. Because this application of hydrophobic coatings has not
been achieved at a commercial scale, there currently exists little to no
systematic research on the condition of heat exchanger surfaces. The results of
this study will be applicable to industrial coatings on industrial equipment
beyond just heat exchangers, including distillation columns and moisture
separators.