* 1520817
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Cyberinfrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Jean-Paul Pinelli, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2020
* USD 14,457,736.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards research community with
access to research infrastructure that will include earthquake and wind
engineering experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure, computational modeling
and simulation tools, and research data, as well as education and community
outreach activities. NHERI will be comprised of separate research infrastructure
awards for a Network Coordination Office, Cyberinfrastructure, Computational
Modeling and Simulation Center, and Experimental Facilities, including a post-
disaster, rapid response research facility. Awards made for NHERI will
contribute to NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
(NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program. NHERI continues
NSF's emphasis on earthquake engineering research infrastructure previously
supported under the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation as part of NEHRP, but now broadens that support to include wind
engineering research infrastructure. NHERI has the broad goal of supporting
research that will improve the resilience and sustainability of civil
infrastructure, such as buildings and other structures, underground structures,
levees, and critical lifelines, against the natural hazards of earthquakes and
windstorms, in order to minimize loss of life, damage, and economic loss. In
today's information age, this research requires the integration of data and
computation. This award will provide the Cyberinfrastructure component for
NHERI. This cyberinfrastructure component will develop the DesignSafe-ci.org web
portal, a cyberinfrastructure for the natural hazards engineering community to
provide computational tools to manage, analyze, and understand critical data for
natural hazards research. DesignSafe-ci.org will include an interactive web
interface, data repositories to share data sets, and a cloud-based workspace for
researchers to perform simulation, computation, data analysis, and other
research tasks. The integration of data and computation in the cloud will enable
new research discoveries in natural hazards engineering, which in turn can lead
to more hazard-resilient civil infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural
hazards engineering research conducted with NHERI resources will require
integration of diverse data sets from a variety of sources, including
experiments, computational simulation, field reconnaissance, earth science,
social science, building science, and architecture. DesignSafe-ci.org will
embrace a "cloud" strategy for the "big data" generated in natural hazards
engineering research. It will be designed based upon a set of proven
technologies, drawn from other large-scale, NSF-supported open science
infrastructures, and will leverage the computing and storage platforms already
supported by NSF. DesignSafe-ci.org will provide a comprehensive
cyberinfrastructure that supports research workflows, data analysis and
visualization, and the full lifecycle of experimental, field, and computational
data required by engineers and scientists to effectively address the threats
posed to civil infrastructure by natural hazards. DesignSafe-ci.org will include
the following resources: (1) interactive DesignSafe-ci.org web portal, (2) Data
Depot, a flexible data repository with streamlined data management tools, (3)
Reconnaissance Integration Portal, which provides access to post-disaster, rapid
response research reconnaissance data through a geospatial framework, (4)
Discovery Workspace, which allows simulation, data analytics, and visualization
to be performed in the cloud and linked with data in the Data Depot, (5)
Learning Center, which provides training and educational materials, and (6)
Developer's Portal for users to develop new cyberinfrastructure capabilities.
This award will also provide the natural hazards research community with access
to high performance computing resources and user support, data curation, and
publisher services.