* 1520168
* SBIR Phase I:  Platform-Independent Full-Body Computational Human Phantom
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Sergey Makarov, Neva Electromagnetics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 166,986.00

This SBIR Phase I project will create, develop, and disseminate a reputable and
atomically-accurate, platform-independent computational human phantom. The
computational phantom will include about 120 individual tissue parts in the form
of finite-element triangular surface meshes with approximately 130,000 triangles
total. Each tissue part will be extracted from the Visible Human Project-Female
dataset of the National Library of Medicine. This open and free of charge
research and education resource will be made for research applications to all
universities and private entities. The phantom will be primarily intended for
modeling MRI and cellphone safety, modern electromagnetic diagnostic and
therapeutic tools, on-body and in-body antennas, wireless body sensors,
biomedical microwave imaging, as well as tissue engineering and biomedical
imaging. The phantom or its parts can be used in any of the leading commercial
electromagnetic, acoustic, and thermal simulators, or in custom research
applications.

The phantom will possess a full set of topological characteristics necessary for
cross-platform compatibility and computational efficiency. Each original tissue
triangular surface mesh will be strictly 2-manifold or thin-shell (no non-
manifold faces, no non-manifold vertices, no holes, and no self-intersections).
No tissue mesh will have any triangular facets in contact with other tissue
surfaces. There will always be a (small) gap between the distinct tissue
surfaces. This gap will physically represent thin membranes separating distinct
tissues. Numerically, it will correspond to an 'average body' container(s),
which will enclose organs and tissues, and will guarantee compatibility between
different Computer-aided design formats. Tissues will be created that are fully
enclosed within each other, such as the white matter inside the gray matter,
cancellous bone inside a cortical bone shell, etc. These tissues will also
neither touch nor intersect. Each tissue triangular surface mesh will have
nearly the same segmentation accuracy (resolution) and the minimum surface
triangular mesh size allowed. The entire phantom and the individual tissue
triangular surface meshes will be made available in binary, NASTRAN, PLY, and
STL formats. The phantom will be augmented with a set of electromagnetic tissue
properties covering the range from 1000 Hz to 60 GHz.