* 1520853
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure:  Experimental Facility with Twelve-Fan Wall of Wind
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Arindam Chowdhury, Florida International University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2021
* USD 4,369,994.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards research community with
access to research infrastructure that will include earthquake and wind
engineering experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure, computational modeling
and simulation tools, and research data, as well as education and community
outreach activities. NHERI will be comprised of separate awards for a Network
Coordination Office, Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center, and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response
research facility. Awards made for NHERI will contribute to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program. NHERI continues NSF's emphasis on earthquake
engineering research infrastructure previously supported under the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation as part of NEHRP, but
now broadens that support to include wind engineering research infrastructure.
NHERI has the broad goal of supporting research that will improve the resilience
and sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as buildings and other
structures, underground structures, levees, and critical lifelines, against the
natural hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order to reduce loss of life,
damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI resources will be available
on the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal.

NHERI Experimental Facilities will provide access to their experimental
resources, user services, and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported
research and education awards. This award will support a NHERI Experimental
Facility at Florida International University to conduct wind engineering
research using the 12-fan Wall of Wind (WOW). The United States has learned very
hard lessons in the last decade about its human, economic, and infrastructure
vulnerabilities to wind hazard events. The WOW is a windstorm simulation
facility that allows testing of holistic building systems and other structures
at multiple scales in wind speeds up to and including hurricane Category 5 on
the Saffir-Simpson scale, with a wind-driven rain option. The WOW will allow
researchers to generate new and highly specific knowledge on wind damage and
rain intrusion mechanisms. The goal is to improve design practices for
structural and building envelope systems and lifeline infrastructures to create
more wind-resilient and sustainable communities. The WOW will also promote
student learning as part of the larger national effort to foster a diverse and
globally competitive science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
workforce. More broadly, the WOW will serve the national interest by promoting
the progress of wind engineering science and technology; generating innovations
that can lead to reductions in life, property, and infrastructure losses; and
supporting research needed to prevent wind hazard events from becoming community
disasters.

The WOW facility will provide the following experimental capabilities: (1) high-
speed holistic testing at multiple scales in simulated hurricane wind speeds up
to and including Category 5; (2) wind-driven rain simulations to study water
intrusion; (3) testing under extreme environments to develop innovative
mitigation devices; (4) large-scale aerodynamic/aeroelastic testing in
atmospheric boundary layer flows at high Reynolds numbers; and (5) classic
boundary layer wind tunnel small-scale testing in flows with a full turbulence
spectrum. The WOW will offer a wide range of instrumentation and data
acquisition systems, and will allow wind load data to be obtained for a wide
range of building shapes, accounting for interference and shielding effects not
addressed in current design standards. The archived database will help
researchers study peak loads and validate computational methods. Holistic
testing of integrated component assemblies will help determine fragilities,
progressive failure modes, and rain intrusion mechanisms. Research using the WOW
will help validate sustainable building concepts and innovative mitigation
strategies. Knowledge gained from large-scale tests will enable researchers to
develop more energy efficient and smart building envelopes, identify on-site
renewable energy sources, and implement natural ventilation strategies.
Strategic partnerships will add capabilities to allow use of aerodynamic data on
straight winds in designs for tornadoes and downbursts. Research conducted at
the facility will contribute to incorporating new findings into standards and
improving current practices. The university's STEM Transformation Institute will
help incorporate its program into the facility's educational component,
fostering a new intellectual infrastructure with inquiry-based active learning
and Learning Assistant modules, which will be transportable to wind engineering
curricula in the United States and around the world. This facility will conduct
annual workshops for prospective users and will host Research Experiences for
Undergraduate students.