* 1520221
* Socioecological factors and patterns of growth and development in two gorilla species
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Tara Stoinski, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 371,517.00

A central challenge in human evolutionary studies is to understand when, how and
in what social and ecological context unique features of modern human life
history evolved, including our early age at weaning, prolonged period of slow
childhood growth, and late age at first reproduction. These key elements of our
life histories are proposed underlie key shifts in human cognitive and
behavioral evolution. Our closest living relatives, the great apes, provide
critical comparisons for investigating human life history evolution, but current
knowledge of their physical growth patterns remains overwhelmingly derived from
captive studies and from chimpanzees. This project uses non-invasive methods to
study growth and development in two long-term study populations of wild
gorillas, for which there are very few existing data. The outcome of this
research will significantly advance our understanding of comparative great ape
development and will critically inform fundamental questions about the
evolutionary origins of modern human life history. In addition, the research
will result in a valuable new dataset of interest to researchers across several
disciplines, and support important efforts in primate conservation, student
training, research infrastructure, and international collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research employs a novel combination of non-invasive
methods to integrate morphological, physiological, and behavioral data to
generate a comprehensive understanding of the manner in which observed
differences in life history and socioecology interact with variation in physical
ontogeny within and among ecologically distinct populations of wild gorillas.
Data to be collected from Karisoke mountain gorillas (N=115; 0-18 years, N=80
based on current demographics) include measures of morphological growth and
development (dental emergence, linear body dimensions, muscle mass via urinary
creatinine), maternal and offspring energetics and diet (urinary C-peptide,
suckling rate and bout duration, diet composition and nutritional content),
maternal dominance status and parity, and other measures of behavior (e.g.,
activity budgets, daily travel distance) and health. These data will be
partnered with measures of dental and somatic growth determined from a naturally
accumulated skeletal sample at this site. Comparative morphological and
behavioral data for wild western lowland gorillas are from the Mbeli Bai Study,
Republic of Congo (N=140; 0-18 years, N=50). The project aims to: 1) provide the
first data on physical ontogeny in wild mountain gorillas of known age, and test
hypothesized socioecological factors influencing variation in development and
life history between mountain and western gorillas; 2) test maternal energetics,
nutrition and other effects on variation in offspring dental and somatic
development within mountain gorillas; 3) test relationships between measures of
morphological development and key behavioral and reproductive life history
measures in mountain gorillas; and 4) test whether the timing of developmental
milestones assessed from skeletal remains differs significantly from those
determined from surviving members of the same population. Results will yield a
more comprehensive understanding of how and why dental, somatic, reproductive,
and behavioral milestones co-vary in closely-related great ape taxa, and by
shedding light on how individual variability in life history may be mediated by
offspring growth, improve our understanding of reproductive (and thus,
evolutionary) outcomes of ontogenetic variation. Further, by generating a
comprehensive model of development and life history in these extant populations,
and testing the accuracy of our life history inferences from an associated
skeletal assemblage, our results are expected to significantly inform approaches
to studying life history in fossil contexts.