* 1520927
* STTR Phase I:  Microbial Production of a Multifunctional Natural Product 5-Hydroxytryptophan
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Yuheng Lin, BiotecEra Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be to develop a microbe to produce
5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) for use as a dietary supplement, and as an animal
feed supplement. 5-HTP is a multifunctional natural product that has been used
as antidepressant, sleep aid, and appetite suppressant worldwide. In addition,
5-HTP can be used to prevent milk fever, a common disease occurring among farm
animals, which causes substantial economic losses. Currently, the only
commercial production of 5-HTP is through the extraction from the seeds of
Griffonia simplicifolia, a woody climbing shrub grown in west and central
Africa. However, the insufficient and unstable supply of the raw material has
resulted in a high and volatile price of 5-HTP, which has greatly constrained
the development of its market. The technology to be developed is expected to
lower the production cost by up to 90% compared with the current botanical
extraction method, secure the stable production of 5-HTP, and satisfy the market
demands.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to create an optimal 5-HTP-producing strain
that can be readily used for large scale production. The strain is expected to
have the following desired features: 1) Eliminates the use of antibiotics; 2)
eliminates the use of the expensive inducer IPTG; and 3) provides an optimized
co-factor generation and recycling system. The company has achieved the
microbial production of 5-HTP at over 1 g/L from tryptophan in shake flasks,
which demonstrates great commercialization potential. However, this approach
still uses antibiotics and the expensive inducer IPTG, which can increase the
cost of large scale production by about 44%. In addition, extensive use of
antibiotics in large scale production may raise environmental concerns. To
address these issues and achieve the goal of this STTR Phase I project, the
following three research objectives will be pursued: 1) Construction of an
antibiotic-free plasmid selection system; 2) development of an inducer-free
expression system with incremental strengths; and 3) optimization of the
generation and recycling of cofactor MH4.