* 1520252
* SBIR Phase I:  Degradation-Deformation Relationships in Novel Controlled-Dissolution Magnesium Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Hunter Henderson, Boneco, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to prepare a
novel biodegradable magnesium alloy containing alkaline earth metals for
commercialization by developing structure-property relationships between
microstructure, degradation behavior, and mechanical behavior. With mechanical
properties close to that of a traditional metal and the bioabsorbability of a
polymer, magnesium has the potential to outcompete both classes of material as
an orthopedic implant. These magnesium alloys can offer benefits to patients
across a wide range of applications in the $50 billion implant market, and are
particularly well suited to compete in the $500 million suture anchor market.
Beyond advancing a particular alloy forward towards commercialization, this
Phase I will result in a new understanding of how microstructure impacts
degradation and mechanical properties, adding crucial data to the fledgling
field of magnesium implants. In the near future, these medical devices will
offer improved outcomes to patients, while becoming a dominant force in the
implant market.

The intellectual merit of this project is derived from the development of
structure-property relationships between microstructure and both degradation and
mechanical behavior. Sufficient mechanical integrity and an appropriate
degradation rate are critical to the success of bioabsorbable mechanical
implant, and these relationships must be established prior to broad in-vivo
testing. The studies will consist of a suite of microstructural modification,
in-vitro degradation testing, and bulk mechanical testing. The critical factors
being considered are grain size, texture, precipitate morphology and volume
fraction, degradation testing, compression, and tension testing. Once
relationships between these variables are known, implants can be designed with
optimized, and even tailored, properties for a given patient.