* 1520846
* Hazards SEES: The Risk Landscape of Earthquakes Induced by Deep Wastewater Injection
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Anne Sheehan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,623,814.00

Non-technical Summary

The United States is experiencing a major expansion of domestic oil and gas
production. These activities involve large amounts of water, both in hydraulic
fracturing and in reservoir production, and the energy boom has been accompanied
by a major increase in wastewater disposal by injection. There is growing
evidence that wastewater injection can generate earthquakes under certain
conditions. For example, injection-induced earthquakes are thought to be
responsible for the increase of earthquakes in some places, like Oklahoma, which
in 2014 experienced a greater number of earthquakes larger than Magnitude 3 than
California.

Although there is much ongoing research related to the potential impacts of the
increased oil and gas production on water and air quality, little work has been
done to understand how injection wells affect seismic risk, creating substantial
uncertainty for communities, industry, and regulators. The CU Collaboratory for
Induced Seismicity (CCIS) is developing the geoscience, social science, and
engineering understanding, models, and methods needed to quantify risks
associated with injection-induced earthquakes and to evaluate strategies for
sustainably managing and mitigating these risks.

This research is providing vital knowledge to local communities, regulators, and
the oil and gas industry, including guidance documents on seismic monitoring; a
science-based model regulation that can help guide state and local regulatory
decisions; and seismic risk tools for use by industry, insurers, and others.
This information may be used to manage risks associated with injection-induced
seismicity to foster more sustainable development of energy. The project
involves an External Advisory Board, composed of representatives from regulatory
agencies, industry, and academia. This group helps the research team develop
products and facilitate the transfer of knowledge and products to key decision
makers. The project is also providing a cohort of graduate students and postdocs
with the skills to bridge across disciplines to create scientific tools to model
and evaluate the risks associated with induced earthquakes and to better
communicate these risks. The team has a high representation of women in science
and engineering, which is being leveraged to recruit and mentor underrepresented
students.

Technical Description

CCIS is probing the mechanisms by which injection wells induce earthquakes, the
potential for these earthquakes to cause damage to the built environment, and
the social and economic impacts of induced earthquakes. This project is
expanding our knowledge of the complex interactions of the natural (Theme I),
built (Theme II), and human (Theme III) environments in the creation and
management of induced seismicity. In Theme I, we are conducting seismic
monitoring and analysis of satellite measurements of surface deformations around
injection wells and developing hydromechanical models. Our research in Theme II
is focusing on new fragility and hazard models to proactively assess the risk of
induced ground shaking to structures and infrastructure, and is exploring how
monitoring and other regulatory actions impacts risk. In our Theme III, we are
examining how induced seismicity is reflected in community risk perceptions,
knowledge sharing networks, and stresses; we are also creating a comprehensive
catalog of regulatory alternatives pursued by different states. Our research is
grounded in four case study communities in Colorado and Texas.

Our research presents a holistic study of earthquakes induced by deep wastewater
injection, linking fluid flow, earthquake initiation, and ground shaking
characteristics to probabilistic models for damage to infrastructure and
connecting all this work with social science research on community impacts with
respect to risk perceptions, social cohesion, and knowledge sharing networks. We
are investigating current regulations on induced seismicity, and examining how
regulations impact and respond to geoscience, engineering, and community
processes. We are accomplishing our goals through in situ and participatory
empirical research and design, combined with data collection from seismological
and satellite instruments and multi-scale models. In doing so, our research is
transforming our understanding of the sustainability of the coupled natural-
human-physical systems that affect and are affected by earthquakes induced by
deep wastewater injection, which in turn enables new approaches for mitigating
and managing these risks.