* 1520765
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Experimental Facility with Large-Scale, Multi-directional, Hybrid Simulation Testing Capabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* James Ricles, Lehigh University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2020
* USD 4,886,987.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) will be
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user
national facility that will provide the natural hazards research community with
access to research infrastructure that will include earthquake and wind
engineering experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure, computational modeling
and simulation tools, and research data, as well as education and community
outreach activities. NHERI will be comprised of separate awards for a Network
Coordination Office, Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center, and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response
research facility. Awards made for NHERI will contribute to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program. NHERI continues NSF's emphasis on earthquake
engineering research infrastructure previously supported under the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation as part of NEHRP, but
now broadens that support to include wind engineering research infrastructure.
NHERI has the broad goal of supporting research that will improve the resilience
and sustainability of civil infrastructure, such as buildings and other
structures, underground structures, levees, and critical lifelines, against the
natural hazards of earthquakes and windstorms, in order to reduce loss of life,
damage, and economic loss. Information about NHERI resources will be available
on the DesignSafe-ci.org web portal.

NHERI Experimental Facilities will provide access to their experimental
resources, user services, and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported
research and education awards. This award will provide a NHERI Experimental
Facility at Lehigh University to support research to mitigate the impact of
natural hazards, including earthquakes, on structures. This facility will
provide experimental resources for accurate, large-scale, multi-directional
simulations to investigate the effects of natural hazard events on civil
infrastructure systems, with potential soil-foundation effects. The new
discoveries and knowledge from these simulations will enable researchers to
develop and validate new hazard mitigation solutions and innovative hazard-
resistant structural concepts. The research conducted by facility users will
contribute to the development of the next generation workforce for natural
hazards engineering research, educational activities, and professional practice.
The education and community outreach programs, along with the strategic
education partnerships of the facility, will target a diverse audience and
attract young individuals into science, technology, and engineering, while also
reaching out to educate and inform a broader community. This facility will
conduct annual workshops for prospective users and will host Research
Experiences for Undergraduate students.

The facility's experimental resources, which include a strong floor, multi-
directional reaction wall, static and dynamic actuators, and testing algorithms,
will support large-scale, multi-direction, real-time hybrid simulations that
combine physical experiments with computer-based simulations for evaluating
performance of large-scale components and systems. The types of laboratory
simulations and tests enabled by the facility include: (1) hybrid simulation
(HS), which combines large-scale physical models with computer-based numerical
simulation models; (2) geographically distributed hybrid simulation (DHS), which
is a HS with physical models and/or numerical simulation models located at
different sites; (3) real-time hybrid earthquake simulation (RTHS), which is a
HS conducted at the actual time scale of the physical models; (4) geographically
distributed, real-time hybrid earthquake simulation, which combines DHS and
RTHS; (5) dynamic testing, which loads large-scale physical models at real-time
scales through predefined load histories; and (6) quasi-static testing, which
loads large-scale physical models at slow rates through predefined load
histories. The facility resources will enable multiple, large-scale simulations
and tests to be conducted simultaneously, allowing numerous users to work
concurrently without significant interruption. The large-scale hybrid
simulations are a unique resource for system-level response data, since they
enable the definition of the "system" to be expanded well beyond the size of
typical laboratory physical models. At the same time, due to its large size, the
facility can accommodate large-scale physical models, which reduces scaling
effects associated with typical, small physical models. A broad array of
instrumentation, large-scale data acquisition systems, and advanced sensors will
provide the system-level data needed for advancing computational modeling and
simulation. The facility will utilize the HS capabilities for earthquake
engineering to develop hybrid wind engineering simulation capabilities within
the facility. The HS being advanced at the facility has the potential for
broader impacts in other fields of science and engineering, where combining
physical models and numerical simulation models will enable more holistic
definitions of "the system" in experimental research.