* 1520870
* Hazards SEES: Social and Physical Sensing Enabled Decision Support for Disaster Management  and Response
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Desheng Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,991,000.00

Infrastructure systems are a cornerstone of civilization. Damage to
infrastructure from natural disasters such as an earthquake (e.g., Haiti,
Japan), a hurricane (e.g., Katrina, Sandy), or a flood (e.g., Kashmir floods)
can lead to significant economic loss and societal suffering. Human coordination
and information exchange are at the center of damage control. This project aims
to radically reform decision support systems for managing rapidly changing
disaster situations by the integration of social, physical and hazard models.
The researcher team will serve as a model for highly integrative and
collaborative work among researchers in computer science, engineering, natural
sciences, and the social sciences for research, education, and training of
undergraduate and graduate students, including those from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team seeks to design novel, multi-dimensional,
cross-modal aggregation and inference methods to compensate for the uneven
coverage of sensing modalities across an affected region. They use data from
social and physical sensors as input into an integrated model, from which they
are designing a new methodology to predict and prioritize the consequences of
damage; they are including both temporally and conceptually extended
consequences of damage to people, civil infrastructure (transportation, power,
waterways) and their components (e.g., bridges, traffic signals). They are
developing innovative technology to support the identification of new background
knowledge and structured data to improve object extraction, location
identification correlation, and integration of relevant data across multiple
sources and modalities (social, physical and Web). They use novel coupling of
socio-linguistic and network analysis to identify important persons and objects,
statistical and factual knowledge about traffic and transportation networks, and
the resulting impact on hazard models (e.g. storm surge) and flood mapping. They
are developing domain-grounded mechanisms to address pervasive trustworthiness
and reliability concerns. Exemplar outcomes include specific tools for first-
responders and recovery teams to aid in the prioritization of relief and repair
efforts as well as improved flood response, urban mapping, and dynamic storm
surge models. They also are providing interdisciplinary training of students,
leveraging research in pedagogy in conjunction with Ohio State University's new
undergraduate major in data analytics and Wright State University's Big and
Smart Data graduate certificate program.