* 1520238
* Exploring the influence of tidal stress changes on the generation of secondary slip fronts during slow slip events in Cascadia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Alan Rempel, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2018
* USD 240,000.00

Energy within the Earth is released on faults that can either rupture abruptly,
causing hazardous earthquakes, or slip slowly in largely aseismic events that
can last from hours to years. Slow-slip phenomena occur frequently in Cascadia,
responding to and modifying conditions along the plate interface beneath the
locked region where the next mega-thrust earthquake will occur. The specific
physical processes that govern slow-slip behavior also determine the state of
the potential rupture surface nearest to the major population centers in the
Pacific Northwest. Discriminating between the different rheological models and
mechanical treatments that have been proposed to explain slow slip is
challenging because many of them can reproduce the primary characteristics of
slow slip events, such as propagation speeds, stress drops, and recurrence
intervals. This makes all models that can reproduce these features equally
plausible. The recent discovery of "secondary" slip fronts that occur in
conjunction with slow slip provides a new opportunity to distinguish between
competing models. Accordingly, this project will characterize secondary slip
fronts by determining their spatial extents, slip velocities, and stress drops.
These diagnostics will then be compared with modeled secondary slip fronts to
determine which of the competing model formulations is able to reproduce the
observations and provide a window into changing fault conditions beneath the
Pacific Northwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slow-slip phenomena require the slip
rate to increase to observed speeds, typically 10 to 100 times the plate rate,
but refrain from accelerating fast enough to generate seismic waves. The
specific physical mechanisms responsible for imposing this speed limit are in
dispute. Our research combines observational and theoretical components to
examine the influence of tidal stress changes on slow-slip processes, thereby
offering an objective test of several competing model treatments that have
succeeded in reproducing the first-order characteristics of slow slip (e.g. slip
speeds, stress drops, etc.). The proposed observational effort will use
Principle Component Analysis on a low-frequency earthquake dataset from Cascadia
to systematically quantify the length scales, time scales, propagation speeds,
and propagation directions of secondary fronts that immediately follow passage
of the main slip front. The theoretical effort will incorporate shear and normal
stress oscillations into slow-slip simulations that include rate-and-state
formulations and dilatancy hardening. The observational catalog that we assemble
will be used to test and refine model treatments that seek agreement between
predicted and actual characteristics of secondary fronts that propagate along
the Cascadia mega-thrust.