* 1520261
* SBIR Phase I:  On-Site, Real-Time, Continuous Measurement of Hazardous Pesticides in Water Matrices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Debapriya Mazumdar, Andalyze
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 148,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project can be seen through the
increased measurement requirements of pesticides in drinking in the U.S. and
around the world. Several government agencies including the U.S. EPA Office of
Water, U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), and State Environmental Departments, and
local city and county agencies monitor drinking water for pesticides. And new
studies are reporting additional and worsening health effects of ingesting
various pesticides. Quick identification and measurement, in addition to low-
cost and simplified testing methods the technology can assist by significantly
increase the frequency of testing, identifying the contaminating source and then
remediating thus helping to reduce the quantities of pesticides being consumed
overall. While ANDalyze has already shown the technology potential with various
heavy metal sensors, additional opportunity can be seen in the measurement
capability for pesticides and other organic molecules which will be initially
proven by first developing a fluorescent sensor for the herbicide atrazine using
DNA aptamer technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will help to address the contamination of trace
pesticides, such as Atrazine, in our water resources which pose a serious health
concern. Their simple, quick and inexpensive measurement is essential for
driving effective removal technologies. Currently pesticide measurements are
conducted solely in the laboratory using sophisticated instrumentation which are
expensive (~$900ea test) and require skilled operators. Using a patented DNA-
based sensing technology, ANDalyze has created a method of detecting and
quantifying chemical levels based on the recent discovery of the catalytic
properties of DNA. By applying in-vitro selection to identify DNA aptamers that
have high selectivity and sensitivity for atrazine, performing biochemical
characterization and optimization of the DNA aptamers to assess their
selectivity and sensitivity for the atrazine against similar molecules (triazine
class) and other common pesticides, and finally developing a fluorescent sensor
for detection using the ANDalyze fluorimeter, ANDalyze can offer simple, fast,
inexpensive, reliable and on-site, real time detection of such contaminants.