* 1520907
* Modeling slow slip and earthquake nucleation on heterogeneous faults: implications for foreshocks and repeating earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Nadia Lapusta, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 446,999.00

The researchers have developed sophisticated numericals models that explore how
faults that produce earthquakes, large and small, also produce movements that
are slow, and look different from typical earthquakes. Earthquakes are typically
generated by rapid slip on pre-existing faults inside the Earth, loaded by
tectonic plate motion. Observations show that the rapid slip, with the average
velocity of the order of 1 m/s, coexists with much slower slip that can be
measured, e.g. using GPS. These types of phenomena often exist in the same place
and can influence each other. This project will look to simulate several cycles
of large earthquakes and, by incorporating what we know about how the Earth
deforms, the physics of seismic waves and faults, observe how slow events and
both small and large earthquakes work. They will take their simulations and
compare them with observations made in experimental labs and in nature. The
studies will lead to better understanding of earthquake nucleation, fault
properties, and the predictive value of foreshocks sequences, and hence help
mitigate seismic hazard. Combined with codes for wave propagation and site and
building response, the methodology for simulating slow slip and earthquake
sequences can become a vital ingredient of physics-based simulation capability
for seismic hazard analysis This kind of modeling could have transformative
impacts on our understanding of earthquakes and their hazards. These types of
models add another tool to our study of hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study
the interaction of slow slip with seismicity-producing fault patches, the
researchers will use a unique numerical approach capable of resolving all stages
of slip: accelerating slip during earthquake nucleation, dynamic rupture with
all inertial (wave) effects, postseismic slip, and interseismic slip including
transients. Slow slip will be generated as a part of long-term fault simulations
using several physical mechanisms to enable comparison between them: (i)
nucleation processes on faults governed by standard velocity-weakening rate-and-
state friction, (ii) modifications of such processes due to inelastic shear
dilatancy, and (iii) slow slip on velocity-strengthening faults. The fault
models will include one or multiple patches defined as areas of different
frictional properties. Several types of differences that may lead to seismicity
will be explored, including variations in effective normal stress, rate-
weakening properties, dilatancy, and permeability. The focus here is on
simulating and characterizing well-resolved interactions of slow slip and
seismic events in terms of their radiated spectra, stress drops, potential for
seismicity recurrence on a patch during a single episode of slow slip, spatial
extent of the generated events in relation to the patch sizes, modification of
slow slip by the resulting seismicity and its postseismic effects, and the
consequences of interaction between nearby patches. Comparison of these features
with observations (including laboratory studies) will allow identification of
scenarios relevant to the observed phenomena as well as clarify the nature of
heterogeneity on natural and laboratory faults. The developed detailed models of
slow slip interaction with heterogeneous patches will be used to create
simplified representations of microseismicity for use in future simulations of
earthquakes and slow slip, including foreshock sequences and tremor, in
realistic fault settings.