* 1520648
* Thermal conductivity of Deep Earth's materials studied by fast pulsed laser techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Alexander Goncharov, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 243,941.00

Knowledge of thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity of the Earth's
minerals under extreme conditions is important for understanding the physical
and chemical processes and their evolution in the Earth. The rate of the heat
transport through the mantle is crucial for the existence and stability of the
Earth's magnetic field. The temperature distribution inside the Earth's mantle
depends on the rate of heat transfer by convection, conduction, and radiation.
An understanding of these processes requires knowledge of the thermal
conductivity as a function of pressure and temperature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal conductivity of materials in Earth and planetary
interiors is one of the key parameters controlling the thermal history of the
core and mantle and their dynamics. These are related to the processes of
planetary accretion and differentiation, the time evolution of mantle and core
temperatures, and the generation of the Earth's magnetic field. In this project,
it is proposed to determine the thermal conductivity of the Earth's key minerals
under high P-T conditions by using pump-probe pulsed laser techniques. To
determine the lattice thermal conductivity, the heat fluxes across the sample
and their time history using time- and spatially resolved spectroradiometry
and/or time-domain thermoreflectance will be measured. These measurements will
be applied to lower mantle minerals and also Fe and Fe-rich alloys. To infer the
radiative thermal conductivity, the optical spectra of these mantle minerals in
the ultraviolet-to-infrared spectral range at high P-T conditions (up to 150 GPa
and 6000 K) will be studied. For in situ high-temperature measurements of the
optical properties, broad band optical spectroscopy systems in visible and
infrared spectral ranges will be employed which use supercontinuum and
nonlinearly mixed pulsed laser sources in combination with time-resolved
multichannel detectors (streak camera, intensified CCD, and array MCT detector).
These techniques will be applied to study lower mantle minerals, silicate melts,
and planetary ices. These experimental data will give a direct estimate of the
radiative and conduction parts of the thermal conductivity of deep Earth
materials at the relevant P-T conditions. Knowledge of the depth-dependent
thermal conductivity of the Earth's mantle will complement recent advances in
mantle convection modeling, where a range of possible dynamic structures are
predicted depending on the assumed thermal conductivity. Thus, the PI's work
will provide a crucial test of these models and our current understanding of the
Earth's interior.