* 1521508
* OCE-PRF Track 2 (International): Towards a 3-Dimensional Understanding of the Meridional Overturning Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* NONE NONE, Chapman                 Christopher    C
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 194,000.00

The "global meridional overturning circulation" is an ocean current that brings
warm, often salty water from the tropics to the colder polar regions. This
circulation acts to redistribute heat around the globe and has a profound
influence of the Earth's climate, and for this reason is sometimes called the
"global ocean conveyor belt." The Southern Ocean, which encircles the Antarctic
continent, exerts a strong influence on the global overturning. However, in the
Southern Ocean, the dynamics of this current are very poorly understood. In this
project, the fellow (Christopher Chapman) together with sponsoring scientist
Jean-Baptiste Sallée, at LOCEAN-IPSL, Paris, will work towards understanding the
role that large undersea topography and much smaller scale turbulent flows,
called "eddies" play in global overturning using a mixture of simple ocean
models; observations from oceanographic instruments; and sophisticated global
climate models. Our results will help reduce uncertainties in projections of
future climate change and will aid policy makers to understand the potential
impacts of their decisions.

The Southern Ocean strongly influences the global overturning circulation. It is
in the Southern Ocean that cold, deep waters upwell to the surface, that surface
buoyancy forcing and diapycnal mixing processes cause water mass transformations
and where energetic baroclinic eddies act to oppose the general northward
overturning circulation driven by wind forcing. However, a lack of observations
in the region and the prohibitive expense of running large-scale eddy-resolving
simulations has meant that the Southern Ocean overturning is poorly understood.
In particular, most studies to date exploit the fact that the Southern Ocean
currents are primarily zonally oriented to treat the MOC as a two dimensional
system, ignoring variations with longitude.

However, recent observations have shown that the Southern Ocean is not
2-dimensional. Turbulence, tracer-mixing and water-mass subduction are strongly
localized to regions downstream of large bathymetric features, such as the
Kergulean Plateau. Recent work has indicated that turbulent processes near these
bathymetric features can cause a rearrangement of the ocean's physical structure
on large-scales. As such, these local-scale dynamics may have an influence of
the large-scale structure of the global overturning.

This project aims to blend descriptive and process based approaches to study the
influence of "local" dynamics on the "global" overturning. The first stage of
the project will use data from satellites, Argo floats, ships and instrumented
elephant seals to determine how dynamical processes originating due to flow
interaction with large bathymetric features influence the large-scale oceanic
structure - in particular the potential vorticity structure and the meridional
flux of heat and mass. The second stage of the project will use a high-
resolution (eddy-resolving) numerical ocean model, run in an idealized
configuration, meant to be representative of the Southern Ocean. The model will
be run both with, and without, large-scale bathymetry and with, and without,
turbulent eddies. Finally, the output of climate models contained in the CMIP5
database will be examined to determine what influence, if any, the accurate
representation of flow/bathymetry interaction in the Southern Ocean has on the
response of the global overturning.