* 1521133
* Developing 230Th/U Dating of Coral Artifacts for High-Precision Cultural Chronologies in Eastern Polynesia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Warren Sharp, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 168,983.00

Researchers wish to understand the tempo of the rise of complex, populous
societies from small founder groups and the pace of accompanying environmental
change. Archaeological study of Polynesian cultural sequences created on island
ecosystems is well suited to such investigations. Beginning with small bands of
pioneering settlers, the first humans on the landscape of each newly discovered
island, Polynesian societies of increasing size and hierarchical complexity
developed over time. This development was accompanied by environmental changes
including profound modifications to native flora and fauna, landscapes, and
marine resources. However, the timing of initial settlement and the tempo of
ensuing cultural and environmental change remain highly uncertain despite nearly
70 years of research. In the current project, Drs. W. Sharp and P. Kirch and
their collaborators Drs. M. Allen and G. Molle will further develop a novel
approach to dating Polynesian cultural sequences. The expected improvements in
dating will, for the first time, provide a clear picture of the speed of
cultural and environmental change in these Polynesian societies. Better dates in
key Eastern Polynesian archipelagoes will also help resolve a longstanding
debate over the timing of the extraordinary trans-Pacific dispersal of the
Polynesians. Developing the capability to precisely date coral artifacts will
help Pacific archaeologists erect refined chronologies for human occupation and
human-ecosystem interaction elsewhere in Oceania.

Polynesian archaeologists have traditionally depended almost solely upon
radiocarbon dating (i.e., 14C dating) to provide a quantitative temporal
framework for colonization of islands and subsequent evolution of island
cultures and environments. Despite significant improvements in the radiocarbon
technique through the years, radiocarbon dating has severe inherent limitations
when applied to the past ~1000 years, the time frame of cultural development in
eastern Polynesia. An alternative dating technique that has already demonstated
considerable success in applications in Polynesia is 238U-234U-230Th dating of
corals, herein referred to as 230Th coral dating. The technique is based on
decay of naturally occurring uranium in corals, and reliable 230Th coral ages
with precisions of 1-2% are readily attainable. For example, for 500-year old
corals this translates into dates with uncertainties of only five to ten years.
In the current project, Sharp, Kirch and their collaborators will apply 230Th
coral dating to coral abraders made from pieces of Acropora or other corals used
by Polynesians to shape fish hooks made from shell. Such coral abraders are
common in Polynesian archaeological sequences and have been shown to be highly
suitable for 230Th dating. In sum, the project will provide chronologies for
cultural sequences in key archipelagoes of Eastern Polynesia of unprecedented
accuracy and precision, thereby substantively advancing our understanding of
Polynesian prehistory.