* 1521786
* Complexity to Clarity: Nonparametric Procedures that Exploit Structured Data and Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ann Lee, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Modern research in the physical sciences involves the use of non-standard
aggregate data objects (for example, images, spectra, or hurricane tracks),
which are not directly amenable to traditional statistical methods. Naturally,
the physical processes that generated these observed data are also often very
complicated. Typically the only meaningful "model" is in the form of a high-
resolution theoretical or simulation model. For example in cosmology, scientists
regularly use large hydrodynamic simulations to understand how the universe
formed and evolved. The goal of this project is to develop a new means of
combining careful statistical modeling of scientific phenomena with scalable
procedures that fully exploit the richness of large collections of complex data
without reducing the data to a set of features or
templates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on ideas from harmonic analysis and
spectral methods, this project is to develop flexible and adaptive nonparametric
methods for high-dimensional inference that exploit sparse (and potentially
nonlinear) structure in complex data. These methods derive Fourier-like bases
that adapt to the intrinsic geometry (e.g., submanifold structure) of the
underlying data distribution, and use the empirical basis functions to estimate
functions on high-dimensional aggregate objects. The methods go beyond point-
estimates in prediction to nonparametric estimation of conditional densities,
density ratios and likelihoods of complex, high-dimensional data. A key
application of these methods is the calibration of complex simulation models:
the inference challenge of determining the settings of input values to these
models so that their output approximates either real data or the output of a
more complex and computationally-intensive simulation code. On a broader scale,
this work will make key methodological contributions to building, interpreting,
and using probability models for high-dimensional, complexly-structured data in
a wide range of scientific applications.