* 1521421
* Collaborative Research:  Retention of Anisotropic Colloids in Porous Media: A Modeling and Experimental Investigation at Multiple Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,11/30/2019
* Huilian Ma, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 199,192.00

Collaborative Research: Retention of Anisotropic Colloids in Porous Media: A
Modeling and Experimental Investigation at Multiple
Scales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groundwater is one of
the most important components of the hydrologic cycle, serving as the source of
about 33 percent of public water supply and providing drinking water to more
than 90 percent of the rural population in the United States. Biological
(bacteria) and non-biological (soil particles) natural colloids are ubiquitous
in groundwater. The transport of pathogens (biological colloids) is relevant to
producing safe drinking water, and the transport of heavy metals as facilitated
by colloids (non-biological colloids) in groundwater has been widely recognized
as a serious public concern. Almost all natural colloids are anisotropic in
nature, being non-spherical in shape and possessing varied degrees of
heterogeneity in surface charge. This project addresses the limitations of our
current understanding of transport and fate of colloidal particles in porous
media that stem from approximations of spherical shape and uniform surface
charge used in previous studies. An improved understanding of colloid transport
and retention in the environment will provide critical knowledge needed for
producing safe drinking water and protecting sustainable water resources,
essential steps for human health and development. Results from this work will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate curriculums. Interactive
demonstrations on environmental aspects of colloids and nanomaterials will
engage middle- and high-school students during a two-week summer camp that
encourages interest in STEM disciplines among women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a combined experimental and
modeling study that integrates considerations of shape anisotropy and surface-
charge heterogeneity. The research uses a multi-scale approach to investigate
the retention of anisotropic colloids onto flat surfaces, at grain-to-grain
contacts, and in complex porous media. Systematic experiments using laboratory-
prepared rod-shaped colloidal particles with various aspect ratios and surface-
charge heterogeneity will be analyzed in novel ways. Applications of cutting-
edge methodologies in microelectronics, high-resolution mass sensing, optical
microscopy, and laser-scanning cytometry will enable observations of colloid
attachment rates on the surfaces and pore throats of the mineral grains
comprising porous media and reveal phenomena appropriate to scaling up
observations to aquifers. In parallel, a numerical simulation model that is
capable of tracking both the movement and orientation of anisotropic colloids
within porous media will be developed. The results of this project provide
predictive quantification on how non-spherical shape and surface-charge
heterogeneity impact transport and retention of anisotropic colloids.