* 1521393
* STTR Phase I:  Simultaneous Broadband and Highly Efficient Wireless Powering and Communication of Wearable Wireless Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Argy Petros, Innovelix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 224,974.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will go beyond wearable
sensors. This project is expected to yield significant societal benefits on
health and quality of life, as the proposed technology will be able to support
the safe powering and communication of novel wireless systems that will enable
next generation applications; including, implantable or wearable biomonitoring
of senior people in assisted living, pacemakers, drug delivery, artificial
organs, bionics for people with disabilities and injured military personnel, and
novel treatments for cancer and brain disorders. This project is also expected
to revolutionize other commercial applications, such as, wireless sensors for
structural health monitoring and environmental monitoring. In addition, this
project is expected to broaden broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups through Senior Design projects on wireless powering and outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
(STTR) Phase I project will generate the required technological knowledge for
deriving the first miniaturized wireless power transfer systems, which can
simultaneously and safely transmit power to and communicate with wearable
devices and sensors, with unprecedented power transfer efficiency, bandwidth and
alignment-insensitive characteristics. Therefore, this project is expected to
have a significant impact on the development of new and/or conformal wearable
battery-less devices that support novel biomonitoring, diagnostic techniques and
therapies and enhancing our capabilities for disease prevention and treatment.
This project is also expected to lead to the first generation of truly
autonomous wireless implantable devices for various applications such as smart
medicine activation, artificial organ enhanced performance and status
monitoring.