* 1521740
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Monitoring and Modeling Family Eating Dynamics (M2 FED): Reducing Obesity Without Focusing on Diet and Activity
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Donna Spruijt-Metz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,058,461.00

This project is funded under a joint solicitation between the National Science
Foundation and the National Institutes of Health, named "Smart and Connected
Health" (SCH), which aims to accelerate the development and use of innovative
approaches that would support the much needed transformation of healthcare
across the entire population. The obesity epidemic is the primary cause of
recent increases in heart disease, diabetes, cancer, and other diseases that
place an untenable strain on healthcare and public health. One of the primary
behavioral causes, i.e. dietary intake, is a behavior that science has had
little success in understanding, much less affecting. Recent advances in remote
sensing have provided a new paradigm for tracking human behavior, but obesity-
related efforts focused directly on diet and activity have been hampered by not
only the accuracy of behavior tracking (especially dietary intake) but also the
lack of behavioral theories and dynamic models for personalized just-in-time,
adaptive interventions (JITAIs). Current behavioral science suggests that family
eating dynamics (FED) have high potential to impact child and parent dietary
intake and obesity rates. The confluence of technology research and behavioral
science research creates the opportunity to change the focus of in situ obesity
research and intervention from behaviors that have proven difficult to monitor,
model, and modify (e.g., what and how much is being eaten) to the family
mealtime and home food environment (e.g., who is eating, when, where, with whom,
interpersonal stress), providing opportunities for monitoring and modeling (M2)
behavior via remote sensing, and the potential for successful behavior
modification via personalized, adaptable, real-time
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes M2FED, an integrated system
of in-home beacons, wireless and wearable sensors, and smartphones that collects
synchronized real-time FED data that will be used to iteratively develop
dynamic, contextualized FED systems models based on that data. The technology,
ideographic models, and techniques to iteratively develop those models can guide
future JITAIs and thus have a downstream positive impact on diet and ultimately
obesity. The project brings together behavioral scientists, system scientists,
obesity experts, computer scientists, and electrical engineers to address
fundamental challenges of remote, continuous data capture for real-time behavior
modeling for obesity prevention and treatment. Behavioral scientists
traditionally have not had access to real-time data and dynamic models, while
engineers have not had the expertise to identify what to monitor and model or
what feedback to provide. This project connects complimentary expertise to
develop a dramatically different approach to childhood obesity, focusing on
behaviors, i.e. FED rather than diet, that can be more accurately monitored and
modeled and have greater potential for positive and long-term modification.
Fundamental technology research challenges in realizing the M2FED system include
unique individual in-home localization, eating detection, conversation stress
and mood assessment in reverberant environments, and a system-of-systems
framework that includes heterogeneous sensing and communication systems across
the family system itself. Fundamental behavioral research challenges include
real-time modeling of FED based on past and ongoing observations of FED states
and intra- and interpersonal states and events that create temporal and causal
impact on FED. While this project is performed within the context of the
obesity/FED relationship (which itself has the potential for sweeping impacts on
human health and healthcare costs), the project also generalizes a framework,
including both an evidence-based system and an experimental platform that
extends to systems and applications beyond childhood obesity and behavior
modification. The multidisciplinary nature of this work also provides new
outreach and educational opportunities, informing (and being informed by) the
public and preparing a workforce that is better equipped to address the
fundamental human-behavior-centric challenges of health management and wellness
preservation.