* 1521053
* Moduli Spaces of String Vacua with Four Supersymmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* M. Ronen Plesser, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 315,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Ronen Plesser of Duke
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory is the leading contender for a
quantum theory of gravity and a unified description of the fundamental structure
of the universe. Research in string theory in the past three decades has led to
exciting new insights in physics and mathematics. Considering string propagation
in nontrivial backgrounds produces physical interpretations for mathematical
structures in spacetime. The interplay between mathematical and physical
intuitions and techniques has enriched both fields. A notable example of this is
the discovery and the many applications of mirror symmetry, a surprising
relation between two distinct spaces that lead to indentical physics when used
as string backgrounds. Plesser's research will build on these results and on
recent progress in both fields to pursue these studies in new regimes. This work
will be done in collaboration with physicists and mathematicians around the
world, enhancing interdisciplinary cooperation. As a result, research in this
area advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in a
particularly interdisciplinary direction. Plesser will also train graduate
students and involve undergraduate students in the research. Plesser will also
collaborate with local public schools to enhance science teaching and generate
enthusiasm for science in young people through visits to the classroom to
present specific curriculum materials developed in concert with the schools.
These curriculum materials are made broadly available for use elsewhere.
Moreover, the regular public stargazing events conducted by Plesser for the past
decade will be enhanced by including astrophotography
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Plesser will pursue various
approaches to better understand the structure of the moduli space of string
vacua with four unbroken supersymmetries. This includes perturbative heterotic
vacua and the (0,2) superconformal field theories associated to these, as well
as F-theory and M-theory compactifications on Calabi-Yau fourfolds. Each of
these formulations gives a simple description of a region of the moduli space,
and the relation between the two descriptions in regions of overlap is of
particular interest.