* 1521233
* STTR Phase I:  Research and Development of High Efficiency Shielded Toroidal Transformers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Qiong Wu, HIGHEST Transformers Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 207,832.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project are: the savings of
energy to help US economy; reduction of the pollution and greenhouse gas
emissions by lowering energy production of expensive polluting units; improve
the reliability of the distribution networks; and avoiding environmental
contaminations caused by oil-immersed transformers. This energy-efficient
product will save money to taxpayers, since it will have lower operating costs
that compensates for acquisition costs. The energy losses attributable to
distribution transformer inefficiencies are approximated 60 to 80 billion kWh,
which rob U.S. business and American consumers of approximately $4 billion per
year. If the changeover to energy-efficient transformers applies nationally (one
percent higher efficiency transformers) it will roughly result in savings of
about $500 million per year. The technology will upgrade the performance and
reliability of the power distribution networks. The costumers are national large
power utilities that spend approximately $1.5 billion (annually) to purchase
these assets from power transformer manufacturers. While this project focuses on
the research and development of the medium voltage transformers for utilities,
there are other application areas including, marine and hazardous environments,
hospitals, wind farms, renewable energy sites, and portable transformers where
smaller and lighter devices are needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will address the research
and development of a new generation of medium voltage distribution utility-grade
transformers. This dry-type transformer will be constructed on toroidal iron
cores. Therefore, the core has a gapless construction yielding transformers with
extremely low no-load losses. Toroidal transformers are not currently in use in
distribution systems due to the lack of experience with their design at medium
and high voltages. These transformers will be manufactured with a special
patented electrostatic shield. The technology allows manufacturing using a
minimum amount of insulation between windings/layers to withstand overvoltages;
this facilitates the control of the temperature rise as well. The low energy
dissipation of this technology allows designing dry-type transformers with size,
price and efficiency comparable to oil-immerse standard transformer designs.
Thus, the final objective of the project is to replace oil immersed overhead
transformers with dry toroidal units, reducing the potential for violent faults
(explosions) in addition to the environmental benefits of avoiding the use of
oil. The final product will be unique in terms of efficiency, with very low
acoustic and electromagnetic noise, and high overload capability among other
technical advantages.