* 1521172
* STTR Phase I:  Bioprocess-derived Glucaric Acid as a Renewable Feedstock for Diverse Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Neal Connors, Kalion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research Phase I project is the development of polymer applications for
glucaric acid such as polyesters and polyamides. For example, the polyester
segment has a potential for 9 billion pounds with a market value of $5 - $13
billion. Success on this project will catalyze the use of bioprocess-derived
glucaric acid for this and other applications for which this versatile six
carbon di-acid has utility. While some smaller shorter carbon chain length
molecules (three to five carbons, C3-C5) based renewable materials are
available, bioprocess-derived glucaric acid could represent the first major,
biologically-produced C6 used for polymer synthesis if it can be successfully
brought to market. Based on precedents for large-scale fermentation processes,
successful translation of the glucaric acid bioprocess and polymer synthesis
technology into the commercial space would also result in job creation, as bio-
based plants have typically been initiated in the US. Critically this work will
also further validate the commercial viability of producing commodity-scale,
high value-added chemicals produced by microbes developed with synthetic biology
techniques. With the United States at the forefront of synthetic biology, proven
commercially successful products will lead to greater private investment in this
growth sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase I research
project are: 1) demonstrate the synthesis of novel, high molecular weight
polymers (&gt;10 kDa) from glucaric acid and suitable co-monomers with useful
thermal and mechanical properties, and 2) develop and evaluate genetically
altered E. coli strains for improved glucaric acid production. As a novel di-
acid monomer, glucaric acid provides the opportunity to explore uncharted
territory in the polymer space. These new materials can serve as functional
replacements allowing suppliers to leverage an alternative to petroleum
feedstock-based polymers. Reaction schemes that carefully control monomer
stoichiometry and drive high conversion will be employed to achieve polyesters
and polyamides with molecular weights greater than 10 kDa.