* 1521918
* RAPID:  On-site Disinfection and Survival of Ebola and Other Viruses in Human Fecal Wastes and Sewage
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Mark Sobsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2018
* USD 144,418.00

1521918&lt;br/&gt;Sobsey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAPID: On-site Disinfection and
Survival of Ebola and Other Viruses in Human Fecal Wastes and
Sewage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical and urgent need for quantitative
data on the survival and rapid, onsite chemical disinfection of Ebola virus and
surrogate/indicator viruses in feces and raw sewage, as no such data currently
exist. Data on both survival and chemical disinfection of Ebola virus and
surrogates/indicators for it will provide quantitative information to assess the
risks posed by Ebola virus in fecal waste and raw sewage and to determine if the
risks can be reduced effectively by on-site, rapid chemical disinfection. No
previous studies have ever compared systematically the range of chemical
disinfectants to be used here for inactivation of Ebola or other
surrogate/indicator viruses. The project will provide critical and timely
quantitative information on the survival and rapid on-site chemical disinfection
of a mutant Ebola virus and several candidate indicator/surrogate viruses in
feces and raw sewage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this study are to:
(1) do batch laboratory-scale experiments to quantify and characterize the rate
and extent of inactivation of the infectivity of a mutant Ebola virus strain as
well as surrogate/indicator viruses, both enveloped and non-enveloped) in feces
and raw sewage at two temperatures (37C and a room temperature of ~23C) under
both aerobic and anaerobic conditions, and, (2) to determine the rate and extent
of inactivation of the infectivity of these viruses in feces and raw sewage by
batch disinfection with different doses of the following disinfectants: free
chlorine, 2 quaternary ammonium compounds, peracetic acid, lime (calcium
hydroxide), a phenolic compound and an anionic detergent. The mutant Ebola virus
strain that is not infectious for humans or animals but grows and can be assayed
for infectivity in a genetically modified cell line will be used along with the
following surrogate/indicator viruses: an animal coronavirus (Transmissible
Gastroenteritis Virus of Swine), an avian influenza virus strain, an enveloped
bacteriophage (Phi6) and 2 non-enveloped bacteriophages of E. coli (MS2 and
PhiX-174).