* 1521534
* Robust earthquake source scaling and seismic efficiency for intermediate depth and deep earthquakes at global and regional scales
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* German Prieto, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2018
* USD 260,000.00

Earthquakes pose a significant hazard to communities worldwide. One type of
earthquakes that are generally known as deep earthquakes, mostly occur along
subduction zones in Japan, Alaska, Cascadia, and South America to name a few.
Even though they represent about 25% of the total number of earthquakes
worldwide, as of yet, we do not clearly understand the mechanism that allow this
earthquakes to occur. In the proposed research we will study two of the active
regions in terms of deep earthquakes, México and Chile, combining both global
observations and available regional observations from the national seismic
networks of the respective countries. We will determine not only the magnitude
of the events but also the complete energy budgets that can describe the way in
which these earthquakes start and grow, and ultimately constrain the driving
mechanism. Our observations and analysis will provide fundamental parameters
that may help laboratory experiments compare and extrapolate their observations
to a realistic Earth, better predict the ground motions of future large deep
earthquakes in Chile and Mexico and mitigate seismic hazard in other regions as
well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work on deep and intermediate-depth
earthquakes has raised new questions about possible mechanisms involved in these
earthquakes [Prieto et al., 2013; Zhan et al 2014; Meng et al, 2014]. We propose
to extend the determination of the complete earthquake energy budget at global
scales, using broadband seismic stations at teleseismic distances. Because of
the limited ability of retrieving high frequencies at these distances, only
earthquakes with M&gt;5.5 are analyzed [Poli and Prieto, 2014]. Therefore, we
will include at least two areas with records of intermediate-depth and deep
earthquakes at regional scales (e.g., Mexico, Chile) that will allow for
accurate analysis of M&gt;3.5. For an accurate analysis of the earthquake source
process, it is necessary to determine both static source parameters - including
magnitude, duration and rupture size - and dynamic parameters like radiated
seismic energy and rupture velocity. With these parameters it will be possible
to determine the energy partitioning during earthquake rupture. We hope to be
able to relate our observed variations with geodynamical properties of the
associated subducted slabs and better constrain the physical mechanism involved
in deep earthquake rupture [e.g. Yamasaki &amp; Seno, 2003, Reynard et al., 2010
Green, 2015].