* 1521018
* Modeling Bubbly Flows and Bubble-Mediated Gas Transfer in High Wind Conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Junhong Liang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 295,974.00

Bubbles in the ocean are a key component of air-sea gas transfer at moderate to
extreme wind speeds. They enhance gas transfer rate by providing a pathway in
addition to the ocean surface. Due to surface tension and hydrostatic pressure
exerted on bubbles, gases are able to dissolve at supersaturated conditions. The
surface ocean is, therefore, supersaturated with outgassing at the ocean surface
and interior dissolution through bubbles. The primary objectives of this study
are to better understand processes governing the evolution of bubbles and
dissolved gases under high winds and to improve parameterization for bubble-
mediated gas flux. Three hypotheses, identified based on previous observational
and theoretical studies, will be tested: (1) Gas dissolution through bubbles is
important in determining mixed layer dissolved gas concentration under a
hurricane; (2) Wind speed dependence for bubble penetration and bubble-mediated
gas flux is smaller in high wind conditions; (3) Bubble-enhanced effective
solubility for Dimethyl Sulfide and the kinetics of the carbonate system have
substantial impacts on air-sea flux of these gases. The hypotheses will be
tested using a coupled - large eddy simulation - bubble population - dissolved
gas concentration model, which has been shown to faithfully reproduce the
simultaneous evolution of and the interplay among oceanic surface boundary layer
turbulence, bubbles of multiple sizes with multiple gas components, and the
dissolved concentrations of multiple gases. The model also includes the bubble-
induced enhancement in effective solubility for polar gas DMS and chemical
reactions for the carbonate system. The model will be forced by realistic wind
and wave conditions under hurricane Frances (2004), where high quality oceanic
measurements of turbulence, dissolved oxygen and Nitrogen will be used to gauge
the model realism, as well as steady winds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit :&lt;br/&gt;Subsurface bubbles, especially in high wind conditions, are
hitherto insufficiently understood, and the contributions of bubbles to the
total air-sea gas flux are poorly constrained and have not yet been included in
any existing climate simulations or biogeochemical process estimates. The
synthesis of simulations and data will provide accurate description of processes
governing bubbles and dissolved gases at high spatial and temporal resolutions.
Results of this study will provide fundamental understanding of and
mechanistically based parameterization for bubble distribution and bubble-
mediated gas transfer. They will also be applicable to the air-sea transfer of
other reactive and non-reactive gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The research in bubbles and air-sea gas transfer in high wind
conditions contributes broadly to the understanding of the earth system in terms
of both the physical coupling of the ocean and atmosphere and the global
biogeochemical cycling. Better parameterization of bubble-mediated gas flux for
large scale and climate models will result in significant improvements in the
modeling and budget estimate of climatically and environmentally important
soluble gases including carbon dioxide, oxygen and Dimethyl Sulfide. This study
will improve our capability to predict future environmental and climatic
changes, and will provide better scientific basis for decision makers in
politics and industry on a range of issues such as climate and energy. It,
therefore, has important economic and societal implications. Although this study
focuses on the impact of bubbles on air-sea gas transfer, better description of
subsurface bubble fields also leads to better characterization of sound and
light propagation at the surface ocean and benefits the ocean engineering
community. The project will support a new investigator. Besides publishing in
refereed journals, the PI will actively participate in conferences and workshops
organized by established scientific groups and societies and will develop
collaboration with other colleagues in the air-sea gas exchange community.
Scientific results will also be presented to the general public on the PI's
website. Project materials will be incorporated into the University of
Washington's continual outreach effort to local schools, museums and community
groups. The PI and Co-PIs will continue to be involved in outreach activities
through the Seattle science festival and other volunteer activities at local
schools.