* 1521503
* Workshop:  Decadal Climate Predictions: Improving Our Understanding of Processes and Mechanisms to Make Better Predictions; Aspen CO; June 7-12, 2015
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* John Katzenberger, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 04/30/2016
* USD 19,952.00

This workshop will bring together researchers who are currently promoting
various types of idealized experiments and diagnostic studies to address this
problem by individual scientists and groups, in order to compare their results,
and formulate productive coordinated experiments that can become part of the
experiment design for the decadal prediction experiments for the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project (CMIP6). In order to provide robust decadal climate
predictions, the research community must improve the capabilities of decadal
climate predictions. Improved understanding of the processes and mechanisms in
the climate system that lead decadal climate variability is crucial. NSF funds
will provide travel support of early career scientists at the workshop to be
held in Aspen CO, June 7-12, 2015. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to bring together the World Climate Research Program Decadal Climate
Prediction Panel to compare their results and formulate productive coordinated
experiments to further the understanding regarding processes and mechanisms that
could produce prediction skill on decadal timescales. Approximately 30
scientists from the DCPP, which is made up of the Working Group on Coupled
Models and the Working Group on Seasonal to Interannual Prediction will
participate from the United States as well as from key international modeling
groups.