* 1521528
* The geometry of nutritional niche separation among forest monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,03/31/2020
* Jessica Rothman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2020
* USD 276,920.00

Studying present-day primate communities can help us to understand how they were
shaped and maintained through evolutionary time. Adequate nutrition is critical
for survival and reproduction. The goal of this research is to understand how
monkeys meet their nutritional needs while sharing the same rainforest habitat.
Dr. Jessica Rothman and her team will study the diet and nutrition of four
monkey species and map the nutrients in trees in Kibale National Park, Uganda.
The research will test hypotheses that will help understand their divergent
nutritional goals. For example the researchers will test the hypothesis that
different species of monkeys balance their intake of carbohydrates, fats,
protein, minerals and toxins in different ways, which allows them to survive
together in the same habitat. The research will be applied to scenarios of
primate evolution and management strategies that affect primate conservation.
Several graduate students and undergraduate minority students in STEM will
participate in this research. They will observe wild primates, learn ecological
field methods, and be trained in near infrared spectroscopy, nutritional
modeling and plant analysis. This training will provide them with a unique
international experience in a rainforest that hosts some of the highest
densities of primates in the world. They will work alongside Dr. Rothman, a
nutritional modeler from the University of Sydney, and conservation managers in
the Uganda Wildlife Authority. The research team will also lead hands-on
workshops on ecology and conservation at a Bronx middle school where students
would otherwise have little opportunity to engage with nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research takes a new approach to understand
mechanisms that promote functional niche separation in primate communities, and
examines species-level differences in traits at the nutritional level. Using the
geometric framework of nutrition, novel hypotheses will be tested that are
related to the divergence of nutritional goals of sympatric monkeys in Kibale,
an African rainforest with a rich history of research that hosts a high density
of primates. Through this research, the nutritional ecology of sympatric primate
species will be comprehensively examined, and their patterns of nutrient
balancing will be revealed. The researchers will conduct feeding observations of
individual monkeys, assess food availability by analyzing the nutrients in every
tree in each primate's home range via near infrared reflectance spectroscopy,
and use the geometric framework of nutrition to test hypotheses about primate
feeding ecology and nutritional goals. Through this research the research team
will formulate general principles about the nutritional strategies among and
within primate guilds and provide new insights into primate ecology by shedding
light on the significance of nutritional ecology in niche separation, a
previously understudied and under-recognized dimension of primate community
ecology.