* 1521398
* STTR Phase I:  Assisted Invention Disclosure Tool
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Eric Leininger, PatentDive
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 269,998.00

This STTR Phase I proposal is for the development of a web-based software tool
that dramatically reduces the time and cost of drafting a U.S. patent
application. Inventors and small companies having no background in patent law
and patent-application drafting strategies struggle with properly describing
their inventions. Overcoming this lack of understanding on the part of the
inventor requires a great deal of one-on-one educational training with a patent
professional in order to draft a quality patent application. However, engaging a
patent professional is costly and time consuming. This proposal outlines a
research and development strategy to create and integrate effective game-based
education tools into an existing assisted invention disclosure prototype.
Through game-based learning, inventors acquire a basic understanding of patent
law and patent application drafting strategies, while simultaneously disclosing
details of their invention. The invention disclosure prototype organizes and
structures the data provided, then transforms the data into narrative sentences
that are then formatted according to the rules of the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office. The proposed tool will reduce barriers to obtaining patent protection,
allow greater participation in the patent system and lead to increased
innovation and commercialization beneficial to the overall U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I proposal is to develop a game-
based educational module to augment an existing assisted invention disclosure
tool. For the game-based learning module of this proposal, a curriculum covering
fundamental patent law and patent drafting strategy will be created to educate
inventors. From this curriculum, a gamified tutorial will engage the inventors
throughout the disclosure process. The proposed curriculum will educate
inventors about fundamental patent rules and teach regulations and concepts
related to strategic application drafting. While inventors are interacting with
the gamified tutorial, the assisted invention disclosure tool simultaneously
extracts invention details or elements directly from the inventor. The existing
prototype processes data using a rules engine into narrative sentences. The
proposal also refines the existing data structure of the assisted invention
disclosure tool by adding a common language component. An ontology will also be
created to identify patent specific preparation requirements for a variety of
technical arts in order to scale the tool for use among all U.S. Patent and
Trademark classes. This proposal empowers inventors with the knowledge and tools
to draft U.S. patent applications which will fuel increased innovation and
commercialization.