* 1521188
* STTR Phase I:  Mechanical Surface Treatment for High Performance Biodegradable Implants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Yuebin Guo, Surface Integrity, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 224,953.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to shift current practices in bone fracture
fixation care from using permanent metal implants to biodegradable metal
implants (screws, plates, pins, rods, etc.). A promising biodegradable metal
that is gaining widespread attention is magnesium. This project will advance
magnesium implant technology towards becoming a viable alternative biomaterial
for fracture fixation care. A magnesium implant?s biodegradation can be
customized to an individual patient or application by modifying surface
properties of an implant through surface treatments. If successful, patients
will no longer have to rely on off-the-shelf permanent implants for treating
bone fractures or require secondary removal surgeries to prevent the long-term
complications with these devices. A senior patient with osteoporosis can have an
implant that degrades slowly since his/her bones heal slowly, while a younger
patient can have an implant that degrades quickly since his/her bones heal
quickly. The commercial impact will be an unprecedented shift in the orthopedic
industry towards customizable healthcare. The use of biodegradable metal
implants will not only improve the quality of life of the affected individuals
but also boost the competitiveness of the US medical device
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will demonstrate the
feasibility of using surface treatments, such as laser shock peening or
burnishing, on the surface of a magnesium implant to control the biodegradation
while maintaining necessary mechanical integrity. Permanent metal implants made
of titanium or stainless steel have unsatisfactory performance such as stress
shielding. In addition, they are often removed with a secondary surgery after
the bone heals. An alternative biodegradable material is needed that avoids the
complications inherent to permanent metals. Magnesium is a promising
biodegradable metal. The critical issue that hinders the adoption of this
material for orthopedic applications is its high corrosion rate in the human
body. Surface treatments are an effective method to slow the corrosion rate. The
research objectives are to (1) create a surface layer on a magnesium alloy that
degrades in 3 weeks to 3 months while maintaining structural integrity and (2)
develop a model that designs a surface treatment procedure to meet the
degradation and structural integrity needs of a patient. These objectives will
be accomplished by (a) determining corrosion rate and mechanical degradation
rate over time for different surface treatments and (b) understanding the
relationships between surface treatment, surface integrity, and performance.