* 1521617
* Cyber-Physical Systems Virtual Organization: Active Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 7,013,916.00

The Cyber-Physical Systems Virtual Organization (CPS-VO) was founded by NSF in
2010 to: (i)facilitate and foster interaction and exchanges among CPS PIs and
their teams; (ii) enable sharing of artifacts and knowledge generated by the
projects with the broader engineering and scientific communities; and (iii)
facilitate and foster collaboration and information exchange between CPS
researchers and industry. During the last five years, the CPS-VO has become the
focal point of the CPS community in the US and it has played a significant role
in catalyzing CPS research world-wide. The CPS-VO Portal serves as a central
information repository and as a collaboration platform for the rapidly growing
research community. It is the home for ~150 special interest groups, reaches
over 8,000 members, and includes over 12,000 webpages and over 18,000 files
capturing the first 8 years of CPS history. This proposal looks to envision how
the CPS-VO will be transformed over the next years into an resource which
becomes a "destination for doing" rather than a repository and collaboration
capability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal we address the next phase of
development of the CPS-VO: (1) changing the Portal from being a passive
information &lt;br/&gt;repository and collaboration platform to becoming an
active resource as research tool for CPS, (2) serving as an integration platform
for open source CPS tools and models emerging from the research community and
(3) making the Portal an active resource for CPS education. Active Resources
encapsulate the new capabilities of the CPS-VO. Research teams may contribute to
Active Resources on three different levels: (a) end-to-end design and simulation
tool chains and test beds including model repositories, tools and web-based user
interfaces to access resources, (b) individual tools that can be integrated into
design flows, and (c) models and code integrated into open repositories. The
proposal will spur CPS community growth through conducting series of student
competitions to be held in the first two years building on unmanned air vehicle
design studio from UPenn that will allow students and researchers to study the
physical design, dynamics and control of quad rotors, a multi-model simulation
system from Vanderbilt facilitating the virtual integration of embedded software
for control, estimation, planning, and coordinated, dynamic flight of multiple
micro air vehicles. In addition, the CPS VO will extend outreach to the
community to identify new and emerging VO needs and provide enhanced user
experience through redesign of the user facing portal and integration of new
information management technologies.