* 1521531
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Determining Season Of Death By Dental Microwear Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Alia Gurtov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 10,632.00

The evolution of meat eating in the hominin (ancestral human) diet is central to
hypotheses about the emergence of the genus Homo, the development of the modern
body plan, the elongation of lifespan, and the hominin expansion from Africa
into Eurasia and beyond. Seasonal resource fluctuation can have a profound
effect on adaptive developments such as these, and indeed, it is during the
increased aridity and seasonality of the Early Pleistocene (2.588 - 0.781
million years ago [Ma]) that the earliest evidence for hominin meat-eating
appears. However, little is known about the seasonal dynamics of hominin
foraging at this time. This study provides a timely insight into the successful
strategies of early Homo during an extended period of climate change and
variability by examining the timing of meat foraging at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.
Though meat had the potential to increase energy budgets seasonally or annually,
it also placed hominins in competition with both predators and scavengers.
Technological and behavioral evidence for butchery at Olduvai suggests that
despite the dangers, meat was an increasingly valuable resource in the context
of expanding savannas and receding forests. In addition to covering this
critical time in hominin evolution, Olduvai is well-suited for the project
because it is among the best-studied localities dating to 1.9 - 1.2 million
years ago, and is at the center of debates about hominin meat foraging and
landscape use. Research there will contribute to the long tradition of
international and local collaboration, providing valuable ongoing training to
the future paleoanthropologists and conservationists who will safeguard our
cultural heritage. The project will also further the training of Alia Gurtov, a
graduate student at the University of Wisconsin and will provide data for her
doctoral dissertation.

By examining the timing of hominin foraging at Olduvai, this research can
elucidate the significance of meat as a resource in times of low precipitation
and relative resource scarcity, and the strategies that elevated hominins to
compete at a new trophic level. It will do so using dental microwear texture
analysis (DMTA) on fossil bovid prey. DMTA is a non-destructive technique that
uses scale sensitive fractal analysis to examine microscopic abrasions
reflecting the fracture properties of an organism's diet in the previous weeks
or days. Pilot research has demonstrated that DMTA is capable of distinguishing
between assemblages of impala (Aepyceros melampus) hunted by Hadza hunter-
gatherers in the wet and dry seasons. As a browser-grazer, impala are an
appropriate modern analog for several common prey species at Olduvai. Though
DMTA cannot identify the season of death for individuals, it can be used
comparatively. The anthropogenic assemblage FLK Zinj is penecontemporaneous with
the carnivore-generated assemblage of FLK North, located 200 meters away. This
study will use the modern impala analog to ascertain which season is best
represented at each locality and compare the results to see if hominins and
carnivores were operating during the same times of the year in the same
environments. This research will begin to determine if Early Pleistocene hominin
meat-acquisition varied seasonally, and if the strategy invited or avoided
confrontation with carnivores, thereby contributing to our knowledge of
Pleistocene hominin foraging adaptations.