* 1521748
* The Best of Both: Toward a hybrid discrete and continuum multiscale platelet aggregation and coagulation model
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Aaron Fogelson, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 449,751.00

This project brings together computational scientists and mathematical modelers
to solve a fundamental multifaceted multiscale problem in human physiology,
namely understanding the platelet aggregation and coagulation (PAC) processes
that comprise blood clotting. Over the past two decades, mathematical biology
experts, including the current investigators, have worked to apply sound
mathematical modeling principles and computational methods to attempt to dissect
the complex interactions that occur within the platelet aggregation and
coagulation process - fluid-structure interactions, mechanical-chemical
interactions, and structure-structure interactions, to name a few. The
complexity of this problem is due to its multiscale nature in both space and
time, the complex disparate physical and chemical processes involved, as well as
the challenge of attempting to model processes for which experimental validation
is difficult. Over recent years, the experimental world has made significant
advances in accumulating data that might both help us model the PAC cascade more
faithfully, and allow us to predict its pathological deviations. The challenge
is in connecting these two worlds and this project has as its goal employed
modern computing concepts (numerical and algorithmic) to meet this challenge.
While this project focuses on the PAC cascade, it will also have impact in a
wide range of multiscale, multidiscipline applications such as chemical
engineering and material science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physiological time
scale for PAC is on the order of minutes. To date, the only model able to
simulate the entire PAC process over such time scales is a meso-scale
(continuum) model developed by co-PI Fogelson and collaborators. This capability
comes at the cost of coarse-graining the geometry and mechanics of the PAC
process. The co-PI has also developed a fine-grained model of platelet
aggregation that is at the forefront of platelet modeling. However, while
conceptually faithful to the mechanics of the PAC process and the geometric
intricacies of the developing aggregates, the fine-grained model does not yet
contain treatment of the chemical processes of coagulation. Further, this model
is computationally expensive and can, in a reasonable amount of time, only
simulate a small fraction of the physical time that the meso-scale model can.
Consequently, the goals of this project are two-fold: first, to extend the
simulation capabilities of the fine-grained model both in terms of conceptual
fidelity to the PAC cascade, and also in terms of computational efficiency by
implementation on hybrid (CPU/GPU) architectures; and second, to cross-validate
in the multiscale context current meso-scale and the extended fine-scale PAC
models. Accomplishing these goals is critical to our longer-term research
objective of developing hybrid multiscale models - enabled by current and future
experimental data - that combine the best features of both these models.