* 1521805
* International Conference on Exotic Forms of Silicon
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2015,02/29/2016
* P. Craig Taylor, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 02/29/2016
* USD 24,999.00

Proposal Number: 1521805 Institution: Colorado School of Mines Principal
Investigator: P. Craig Taylor Title: International Conference on Exotic Forms of
Silicon

The International Conference on Exotic Forms of Silicon will be held during July
13-17, 2015 at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden, Colorado. This conference
will discuss new ways to create and produce unique forms of silicon, an element
abundant in the earth?s crust, to enable future breakthroughs in the areas of
microelectronics and renewable energy production. Fifteen world leaders in
silicon research have agreed to participate in this conference. The conference
will also support the participation of 20 graduate students and postdoctoral
research associates who are positioned to be future leaders of this field.

Silicon is an earth-abundant, non-toxic element that the base material for
semiconducting devices. If alternative molecular forms of silicon (Si) can be
made with high purity in thin film form, then these new silicon materials may
have significant potential to drive the next 50 years of microelectronic,
optoelectronic, and energy harvesting device development. This conference will
bring together 15 internationally prominent researchers in silicon materials
research, mostly based in the United States, to discuss common problems and
potential transformative breakthroughs to enable the next generation of
microelectronic, optoelectronic, and energy harvesting materials and devices,
and to drive US-led innovation in this area. Structures to be discussed include:
1) forms of silicon created under high pressure that are metastable at ambient
pressure; 2) single layers of Si (silicene); 3) clathrate Si, which has been
studied for superconducting and thermoelectric properties but not for
semiconductor applications; 4) nanostructured forms of Si (nanodots and
nanowires), including those composed of diamond Si; and 5) porous Si. The
conference will also provide support for the participation of 20 graduate
students and postdoctoral research associates, including student from under-
represented groups at Fisk University, as part of a collaborative relationship
with the Renewable Energy Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at
the Colorado School of Mines.