* 1521614
* OCE-PRF Track 1: Resolving the Advantages of Motility and Chemotaxis in Oceanic Crust
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Stephanie Carr, Carr                    Stephanie      A
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

The oceanic crust constitutes a vast aquifer of circulating fluids and
represents a significant, but relatively unexplored biosphere. Genomic
observations of crustal fluids sampled from the eastern flank of the Juan de
Fuca Ridge (JFR) have revealed an abundance of motility and chemotactic genes.
The goal of this project is to investigate the chemotactic potential of these
unique subsurface organisms, leveraging the aforementioned genomic datasets to
enable the isolation and detailed study of motile microorganisms in the
laboratory. The expected significance of this project will be the fundamental
understanding of adapted strategies of microbial life in subsurface oceanic
crust, which will further impact interpretations of biogeochemical cycling in
this vast environment. Outreach efforts include training undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups in STEM in novel genomic techniques and sharing
results with the public at community seminars and through K-12 educational
projects.

Motility is viewed as an energy expensive function and impractical for
organisms surviving in energy starved environments. Nevertheless, enrichment
cultures have already been established from crustal fluids of the JFR based on
genomic data and metabolic interpretations. Microscopy confirms the presence of
active motile organisms within these enrichments. These cultures represent a
prime example of how genomic interpretations can be utilized to determine
nutrient requirements for laboratory growth. The objectives of this study
include (1) isolating motile cells in pure culture, and sequencing the genomes
of these pure isolates in order to recognize their metabolic potential within
crustal environments. Given that these enrichment cultures are some of the first
to be successfully grown from subsurface crustal fluids, any physiological or
metabolic observations will be novel and important for understanding life in the
oceanic crust. The second objective is to (2) investigate which chemical
attractants are most attractive to the cultures isolated in objective 1.
Chemotactic response will be observed within gradient tubes filled with 0.15%
low-melt agarose containing hard agar nutrient plugs. Chemotactic responses will
be evaluated as growth towards or away from the hard chemoattractant plug. The
final objectives of this study are to measure the rates of nutrient consumption
by crustal fluid organisms, their average and maximum speeds, and their reaction
time to nutrients under (3) optimal growth conditions and (4) in situ JFR
nutrient conditions. Motility will be studied using a custom microfluidic
microscope slide. Micro-channels of this slide will be filled with the various
nutrient attractants determined from objectives 1 and 2. Cell behavior and
motility towards attractants will be monitored using an inverted brightfield
microscope and digitally recorded to calculate and model 2D velocities.
Collectively, this suite of independent, yet complementary, laboratory and
genomic analyses are aimed to better understand the role of motility in the
oceanic crust, ultimately resolving unique adaptations for survival in this
environment and advancing the knowledge of geochemical cycles in oceanic crust.