* 1521016
* Center for Quantum Information and Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Carlton Caves, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum information science (QIS) is the interdisciplinary field that
investigates how to use systems obeying the laws of quantum mechanics to perform
information-processing tasks that cannot be performed efficiently using
conventional information-processing systems. This project funds center-wide
research and outreach activities of the Center for Quantum Information and
Control (CQuIC). The Center involves the efforts of four faculty members at the
University of New Mexico (UNM) and one at the University of Arizona (UA). The
goal of research at CQuIC is to combine the abstract understanding of QIS that
comes from mathematical physics and computer science with the practical
knowledge of physical systems that comes from physics, in order to design
practical quantum-information-processing protocols and to implement such
protocols in laboratories at UNM and UA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CQuIC's chief
scientific-outreach activity is the administration and organization of the
SQuInT Network, a consortium of 26 node institutions, including research
universities, undergraduate colleges, national and industrial laboratories, and
international centers for QIS research. The SQuInT Annual Workshop, which had
its seventeenth installment in February 2015, has grown to be one of the major
scientific meetings in QIS, unique in its integration of physics and
information-science talks and its emphasis on presentations by a mix of senior
personnel, postdocs, and students. This project provides partial, but
substantial support for the SQuInT Annual Workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research to be carried out under this project has two different, but closely
related focuses. The first is development of fundamental techniques for
preparation of quantum states, control of quantum dynamics, and precision
measurement, together with verification of any of these three. Some of the
proposed research is theoretical and platform independent: Investigate in-situ
characterization of errors in quantum information processing (QIP) protocols
using syndrome data from quantum error correction. Other research is tightly
coupled theory-experiment development and refinement of control toolkits for
particular quantum systems, in this case, optical photons and cesium atomic
ensembles: Develop and implement sophisticated techniques for state, process,
and detector (POVM) tomography in the 16-dimensional ground hyperfine manifold
of the cesium atom, and develop and implement techniques to control and squeeze
the collective spin of atomic ensembles consisting of a thousand to a million
cesium atoms. The second focus is application of these control techniques to QIP
tasks. Some of this work is primarily theoretical: Investigate the potential,
capabilities, and robustness of analog quantum simulation, with particular
attention to the prospects for boson sampling. Other research is tightly coupled
theory-experiment application of control techniques to perform QIP tasks in our
laboratory systems: Implement the quantum kicked top in the 16-dimensional
ground manifold of cesium, and implement sophisticated techniques to
discriminate optical-frequency coherent states for enhanced optical
communication.