* 1521402
* STTR Phase I:  Integration of Physics-Based Simulation Tools to Promote Learning and Innovation in Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Marilyn Smith, Continuum Dynamics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 224,855.00

This STTR Phase I project addresses the need to give engineering students hands-
on experience with reliable and robust fluid dynamics analysis software to
develop the intuition and exposure that will be required when they graduate.
Accurate fluid dynamics analysis is crucial in many disciplines to support
product design. Unfortunately, current software is not conducive to the
classroom environment, or use by non-experts, due to the level of expertise
required and the computational cost. The proposed effort addresses these issues
using an innovative approach to implement true "push button" software that is
easy to setup and robust enough for classroom use, yet is accurate enough for
reliable predictions. The software will be augmented by multi-media learning
tools that will provide just-in-time guidance. This research is transformative
in the field of engineering fluid dynamics, particularly in the context of
improved science and engineering education. Unlike other disciplines, the
governing equations do not lend themselves to solution methods readily
implemented by students; similarly current software is hindered by a substantial
learning curve and pre-requisite knowledge. This research has the potential to
remove this barrier. The software and learning tools developed will have
application across all engineering and science disciplines related to fluid
motion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate fluid dynamics analysis is crucial for
many industries to support design and life-cycle analysis, and there is a strong
need to give engineering students hands-on experience and training with reliable
and robust Computational Fluid Dynamics methods so that they can develop the
intuition that will be required when they graduate. Unfortunately, contemporary
software is not conducive to the classroom environment or use by non-expert
engineers due to the computational costs and level of expertise required. The
proposed effort directly addresses these issues by implementing true "push
button" software that is easy to setup and robust enough for classroom use, yet
is accurate enough for reliable predictions in the teaching, research and
industrial environments to provide a platform for students to explore innovative
and transformative analysis and design. The ease-of-use offered by the proposed
software would finally enable Computational Fluid Dynamics to be brought into
the undergraduate engineering classroom, planned in Phase I, and would appeal
directly to areas of the commercial market that are not served by current
offerings. In Phase I the proposed software will be adapted for the academic
environment, and a joint undergraduate and graduate engineering course that uses
the software will be developed and taught.