* 1521105
* RUI: Supersymmetric Theory, Phenomenology, and Tool Building
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joel Walker, Sam Houston State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 75,000.00

This award funds the research of Professor Joel W. Walker at Sam Houston State
University in Huntsville, Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities are to
include the phenomenological investigation of topics broadly related to the
subject of "supersymmetry", as well as the engineering and distribution of
original software tools enhancing the productivity and efficiency of this and
related studies. Supersymmetry is an idea that may protect the relatively light
mass of the Higgs Boson observed by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in 2012 from
drifting to a much heavier value. It works by hypothesizing the existence of a
new class of particles whose interactions would naturally cancel the
destabilizing effects of the known particles. These supersymmetric particles
simultaneously provide a suitable candidate for the cosmological "dark matter"
and are themselves a primary target for discovery in collisions at the LHC.
Efforts to clarify the role of supersymmetry in low energy physics, and the
search for new fundamental particles and interactions, benefit the national
interest in advancing basic scientific knowledge. Sam Houston State University
is a primarily undergraduate institution that takes pride in its proportional
over-representation of female, minority, and low-income students. Specific
activities will be designated for undergraduate participation that are
sufficiently narrow and systematic in scope for students to productively engage
at an early juncture, even as they are becoming more widely educated. This real-
world research exposure offers broader impacts on self-confidence, team
integration, algorithmic problem solving, and systematic handling of data, while
enhancing the likelihood of transitioning a successful high-energy physics
graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, specific topics
itemized for investigation include experimental signatures of novel
supersymmetric mass hierarchies, isolation of distinctive decay modes such as
long-chain cascades, contemporary applications of collider discriminants such as
a boosted event topology, methods for probing the spin composition of dark
matter, and the phenomenology of well motivated alternatives to the minimal
supersymmetric picture such as string-derived large volume scenarios and decays
of the higgsino to the singlino dark matter candidate in the NMSSM. A key
methodology employed in the prior will be the numerical generation and analysis
of Monte Carlo collider data simulations. Support for these objectives will also
be rendered by the authoring, documentation, and dissemination of programs
useful to similarly interested researchers, e.g. for safe, fast computation of
the asymmetric 2-step MT2 event statistic, and for the expeditious selection,
optimization, analysis, and visualization of simulated collider event data.