* 1521110
* Engineering Photonic Quantum States for Quantum Information
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Virginia Lorenz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 396,071.00

A single particle of light, or a photon, can be correlated with another photon
such that measuring the properties of one instantaneously affects the properties
of the other even if they are not in the same location. Such correlations make
photons useful for creating new technologies that allow for faster and more
powerful computing and completely secure communication as well as for testing
fundamental physical theories. Yet creating photons with just the right
correlations for such applications remains challenging. This research project
addresses these difficulties by creating and demonstrating new techniques for
measuring and controlling single photons and the matter with which they
interact. By adjusting the energy source and medium in which photons are
created, photons are created whose correlations are close to ideal for new
technologies and fundamental tests of physics principles. It has been shown that
single photons with properties suitable for secure long-distance communication
can be stored in a memory made of a gas of atoms that preserves their
correlations. In this project the interaction of light with the environment
itself, such as how light is absorbed and transferred between different forms of
energy in molecules, will be studied. The correlations of single photons will be
used to gain more insight into how such processes occur. Extending the ability
to control the properties of single photons and their interactions with matter
has implications for creating new types of computing based on the laws of
quantum mechanics that can solve otherwise prohibitive mathematical problems and
simulate complex physical systems. It also enables methods of sending
information completely securely, with clear indications of any eavesdropping,
and improves the ability to test the theory of quantum mechanics. Understanding
light-matter interaction in molecules supports the creation of new drugs and
improvement of technologies that use such molecules. This research project also
provides students training in quantum optics and atomic and molecular physics
and informs the public about quantum technologies through demonstrations, museum
exhibits and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project extends
our understanding and ability to control the spatial and spectral-temporal
properties of quantum states and their correlations. Quantum applications that
utilize photonic quantum states often have specific requirements for the
photons' spatial and spectral-temporal properties and correlations in order to
perform protocols. Through this work new techniques will be developed and
applied to measure with unprecedented speed and resolution the joint
correlations of photonic quantum states produced via spontaneous four-wave
mixing. The spectral tunability of photon-pairs created in artificially
structured materials will be explored using a new scheme based on dual-pump
spontaneous four-wave mixing. Photonic quantum states will be engineered using
self- and cross-phase modulation and by tuning the group velocity difference
between two distinct pumps, to create photon pairs that are completely
uncorrelated (except for the existence of one indicating the
other).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum memories, are critical components for
quantum information processing applications. High-bandwidth storage and
retrieval of telecom-wavelength photons using an off-resonant Raman protocol in
atomic barium vapor will be demonstrated. The inherent correlations of the
atomic system will be utilized to generate pure photons useful for quantum
applications relying on high-visibility two-photon interference and demonstrate
entanglement of atomic ensembles. Quantum information research has resulted in
techniques to measure the spatial, spectral and temporal correlations of
photonic quantum states. These techniques will be extended and applied to better
understand and control the materials with which the photons interact. New
spectroscopies based on single-photon level interference and coincidence
detection will be used to gain unique insight into the coherence and population
dynamics of molecular liquids, including the intricate redistribution of energy
among vibrational states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By extending the understanding
and ability to control ultrafast photonic quantum states and their interactions
with material systems, the research contributes significantly to the goals of
quantum information research in the areas of quantum communication, quantum
computation, and fundamental tests of quantum mechanics. The new techniques
demonstrated for quantum control in the spectral, temporal and spatial domains
of photonic, atomic and molecular quantum states have the potential to open up
exciting new avenues of research and technology development. The research is
integrated with outreach components to inform the public and K-12 students about
the amazing properties of single photons. The PI prepares interactive
demonstrations of the applications of single photons in quantum communication
for display in the University of Illinois physics building, and for presentation
at public outreach lectures, engineering open houses, and for exhibit in a local
children's museum. The research provides professional training to graduate
students in quantum optics and atomic and molecular physics.