* 1521431
* Collaborative Research: A Unified Approach to Quantum Tomography, Open Systems Control and Quantum Simulation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ivan Deutsch, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2018
* USD 210,001.00

Information technology has been an engine for economic growth largely due to the
trend known as Moore's law, whereby the component density and computational
power of computer chips doubles approximately every two years. In the not too
distant future the building blocks of these circuits is set to reach atomic
scale, where the laws of quantum physics will replace the familiar laws of
classical physics that govern our everyday world. Surprisingly, theoretical
studies have shown that if we can manipulate and control quantum devices as well
as we now manipulate and control classical devices, entirely new avenues will
open up to process information according to quantum mechanics. As a result,
quantum computers will in principle be able to solve some important
computational problems exponentially faster than classical computers. It is also
thought that a simpler class of devices, commonly referred to as analog quantum
simulators, may provide approximate solutions to important problems in chemistry
and materials science that are currently intractable. Though a functional
quantum computer remains a distant goal, the transformative ideas of quantum
computation and simulation hold promise to radically expand the capabilities of
computer and information technology and sustain its future
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award builds on previous accomplishments by
the Principal Investigators in the science and engineering field known as
quantum control, which studies how physical devices governed by quantum
mechanics can be manipulated and controlled with high precision, even in the
presence of inevitable device imperfections and outside disturbances. The first
objective of this award is to develop new techniques whereby one can evaluate
and verify the operation of quantum devices. This will be done through the use
of protocols known as quantum tomography, which determine the state and behavior
of a quantum device through a series of carefully chosen measurements. The
challenge will be to make these protocols more efficient, i. e., minimizing the
number of measurements required, and also more robust, e. g., reliable in the
presence of imperfections. The second objective of this award is to realize an
analog quantum simulator based on a single atom. This single-atom device will be
used to simulate a model system whose behavior is known to be chaotic, i. e.,
hypersensitive to imperfections and outside disturbances. By quantifying the
accuracy of the simulator in the presence of known imperfections, this research
will address essential but so far unanswered questions: How far can one trust
the predictions of an analog quantum simulator in this challenging but common
scenario? And can its accuracy and reliability be improved through state-of-the-
art techniques for quantum control? The answer to these questions is relevant
for large, federally funded research programs in analog quantum simulation at
top research institutions across the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art
quantum control is approaching the thresholds for fault-tolerant operation on a
few physical platforms and is steadily improving on many others. As a result,
researchers are now pursuing architectures for rudimentary digital quantum
computation and analog quantum simulation (AQS). To continue on this path
towards useful quantum information processing (QIP), there is an urgent need for
more sophisticated tools in the areas of quantum control and quantum tomography,
and especially for protocols that are resistant to real-world errors and
imperfections. Furthermore, the quantum information community is heavily
invested in AQS under the assumption that errors are less critical than in a
digital quantum computer. This makes it imperative to study the tolerance of AQS
to errors, even in the absence of decoherence, and the prospects of robust
control in the context of complex dynamics such as quantum
chaos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will focus on quantum control and
measurement, and their application in quantum tomography and analog quantum
simulation. The work will build on well established ideas from optimal control
and measurement theory, bringing these to bear on a unique experimental testbed:
electron-nuclear spins of cold 133Cs atoms in their electronic ground state.
This system provides long coherence times, can be manipulated with radio-
frequency, microwave, and optical fields, is accessible to measurement though
Stern-Gerlach analysis, and has a 16-dimensional Hilbert space, large enough to
explore non-trivial tasks of QIP. With its proven capability to apply high-
fidelity unitary maps and perform high-fidelity orthogonal measurements, the
testbed provides the building blocks needed for QIP at levels of increasing
complexity. The planned research is a mixture of theory and experiment, and will
address topics in quantum measurement and tomography. In addition, analog
quantum simulation, studying the quantum simulation of a spin-15/2 Quantum
Kicked Top (QKT) and the use of the QKT paradigm to explore robust quantum
simulation in the presence of chaos will be explored. Because the methodologies
of robust control and tomography are independent of any particular platform,
results from this award will serve as a benchmark for what can be achieved, and
a template for similar advances elsewhere in laboratories working with different
physical systems. This will help facilitate progress in the broader field of
QIP.