* 1521623
* Student Travel to the 2015 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) - Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) Conference
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Elizabeth Loboa, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides funding to support travel awards for student/fellows and
young independent investigators (Rising Stars) for the 2015 Biomedical
Engineering Society (BMES)-Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE)
conference. Mechanobiology studies the role that touch, stretch, compression and
shear has on the development of biological systems. These fundamental responses
affect the development of embryos, the healing of wounds, the basic function of
heart, skin and other organs of the body and also fundamental responses of non-
human organisms from bacterial to mammal to the mechanical stresses of life.
This support will aid in the training of new students and rising stars in this
area who will do research in this area in years to come. Developing an
understanding of the effects of mechanical loading on biological systems is of
direct interest to the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology program: Supporting the
development of young investigators in this area is of fundamental importance to
succesful future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the 2015 conference
is 'From Womb to Tomb: Mechanobiology of Generation, Regeneration and
Degeneration.' This is directly related to the mission of the Biomechanics and
Mechanobiology program and also is in line with the mission of Biomedical
Engineering which is partially supporting this request. Sixteen graduate
students/postdoctoral fellows will be selected by the organizing committee to
receive Student/Fellow Awards and present short talks, which will be integrated
into the sessions. In addition, six junior independent investigators will be
selected for a special Rising Star session, which will take place on the first
day of the meeting in order to showcase their work. Support from the NSF will be
used to provide partial support to students, post-doctoral fellows, young
investigators (Rising Stars), and under-represented minorities.