* 1521771
* Collaborative Research:  Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering:  Characterizing Dynamics of Particle-based Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 125,000.00

A significant part of the research in applied fields of science and engineering
focuses on the systems built up from discrete objects. This includes the systems
relevant to materials science, such as dry and wet granular systems, but also
many other soft-matter systems such as foams, colloids, and liquid crystals.
There is also an increasingly relevant and active field of active matter where
the systems of interest are built out of particles governed by some type of
internal forces, such as bacteria and the similar. Going back to the systems
relevant to materials science, one could note important applications, involving
trillions of dollars per year in the US alone. Despite wide-ranging appearance
of systems built out of granular particles, our ability to predict their
behavior lags far behind that for more conventional materials such as Newtonian
fluids. Similar, even stronger, conclusions could be reached for the other
particulate-based systems that are just becoming to be considered. Lack of
continuum-based models for many of the listed systems requires carrying out
discrete element simulations that focus on modeling particle-particle
interactions. Due to increased computational power, current simulations are able
to provide realistic description of the experimental systems and can often be
used with predictive power. However, the separation of spatial and temporal
scales describing particles and their interactions, and of those describing
meso- or macro-scales that are of interest when considering properties of a
system as a whole, leads to increasingly large and essentially unmanageable
amount of data. This proposal focuses on development of a technique, based on
computational homology, which allows us to reach deeper understanding of the
dynamical properties of the considered complex systems by extracting required
information from these large data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
is based on topological data analysis, and in particular it focuses on
development of techniques based on persistent homology, algebraic topological
techniques from nonlinear dynamics, and algorithms and software to compute
homological invariants that are capable of identifying and characterizing the
nonlinear dynamics of complex spatio-temporal systems. These techniques will be
applied to the results of discrete element simulations of particulate-based
systems that will be developed in parallel. These simulations will consider
large number of particles interacting by both attractive and repulsive forces,
both in two and three spatial dimensions. We will consider circular/spherical
particles, as well as the particles of polygonal/polyhedral shapes. As an
outcome of the proposed project, we expect to develop much better understanding
of the dynamical properties of the considered systems, which will be then passed
to scientists and engineers working on their applications. The implications of
success in this project are far reaching. Developing new computationally
efficient mathematical tools for understanding and predicting the dynamics of
complex patterns on large scale data sets provides the foundations for the
analysis of a wide range of problems involving complex nonequilibrium systems.
In the context of particulate-based systems, this includes (i) dry granular
matter built out of particles interacting by repulsive force, with the examples
coming from nature - including avalanches, debris flows, and earthquakes,
technology - processing of coal, ores, and pharmaceuticals; (ii) `wet' systems
built out of particles interacting by a combination of repulsion and attraction,
in particular relevant to porous media applications, and (iii) a number of
multiphase systems including suspensions and active matter. In all of these
systems, understanding and prediction of complex behavior of special structures
is desired.