* 1521424
* OP: Collaborative Research: Quantum Zeno Photonics on Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2019
* Yuping Huang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2019
* USD 264,170.00

Abstract Title: Quantum Zeno Photonics on Chip for Scalable Optics and Photonics
Technologies&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Advanced optics and
photonics technologies deploying ultralow-intensity light beams, such as a
single or few photons, promise to create revolutionary architectures for
communications, computation, sensing, and many other applications. To develop
such technologies, robust tools for generation and processing of photonic
signals are highly desirable. Thus far, encouraging progress has been made in
demonstrating the principle of their operation. However, the existing approaches
suffer from fundamental challenges' such as stochasticity in photon emission and
quantum-state decoherence' and technical difficulties, like a large setup volume
and the need for cryogenic housing. Those issues have constituted a major road
block towards commencing societally-impactful photonic technologies for which
device scalability and mass productivity are a prerequisite. This project seeks
to address this problem by marrying quantum Zeno blockade, which corresponds to
a rather unexplored regime of operation in nonlinear optics, with a newly
developed photonic circuiting technique for hydrogenated amorphous silicon of
exceptional optical properties. Built upon solid experimental and theoretical
grounds, this research is expected to deliver highly integrated, mass producible
devices for practical photonic applications and all-optical information
processing. The project will be carried out collaboratively by researchers from
physics at Stevens Institute of Technology and electrical and computer
engineering at Johns Hopkins University. Knowledge gained through this
interdisciplinary project will be disseminated onto many areas of education,
including through the STEM Achievement in Baltimore Elementary Schools outreach
program for grades 3-5, and through Stevens Technical Enrichment Program
focusing on college students from low income and under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal introduces quantum Zeno
blockade' a Zeno effect in nonlinear optics' into scalable nano-photonic
systems, thereby developing a practical platform for advanced optics and
photonics technologies. The Zeno effect is a counterintuitive phenomenon
dictated by the measurement postulate of quantum mechanics. Its previous studies
often served to illustrate the peculiar nature of quantum mechanics but had
little practical relevance. Exploiting an emerging multilayer-integrated
photonic circuiting technique for hydrogenated-amorphous silicon, this project
will explore optically-reconfigurable, Zeno-based photonic processing on chip.
Owing to the outstanding optical properties of hydrogenated-amorphous silicon,
new photonic devices will be developed that have exceptionally large
nonlinearity, low loss, suppressed background noise, and reduced two-photon
absorption and free-carrier effects. Through quantum Zeno blockade, an
"interaction-free" quantum logical gate will be realized deterministically
(e.g., without using post selection) between single photons that never
physically overlap. This exotic realization eliminates the detrimental phase
noise and quantum state decoherence usually present in competing photonic
devices, making it particularly appealing for scalable quantum computing. The
same effect can disrupt high-order dynamics during parametric photon-pair
scattering, thereby generating pure single and entangled photons on demand. On
chip, room temperature, and uniquely multilayer-integrated, the proposed devices
are particularly promising for large-scale quantum applications built on highly-
integrated photonics.