* 1521667
* CDS&amp;E: Multiscale Integrations of Exoplanetary Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Molei Tao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 209,912.00

With thousands of planets outside our solar system detected in recent years,
there is an emerging need for tools that help extract scientific knowledge from
the large amount of observational data. The purpose of this project is to
develop a tool for understanding the long-time orbital evolution of interacting
exoplanets. Innovative tools are needed because many exoplanet systems exhibit
configurations distinct from that of our solar system, rendering existing
approaches insufficient. The tools developed in this research project will
facilitate the detection of exoplanets and the identification of their
parameters, help explain how observed systems evolved to their current
configuration, and help determine whether an observed system is habitable by
common life forms. The research will contribute not only to mathematics and
astronomy, but will also introduce the general public to scientific thinking and
discovery. For instance, its implementation will be adapted to a free screen
saver with social media interface, which will allow those outside academia to
perform and enjoy exoplanet detection and evolution prediction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational efficiency is a central concern in this
project. Changes in planet orbits induced by nonlinear planet-planet
interactions are oftentimes slow, requiring the simulation of a trajectory for
billions of orbits. Moreover, many of the aforementioned scientific
investigations require large numbers of trajectories, and hence direct
simulations are too time- and storage-consuming. Fortunately, planetary systems
contain a small parameter of planet/star mass ratio, which makes them nearly-
integrable and exhibiting different dynamics over well-separated timescales.
This research project utilizes this fact and achieves accelerated simulation.
Several outstanding challenges are the lack of analytical expressions for
averaging integrals, approximation errors due to small but not infinitesimal
mass ratio, and the inaccuracy of averaging near passage through resonance.
These challenges are addressed by two mathematical contributions. One is a
multiscale method that allows the computation of long time orbital evolution by
averaging over fast scale nonlinear oscillations. This method is based on
numerical resolution of homological PDEs derived from near identity
transformations. The other is an adaptive procedure that allows accurate
integration through transient resonances, which is accomplished by matched
asymptotic expansions with an appropriate near-resonance rescaling.