* 1521801
* Collaborative Research: Computational Modeling, Simulation, and Validation for Tissue Transplantation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Alok Sutradhar, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 231,000.00

A fundamental problem in tissue transplantation in reconstructive surgery is how
to determine the size of tissue flap that can be transferred without the
development of necrosis. An autologous tissue flap is a unit of tissue that is
transferred from one site to another of the same patient while maintaining its
own blood supply. Improved understanding of the anatomy of tissue blood supply
combined with advances in instrumentation and surgical techniques has resulted
in modern methods to transfer tissue based on single arteries and veins.
Surgeons still rely on personal experience to make a qualitative assessment of
the adequacy of blood supply when deciding the size of the flap. If
unsuccessful, the blood supply will be inadequate for the amount of tissue
transferred, and portions of the flap will not survive, wasting the whole
surgery. This can result in significant postoperative complications, additional
surgery, increased morbidity, and increased medical costs. It is therefore
important to develop a practical tool to enable the most reliable flap design
based on the adequacy of blood supply. In order to address this problem, this
research project will develop robust mathematical models that allow estimating
the diameter of the perforating artery and the level of oxygenation in a tissue
given its size and shape. The problem in hand is complicated and warrants a
truly patient-specific approach. Modeling and simulations are necessary in
multiple scales, i.e., at the perforator level, at the intermediate vascular
network level, and at the capillary level. Validating the model with existing
patient data is a challenge. The mismatch of the size of the blood vessel
between the donor site and the recipient site creates additional problems. Based
on these issues, the objective of this research is to create sophisticated
computational tools for successful flap transfer. To achieve this goal, the
specific research objectives are 1) to create a mathematical model to predict
blood flow and oxygen supply in surgical flaps, 2) to generate data-driven
simulation in vascular architecture and image-based validation in perforator
flaps, and 3) to design the flap geometry based on (a) simulation results of
blood flow and oxygen transport and (b) data clustering analysis of flap
parameters from previous surgeries. The research project is a fundamental
synergy of mathematical modeling, medical science, and surgery. The adopted
interdisciplinary approach combines the expertise of the mathematical modeling
community with that of radiologists and plastic surgeons.