* 1521208
* CAREER: Experimental Neutron Scattering and Materials-Based Exploration of Spin-Orbital Physics in Intermediate-Bandwidth Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Stephen Wilson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 120,100.00

Non-Technical Abstract: The electrons in a number of recently discovered
materials with exciting new properties tread a fine line between two extremes:
one of independent electrons largely ignoring one another (such as in good
metals) and one where electrons interact so strongly with each other that they
foster collective behavior. These new classes of so-called intermediate
bandwidth systems occupy a unique regime where the coupling between an
electron's atomic orbital motion and its intrinsic magnetic field (or spin)
plays an important role in generating new electronic behavior. This project will
support a neutron scattering-based experimental research program exploring the
fundamental electronic behavior in three key classes of these new spin-orbit
coupled materials: iron-based high temperature superconductors, iridium oxide
insulators, and topological insulators; many of which possess potential for
future energy transport and computing applications. The project will also
support the growth of materials necessary to attack key research problems while
simultaneously addressing the large national need for creative materials
exploration. In addition to supporting the education of two PhD students, the
project will also provide hands-on, research-based, education to
underrepresented high school interns and undergraduates. The synergy fostered by
this project's integration of research and educational activities will also
advance a broader goal of training the next generation of neutron scattering
experts in the United States.

Technical Abstract: This award will support a neutron scattering-based
experimental research program whose goal is to understand magnetism and
competing order's role in the electronic behavior of an emerging class of
intermediate bandwidth materials where strong spin-orbital coupling effects
conspire to create novel properties. These materials occupy a unique coupling
regime (U~W) where modest correlation can exert a dramatic influence within
their resulting ground states. This project will focus on three classes of these
materials where magnetic and orbital degrees of freedom are thought to play a
key role: iron pnictide high temperature superconductors, novel 5d Mott
insulators, and perturbed topological insulators. Work will be guided by the
project-supported growth of the crystalline materials necessary to attack key
issues while simultaneously addressing the large national need for creative
materials exploration. In addition to supporting the education of two PhD
students, the project will also provide hands-on, research-based, education to
underrepresented high school interns and undergraduates. The synergy fostered by
this project's integration of research and educational activities will also
advance a broader goal of training the next generation of neutron scattering
experts in the United States.