* 1521855
* Hazards SEES: Persistent volcanic crises resilience in the face of prolonged and uncertain risk
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Marcus Bursik, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,875,000.00

Unlike many geological hazards, volcanic eruptions are almost unique in being
preceded by weeks or months of clear precursors, which offer the potential for
successful early interventions to reduce risk. The impacts of eruptions should
therefore be, in principle, amongst the easiest to mitigate of all the great
natural hazards. Nevertheless, impacts of volcanic disasters are often out of
proportion to the magnitude of the eruptions. Eyjafjallaj√∂kull (Iceland), for
example, resulted in a cost of $5 billion due to the cancelation of 180,000
aircraft flights during April and May 2010. Volcanic crises carry a host of
scientific, engineering, mathematical, and societal problems, along with very
high levels of uncertainty. The long-term nature of volcanic unrest, the multi-
hazard character of eruptions, major uncertainty in data and models, and the
diverse responses of decision makers and other stakeholders, make volcanic
hazards uniquely complex amongst natural disasters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing new understanding of the eruptive record, volcanic
plumbing, and the social response and resilience to volcanic threats at Kilauea
(Hawaii) and Long Valley (California). Lava from Kilauea currently threatens a
town of 950 residents and may soon isolate a large community of 10,500.
Heightened seismic activity (including as recent as September 2014) and gas
discharges at Long Valley suggest possible magma movement in the crust.
Eruptions there can be highly explosive, with tephra plumes greater than 20 km
high, and highly destructive pyroclastic density currents. Kilauea and Long
Valley represent the spectrum of volcanic crises that pertain to the United
States. The prolonged nature of unrest (eruptive or not) in both locations has
resulted in mixed social responses, including complacency and denial. This
project is developing new and enhanced computational models of eruptive
processes to provide predictive geophysical simulations. We are integrating data
and models through innovative hierarchical Bayesian statistical modeling in
order to fully incorporate and quantify uncertainties. Our social science
research is characterizing in greater detail stakeholders' understanding of, and
preparedness for, the two types of unrest and volcanic systems, and the mental
models that affect how they use scientific information. We are also developing
and testing for effectiveness different methods of portraying hazard
probabilities and uncertainties to stakeholders, as informed by our social
science results. Results from this project will be broadly transferable to other
volcanic hazards and will, more generally, inform societal resilience to other
natural hazards with long lead times.