* 1521068
* STTR Phase I:  Development of an Objective Tremor Detection System to Improve Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome Outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Michael Abbott, Cambrian Design and Development
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 269,892.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to provide quantitative, actionable data
that enables safer, more effective treatment of infants with Neonatal Abstinence
Syndrome. The medical community is frustrated with the decades-old subjective
assessment tools at their disposal. Technology has progressed to a point where
an objective alternative is now possible. While many medical technologies reduce
physician-patient involvement, this approach will increase the quality of
physician interactions, improve patient outcome, and save an estimated $15,000
per patient by reducing length of stay for those patients by as much as 50%.
This estimated healthcare savings in the United States alone is $402 million
annually. While this technology is focused on Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome, the
physical tremors being investigated are similar in nature to those associated
with other neurological disorders. A successful outcome of this project will
enable future research to improve the outcomes for patients suffering from other
neurological disorders such as ALS, Cerebral Palsy, and Parkinson?s. Success
with Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome is sufficient to provide sustainable
commercial success after product launch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project uses miniature wireless sensors to detect, differentiate, and
quantify physiological tremors caused by withdrawal in infants suffering from
Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome. A successful outcome will be a measurement system
to replace key indicators of the subjective Finnegan Scoring System with
objective data. The project objectives are to design the sensors, optimize
placement and number of sensors, and design signal processing algorithms to
allow discrimination between general infant movements and NAS tremors as
measured on patient limbs and/or torso. Tremor measurements will be correlated
to traditional Finnegan Scoring assessments as part of the validation process.
The Virginia Department of Health reported that in 2012, 394 cases of NAS were
found, representing approximately 15% of all opiate addictions. The cost of
treating these cases was $16.6MM, or approximately $42k per case, driven
primarily by the average length of stay of 10 days, five to six days less than
the national average for similar patient populations. Two additional,
independent data sources estimate a total available US market for treatment to
be $805MM. Feedback from more than 100 doctors and nurses indicates this
approach can reduce length of stay as by as much as 50%, saving an estimated
$300MM.