* 1521433
* STTR Phase I:  Low Cost Point of Use Sensing and Mitigation of Pathogens in Drinking Water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Manoranjan Misra, NanoSynth Materials and Sensors Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program Phase I project is to develop an inexpensive point of use
device that integrates onsite sensing and water purification. Water borne
diseases are a major source of concern worldwide. According to the World Health
Organization, gastrointestinal infections kill around 2.2 million people
globally each year. The pathogenic strains of E. coli, Giardia, Salmonella,
Campylobacter and others, are a major source of water-borne disease outbreaks
around the world. Even low concentrations of E. coli (10-100 viable organisms)
can cause human infections. Water related diseases are also a significant
problem in the United States. Currently over 15 million US households obtain
their drinking water from private wells that are not regulated by the
Environmental Protection Agency. These sources of water are at risk for
contamination and have resulted in outbreaks of sickness. This market will be
addressed by providing end-users (individuals, communities) a method to assess
and purify water at the point of use. The device eliminates the inconvenience of
traditional water filtering and provides clean, safe drinking water to emergency
responders, military personnel deployed in resource limited settings,
individuals in developing areas of the world, and outdoor recreational user
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase I research project are
to integrate the newly developed point of use water sensing and purification
platform to provide a technologically simple and affordable onsite solution for
contaminated drinking water. While significant advances have been made in water
treatment/management and sanitation, the occurrence of water-borne disease in
the USA and world-wide is still significant, particularly in resource limited
settings. In this system, water disinfection is achieved through field assisted
photocatalytic oxidation using simple sunlight. This technology has been
demonstrated to effectively inactivate Escherichia Coli and will be optimized
for high throughput capabilities, as well as to treat other water borne
pathogens such as viruses and protozoa. The research objectives in this proposal
include reduction of treatment time (currently at 1 liter in 5 minutes) by
addressing fluid flow and photocatalytic material synthesis in the device,
optimization of the point of use sensing technology, and integration of the two
technologies into a field deployable unit. If successful we expect a robust
portable point of use sensing and water purification device with a detection
limit of 1 colony forming unit (1-CFU) and 6 Log removal capabilities of various
biological pathogens.