* 1521186
* Signatures of Excited Initial States and Tunneling in Landscape.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Sonia Paban, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sonia Paban at the
University of Texas at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wealth of experimental
data over the past two decades has led to a successful model of the evolution of
the universe known as the Ë-CDM model. This model includes a sudden moment when
space-time started expanding, followed by a period of exponential expansion
known as cosmic inflation. At the end of cosmic inflation the universe looked
pretty much the same in all directions and did not have a center; there were
only slight variations due to the quantum nature of the fields. These
predictions of cosmic inflation match extremely well the recent data collected
on the Cosmic Microwave Background, and they are fairly robust in that they are
mostly, but not completely, independent of the detailed structure of space-time
before inflation began. Professor Paban will investigate whether the precision
of future planned experiments is sufficient to shed light on that detailed
structure. Another aspect of this project relates to quantum tunneling: a
quantum particle can sometimes cross a barrier via a transition which is
forbidden for a classical particle. One proposed explanation of dark energy
involves the multiverse --- a landscape of universes. Transitions in the
multiverse happen via quantum tunneling. Models of the multiverse contain a
large number of fields, whereas most of what we know about quantum tunneling has
been limited to a single field. As a result, research in this area advances the
national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most
fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of the universe.
Professor Paban will investigate the dependence of the tunneling rate on the
number of fields. The broader impacts of this grant includes the mentoring of
graduate students, who will collaborate in this research, as well as Professor
Paban's continued mentoring of underrepresented minority undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, inflation has the power to
erase initial anisotropies on the metric in few e-foldings. For this reason, it
has been assumed that it will be impossible to tell if the pre-inflationary
metric was anisotropic. Previous work by Paban and collaborators indicates that
with the increased precision of projected observations (e.g., the 21cm
experiments) it will be possible to exclude or detect such a scenario when the
number of e-foldings is around 60. The work proposed here will tell if there is
also a distinctive signature for Large Scale Structure measurements,
ì-distortion measurements, and observations of oscillations in the power
spectrum through a polarization measurement. This research will also determine
if there is a distinctive signature in these three future experiments for
inflationary periods that are preceded by tunneling and a period of fast-roll.
Recent work claims that tunneling in a multi-dimensional space of fields is
enhanced as the number of fields grows. This proposal seeks to reproduce or
invalidate these results by means of independent computations, including use of
exact results and numerical Monte Carlo techniques.