* 1521387
* STTR Phase I:  High-Speed Indoor Wireless Networking  Using Visible Light Communications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Xu Wang, VLNComm, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is bringing numerous
economic and social benefits to the public: advance the security of information
and communication, decrease public health risk, and overall increase the quality
of life all around the world. VLC has the potential to significantly increase
the speed of Internet connection in multiuser indoor environments due to the
broad bandwidth of the visible light. Commercializing the VLC technology will
not only be a big step toward energy saving and provide stronger justification
and desire for implementing economical LED systems, but also will increase the
speed and security of wireless data communications. It will offer a huge energy
saving for the nation since energy is already used for lighting, and thus does
not require separate expenditure for communications. It will also increase the
quality of life for those who are concerned about the impacts of Wi-Fi on their
health, and any group of people including children and pregnant women can use it
for Internet connection without any concern about the effect of electromagnetic
waves. VLC can replace the controversial Wi-Fi technology in schools, hospitals,
kindergartens and any other place that health issues are of major
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
(STTR) Phase I project is to develop the technology for visible light
communication (VLC) system that achieves high data-rates using low-cost
commercial light emitting diodes (LED). VLC is a potential alternative data
communication technique for wireless applications that uses optical energy to
provide simultaneously lighting needs and data transmission. The idea in this
technology is to transmit the data using the lighting systems that are already
used for the illumination of indoor environments. Spectrally efficient coding
and modulation techniques with dimming feature support will be developed based
on combinatorial designs to modulate LEDs. Multi-input multi-output (MIMO) will
be explored to increase the transmission speeds since each user receives signals
from multiple LEDs. Solutions to address technical problems of using LEDs
intended for lighting in commercial VLC systems, such as LED heating, LED
nonlinearity and controlling large LED-arrays with low-cost small circuits will
be explored. The techniques developed in the Phase I of this proposal can also
be employed along with faster but more expensive LEDs and photo-detectors to
achieve Gbps streaming in VLC systems. Furthermore, tri-chromatic LEDs can be
used to achieve a three-fold increase in the data-rate by modulating each color
independently.