* 1521072
* Workshop: Biological Collections as a Resource for Technical Innovation
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2017
* Rolf Mueller, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 12/31/2017
* USD 99,000.00

Many natural history museums in the US and around the world harbor large and
invaluable research collections of biological specimens. These collections form
an archive of much of the world's known biodiversity. This archive is already
used as an indispensable resource for many different purposes related to
research in biology and conservation. This award will support a number of
activities, including workshops that will explore a novel use of natural history
collections as a resource for engineering innovation. The rationale behind this
endeavor is that the world's biodiversity represents the outcomes of evolution,
a process that shares many similarities with engineering optimization, but has
been operating on a vast scale in terms of time, space, and the number of
different species and individuals involved. Since no human engineering effort
can come close to the time and spatial scales of biological evolution,
biodiversity can be seen as a precious natural resource for optimizing knowledge
that could have a major impact on technology development, finding solutions to
major engineering challenges, and stimulating economic activity through
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goal of starting a viable
process towards utilizing natural history collection as a resource for
innovation, the set of activities supported by this award will bring together
researchers from very different backgrounds to plan a strategy for a path
forward. The first year-long activity will start with preparatory meetings by a
core team to carefully craft an agenda so that a large interdisciplinary
workshop on the topic can be productive and result in tangible outcomes. After
this main workshop, a team of authors will continue to meet and digest the
results of the main workshop into two sets of publications, one set aimed at the
scientific/engineering community and the other at the general public. The first
set of publications will be aimed at giving scientists and engineers from
diverse backgrounds specific suggestions as to how natural history collections
could be leveraged for engineering innovation. These publication will also
outline the pertinent challenges as well as potential solution strategies in as
much technical detail as possible. The second set of publications will be aimed
at providing policy makers and the general public a well-justified outline of
the innovative and economic potential of natural history collections as well as
estimates for the effort that would be required to realize this potential. The
outcomes of the project will be archived on the website of the Center for
Bioinspired Science and Technology at Virginia Tech
(http://bist.centers.vt.edu).