* 1521055
* Disorder and Dynamics in Silicate and Aluminosilicate Liquids, Glasses, and Crystals Relevant to Geochemical Processes: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Jonathan Stebbins, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2018
* USD 319,999.00

The focus of this research program is the atomic-scale structure and dynamics of
the silicate minerals, glasses and magmas that are at the center of most
geological processes, from those taking place at the Earth's surface to those in
the planet's deep interior. The ultimate goal of this work is to provide better
fundamental understanding, and eventually better prediction, of the material
properties that ultimately control complex processes in nature, many of which
have enormous impacts on people and on society. For the two-year grant period,
one emphasis will be on the effects of high pressure on the structure and
properties of silicate melts that represent magmas in the Earth, and hence are
tied to many geological processes including the formation and eruption of
volcanoes. A second major activity will be further development and application
of methods to measure the distribution of minor elements in some of the most
important silicate minerals in the Earth's crust and mantle, in order to improve
models that describe their chemical behavior in nature, and thus better our
ability to glean clues about geological evolution from natural samples. Results
and methods developed in this project should continue to be of major interest
outside of the Earth sciences, particularly for researchers working to develop
and optimize silicate glasses and ceramics for advanced technologies, such as
materials for data processing and transmission, computer displays, substrates
for photovoltaics, fuel cells, and many other applications. Education is central
to this project, since most of the research will be part of the training of
Ph.D. and undergraduate students on their ways to careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken in this research is to
identify important problems where critical details of short- to intermediate-
range structure are needed and can be elucidated by laboratory measurements,
collect accurate data on synthetic or natural materials, and determine the
consequences of the results for key chemical and physical parameters. The most
important experimental approach that will be used is solid-state Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, which can reveal quantitative details
about the structure around many of the components common in minerals and magmas,
such as silicon, aluminum, oxygen, phosphorus, and sodium. A variety of
compositions of glasses (representing the high temperature molten materials in
natural magma systems) and crystalline materials will be synthesized, and
measurements made of how their structures change with composition, temperature
and pressure. One particular emphasis will be to continue to extend the
applicability of NMR, traditionally used to look at abundant constituents of
non-magnetic materials, to minor and even trace components and to materials
containing substantial amounts of magnetic components. These data should be
particularly important in helping to develop more accurate, physically-based
models of mineral and magma properties and behavior, which are especially
important in the Earth sciences, as many processes take place in regimes of
temperature, pressure, and time that are inaccessible to direct observation.