* 1521551
* Statistical Tools for Analyzing Multiple Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Elizaveta Levina, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 325,000.00

The widespread use of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and other
neuroimaging technologies has given rise to a new field of brain connectomics,
which studies patterns of connections between different regions of the brain.
This project brings together the investigator's expertise on statistical
analysis of networks and her collaboration with neuroscientists to develop new
methods for simultaneous statistical analysis of multiple networks and apply
them primarily to brain connectivity networks inferred from fMRI imaging of
mentally ill and healthy patients, with the goal of using sound statistical
inference to discover how their brains differ. The methods leverage underlying
common structure to share information across networks and identify structural
network features associated with disease status and other diagnostic
assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The raw fMRI data collected from brain
imaging are typically converted to network representations, which are then
analyzed to find patterns of normal human brain activity as well as
abnormalities associated with various mental disorders. Thus the data are
essentially a sample of networks, one for each subject. However, the current use
of network analysis tools in brain connectomics is typically confined to simple
global summaries of the network; even more commonly, the network structure is
ignored altogether in what is known as massively univariate analysis, which
looks at each connection separately. At the same time, the networks community
has developed a wealth of methods for analyzing the structure of a single
network, for example, discovering communities, but there are hardly any
statistical methods that can handle samples of networks in a way that both
respects and exploits network structure. This project will bridge this gap by
developing new statistical methodology for samples of networks, and applying it
to problems in brain connectomics. Our first goal is developing methods to
estimate the "population mean" (in particular the underlying communities) from a
noisy sample of networks. This project proposes an EM-type algorithm which
outperforms naive averaging by exploiting the underlying common structure. The
second goal is designing new accurate classifiers for networks which can
identify interpretable predictive features such as subnetworks by using
penalties based on both spatial and network distances between edges. The third
goal is developing new measures of network similarity inspired by canonical
correlations, which can be used for both network classification and clustering,
the latter especially important for discovering subtypes of brain connectivity
disorders which manifest themselves as different subtypes of psychiatric
disorders. This project will also investigate measures of variability of network
structure and methods for predicting not only disease status, but more complex
multivariate diagnostic assessments. Development of these methods will have
direct impact on research in neuroscience and mental health, and this project
will ensure the methods relevance and feasibility by working in close
collaboration with two brain imaging labs and disseminating the results both in
the statistics and the connectomics communities. The project will also
contribute to training graduate students in both network analysis and brain
connectomics.