* 1521236
* STTR Phase I:  Rapid Investment Casting of Superalloys Using Microwave Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Stanley Morrow, Hadron Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project is aligned with revolutionizing the
metal casting industry by demonstrating a novel rapid and versatile investment
casting system. This all inclusive unit is based on a hybrid microwave heating
technology which permits direct irradiation of the casting mold and metal melt,
which results in low energy consumption and tight control of the melting/casting
processes. This revolutionary system will permit any size business to design and
fabricate low volume metal parts, with complex geometries of any metal
composition (from low-temperature metals to high-temperature superalloys). By
coupling this technology with 3D polymer printing technology to form the mold
core, near-net shaped parts with complex geometries may go from computer design
to a casted part in a matter of a few days (compared to the typical multi-week
delivery for traditional investment casting). These attributes address many of
the current needs of the modern commercial market, which requires rapid
turnaround of new products with shorter product development time. In addition,
the future of advanced manufacturing in the US will be dependent upon small
businesses responding to the market with small quantity, but high-value and
high-quality parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
will be based on the investigation of a furnace design which will utilize
microwave energy to rapidly melt high-temperature metal alloys for the casting
of complex parts within an investment casting process. The investigation will
also focus on early thermal steps within the investment casting process, in
order to reduce processing time and energy consumption, and thus lead to a
savings in cost and emissions. Microwave heating has been demonstrated for a
variety of food products and inorganic powders, but there are little to no
reports on the use of microwave energy to melt and cast metals, especially high-
temperature alloys such as Ni- and Ti-based alloys. This work will investigate
this novel melting technology. The work will show the relation between the
method of microwave coupling, level of superheating, and hybrid quenching
technique (through selective microwave coupling within the investment mold) on
the microstructure and mechanical properties of the resultant metal parts. This
information will lead to the design of a final microwave-based metal
melter/caster, which will provide businesses (from small machine shops to larger
foundries) the ability to rapidly cast a variety of complex-shaped, low- and
high-temperature alloys in the same unit.