* 1521347
* STTR Phase I:  Feasibility and proof of concept of a non-invasive treatment for type 2 diabetes inspired from bariatric surgery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Pratik Patel, Glyscend INC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop the first non-invasive, device-
based treatment for type 2 diabetes which mimics the therapeutic benefits of
bariatric surgery. The proposed non-invasive intestinal lining temporarily
alters signaling pathways in the small intestine to mimic the metabolic effects
of bariatric surgery. The 27 million Americans and 300 million patients globally
with type 2 diabetes are desperate for a treatment that reinstates glycemic
control as opposed to current management strategies, such as metformin and
insulin, which only slow the progression of the disease. The potential
commercial impact of the treatment is significant as the total estimated cost of
diagnosed diabetes in the US is upwards of $245 billion, and on the rise.
Overall, an astounding 1 in 5 US health care dollars are used for the care of
people with diabetes. Major insurers have expressed interest in the
reimbursement of alternative approaches such as the one proposed, thereby
lessening the national cost burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
entails proof-of-concept experiments on the bench top and in-vivo animal model
to address the most pertinent technological risks with the approach. The first
specific aim is to develop and test several formulations of the intestinal
lining and evaluate pertinent performance features. The second aim is to develop
an ingestible delivery method of the selected lining for localized deployment.
Consultation with leading endocrinologists, gastroenterologists, and material
scientists regarding bariatric surgery has guided the selection of very specific
delivery targets within the gastrointestinal tract. These targets form the
success criteria for specific aim 2. The third and final specific aim is to
determine if the lining can be delivered and remain functional in the small
intestine for a period of 2 hours to modify nutrient absorption in a porcine
model. This aim will provide proof-of-concept for the overall approach and
motivate the NSF STTR phase 2 application, wherein more rigorous and long term
safety and efficacy studies will be performed.