* 1521383
* STTR Phase I:  Mineral Removal from Biocoal Produced from Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) for Power Generation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Jordan Klinger, Treamin Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase I project is for the mineral treatment technology for torrefied
biomass. This technology enables the use of municipal solid waste (MSW) as a
viable, and renewable fuel in coal power plant to commercialization. If
successful, existing torrefaction technology can be deployed with the proposed
mineral treatment to provide fuel generation at any site near existing waste
infrastructure. With the addition of this technology, torrefaction technologies
will be able to accept low-cost feedstock and produce cost competitive renewable
fuels. This growth in such fuel companies could create many new jobs and the
associated economic development. Because of the nature of MSW as an existing
fuel source that is generated in all locations, there is potential to boost
development around urban and rural areas through job creation, the utilization
of renewable power generation, and reduction of society's waste streams.

The objectives of this Phase I research project are to remove or significantly
reduce the mineral content within torrefied MSW. Torrefaction is a mild thermal
treatment that transforms biomass to a fuel similar to coal, and is a proven
technology. One major hurdle for torrefaction is the cost of the raw biomass
materials. The use of wastes, such as MSW, can make the torrefied biomass
(biocoal) cost competitive with fossil coal. MSW, however, contains a large
fraction of minerals which cause slagging, fouling, and corrosion in fuel
boilers. To overcome this barrier and realize the economic benefits from MSW
utilization, Treamin Energy, Inc. has developed a method to remove nearly 100%
of soluble and insoluble minerals quickly and inexpensively, and seeks to
demonstrate Proof of Concept for the technology. With existing torrefaction and
mineral treatment equipment, the process will be demonstrated from mineral,
mass, and energy characterizations of the process steams, in addition to using
measured process data in economic assessment tools for industrial potential.