* 1521763
* Student Travel Support for the CoSeRa Workshop. To be held in Pisa, Italy,  June, 16-19, 2015
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Fauzia Ahmad, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The main objective of this proposal is to request travel support for graduate
students from US institutions, who are co-authors of one or more accepted
papers, to participate and present their work at the 3rd International Workshop
on Compressed Sensing Theory and its Applications to Radar, Sonar and Remote
Sensing (CoSeRa). This is the third edition of the CoSeRa workshop series, which
will be held in Pisa, Italy, from June 16-19, 2015.

Intellectual Merit: The 2015 CoSeRa Workshop will have a highly international
profile, with participation from eminent scientists in the Compressing Sensing,
Radar Signal Processing and Remote Sensing fields from all over the world. Every
day, the conference will offer one plenary session, given by renowned scientists
on key topics of research and development, and an oral and poster parallel
scientific sessions, where participants can present their most recent results on
the different topics of the conference. Using this approach, CoSeRa-2015 will
serve as an invaluable occasion for US graduate students to get in touch with
the worldwide leaders in signal processing research and optimum system
development. More importantly, the students will gain new ideas leading to
stronger and more complete theses, and can put their contributions in
perspective and relative to the ongoing research activities. In essence, they
will be exposed to the most recent and advanced findings in the aforementioned
areas.

Broader Impacts: The proposed graduate student participation is poised to have a
positive impact on compressive sensing research in US institutions in the broad
application areas of radar, sonar, and remote sensing. The broader impact of the
proposed student participation will materialize in the near future, as these
students joining the US workforce will be better positioned to spearhead
research and development activities in diverse industrial sectors, such as those
serving law enforcement, homeland security, and defense as well as the
automotive industries. Compressive Sensing yields low cost system design,
enables fast data acquisition, and simplifies operational logistics, which are
crucial considerations in many such applications.