* 1521164
* Collaborative Research: Novel In Situ Measurement and Remote Sensing Techniques for Characterization of Near-Surface Soil Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Markus Tuller, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 05/31/2018
* USD 324,264.00

The uppermost soil layer that covers the Earth's surface controls important
processes, including how rainfall turns into runoff that can cause flooding and
how water that recharges aquifers or is stored in the soil to support plant
growth. Because soil surface properties, including moisture and temperature are
not uniform across the land and vary with time, it is difficult to measure them
over large areas. Recently, satellite remote sensing has become a powerful tool
for large-scale monitoring of near-surface soil properties. However, the near-
surface processes sensed by the satellites are poorly understood because the top
layer (about one inch) of soil has received little attention until now. We lack
the ground-based measurement technology needed to calibrate satellite
observations. To fill this knowledge gap and to provide crucial data for
calibration of satellite measurements, this project will develop of novel sensor
arrays and mathematical models capable of measuring and describing moisture and
temperature variations within the top inch of soil. This technology will be
tested and refined with large diameter precision-weighing soil columns
instrumented with the new sensors and special remote sensing cameras. The
project will provide invaluable information and tools for managing our precious
water and environmental resources in view of climate variability, especially in
arid and semiarid regions of the USA, and improve research in related scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Earth's surface experiences extreme
spatiotemporal moisture and temperature variations and controls important
hydrological processes such as infiltration, runoff, and evaporation. Satellite
remote-sensing (RS) is a powerful tool for characterization and monitoring of
Earth surface processes, but near-surface (NS) dynamics within the penetration
depth of electromagnetic waves are poorly understood due to a lack of high-
resolution calibration techniques. This research addresses the crucial need for
improved monitoring of NS soil property and process dynamics. The project
objectives are to: 1) develop and employ novel in situ measurement techniques;
2) evaluate and advance RS theory for NS soil moisture estimation; and 3)
develop and test creative RS algorithms for soil hydraulic property
determination. To achieve the objectives, ground-based NS moisture content,
temperature, thermal properties and soil heat and evaporative fluxes will be
determined with instruments including a high-resolution time domain
reflectometry array (TDRA) and a penta-needle heat pulse probe array (PHPPA).
These NS measurements will be coupled with analytical solutions for soil
moisture estimates. A scaling method and RS of the soil surface moisture and
temperature will be used to estimate soil hydraulic properties from the duration
of Stage 1 evaporation. The proposed concepts will be tested with a pair of 4-m
deep x 2.4-m diameter precision weighing lysimeters at the University of
Arizona, instrumented with thermal imaging- and shortwave IR-cameras. The
proposed project will transform calibration and predictive capabilities of land-
surface and hydrologic models and provide valuable information for the
management of Earth's precious environmental resources in view of climate
variability, especially in arid and semiarid regions of the US and globally. The
development of high-resolution near-surface physical and hydrologic measurement
capabilities (TDRA and PHPPA) will also enhance research capabilities of related
scientific disciplines (e.g., ecohydrology and atmospheric science).