* 1521210
* Hydrologic controls on temperature extremes in managed landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Noel Holbrook, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 349,169.00

This project examines how vegetation, particularly changes in agriculture,
influence soil moisture and extreme temperatures in croplands. A preliminary
study indicates that in the US Midwest, where crop production has increased
significantly, there was an accompanying decline in the hottest temperatures at
the height of the growing season. This suggests that increased potential for
evaporation from plant leaves has led to cooling and improved conditions for
agriculture. With this in mind, this research examines if: 1) transitions to
higher productivity crops increase the potential for water use, 2) historical
cooling of the hottest growing season temperatures is indeed caused by
agricultural changes in water use, and 3) current models adequately represent
the relationship between soil moisture, temperature, and water use? The first 2
questions will be addressed using soil water sensors, towers that measure
atmospheric water flux, and satellite estimates of temperature and evaporation.
To see if the relationships between soil moisture, crop water use, and
temperature identified in the Midwest can be generalized, global weather station
data as well as crop area, productivity, and irrigation datasets from
agricultural census reports will be analyzed. Question 3 will be addressed using
models that relate temperature and evaporation and that include how this
relationship changes with crop development. Development of the relationships
between crops, water use, and temperature will additionally help in
reconstructing changes in water availability over the last century. All told,
this work will improve understanding of the availability and use of soil
moisture in agricultural regions, as well as the relationships between soil
moisture, extreme temperatures, and agriculture.

The purpose of this research is to explore whether changes to managed vegetation
have significantly altered the hydrologic coupling between agricultural land
surfaces and lower atmospheric boundary layers. A preliminary analysis indicated
large-scale changes in the distribution of temperature related to changes in
agricultural intensity. Specifically, the highest summer temperatures in US
Midwest agricultural areas show significant cooling during the growing season
that is proportional to increases in regional agricultural biomass production.
It is hypothesized that increased agricultural intensity causes increased
potential evapotranspiration and, thereby, amelioration of the hottest growing
season temperatures. To test the hydrologic mechanisms that would underlie such
connections between crop growth, evapotranspiration, and temperature, it is
proposed to evaluate relationships between seasonal and historical crop
development, water use, and evapotranspiration using in-situ soil moisture
measurements, eddy flux measurements, and satellite observations. New datasets
on global crop areas, yield, and phenology will also be used to assess the
generality of the diagnosed relationships between agricultural intensification,
evapotranspiration, and temperature extremes. Further, evapotranspiration models
will be evaluated for accuracy in cropland environments, as will the ability to
generalize inferences of cropland evapotranspiration and soil moisture using the
coarse input data available in earlier periods. This work will also permit
testing several sub-hypotheses: (i) that higher yielding crops generally have
higher evapotranspiration, (ii) that lack of summer warming in the Midwest is a
result of crop intensification, and (iii) that drought reverts intensely
cultivated ecosystems back toward historical temperature conditions. These lines
of investigation have broad relevance for understanding changes in soil moisture
and temperature extremes resulting from transitions toward more intensive
agricultural management.