* 1521562
* Workshop: Natural Organic Matter and its Impact on Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Michael Gonsior, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2016
* USD 48,060.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;1521562 (Gonsior)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
international travel and registration for the workshop "NOM 2015 - 6th IWA
Specialist Workshop on Natural Organic Matter in Drinking Water" (NOM 6) for six
early-career faculty, one post-doctoral scholar, and 10 students. The NOM 6
workshop is an important international meeting that brings experts together to
discuss recent research efforts focused on the impact of natural organic matter
(NOM) on drinking water systems and is jointly organized by the International
Water Association (IWA) and the Swedish water utility Sydvatten. It will be held
in September 2015 in Sweden. At this workshop, experts in NOM join with
environmental engineers to foster new collaborations and to advance the
scientific understanding of NOM and its impacts on drinking water treatment
processes. The travel team members span a large research area of NOM and how it
relates to drinking water treatment. All members of the travel team will give an
oral or poster presentation. The travel team will collaborate on a review
article focused on the fate and effects of NOM during drinking water treatment;
that manuscript is to be submitted by March, 2016. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOM
affects drinking water treatment processes around the world, but specific
regions face unique treatment challenges due to differences in source water
quality and regulatory framework. The travel team represents geographically
diverse regions of the United States (Northeast, Southeast, Midwest, West, and
Southwest regions) that each have important differences in water resources and
NOM signatures; therefore, the NOM 6 workshop will provide a means for the six
faculty participants and a post-doctoral scholar to build new collaborations
with each other and international participants. This workshop brings
researchers, consultants, and drinking water utility representatives together
and allows for exposure to different NOM challenges and solutions from around
the world. Knowledge transfer between biogeochemists and environmental engineers
is crucial to advance understanding of NOM and its complexity with water
treatment processes, so that emerging drinking water treatment challenges are
approached with full utilization of contemporary analytical tools and
fundamental understanding.