* 1521501
* Collaborative Research: Fishing through antiquity in central Alaska: exploring the abundance and use of salmon through stable isotope, zooarchaeological, and ancient DNA analyses
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Ben Potter, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2020
* USD 285,433.00

The primary goals of the proposed research are to reconstruct changes in salmon
abundance and explore human use of salmon in central Alaska from the earliest
occupations during the last Ice Age (~13,000 years ago) through the late
prehistoric period. Today, salmon make up the largest proportion of wild foods
harvested by rural Alaskans, but the availability of this important subsistence
resource is declining in many upriver areas. Research on prehistoric salmon
abundance and use can provide data critical to understanding natural variation
in salmon availability and how northern riverine peoples have responded to
fluctuations in this important resource in the past. By providing a long-term
perspective for sustainability and food security planning, project data will
benefit a variety of salmon stakeholders within Alaska and beyond. The project
has a strong educational component, including the development and delivery of a
project-based course for the Rural Alaska Honors Institute (a college
preparatory program for rural and Alaska Native college-bound students), thus
enhancing opportunities for underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address three questions: (1) How has salmon abundance varied over
time in central Alaska? (2) When did prehistoric foragers begin to use salmon,
and when did they begin to intensively exploit this resource? (3) How did
foragers respond to changes in salmon availability? To address these questions,
a multidisciplinary team will use independent approaches: (a) stable isotope
analysis of human and faunal remains will reveal the contribution of salmon to
the diets of prehistoric salmon consumers (e.g., humans, dogs, bears); (b)
zooarchaeological and ancient DNA analyses of fish remains from existing faunal
assemblages will allow reconstruction of past fish procurement and processing
strategies; and (c) stable isotope analysis of interior lake sediment cores will
track natural fluctuations in salmon abundance. These data will be integrated
with models of forager economy and mobility to explore cultural responses to
salmon abundance through multiple prehistoric periods. This research will
provide the necessary faunal isotope data to accurately reconstruct overall
paleodiets of newly discovered multiple human individuals at the interior sites
of Upward Sun River (~11,500 yrs old) and Tochak (~1000 yrs old), where faunal
and initial isotopic data suggest significant salmon use. This project provides
unprecedented time depth on natural variation in salmon abundance in the North
Pacific and in understanding how northern peoples have responded to changes in
this critical resource in the past. The study will produce much-needed direct
data bearing on prehistoric subsistence strategies in the Alaskan interior
throughout the period of human occupation.