* 1521303
* EAGER: XSight - A Distributed Measurement Infrastructure for Data Transfer Nodes
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Christopher Rapier, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/2017
* USD 299,321.00

As the volume of research data increases, as research workflows become more
dynamic and complex, and as networking capabilities expand, the benefits of
effective instrumentation grow. This project pursues the exploration of
effective networking instrumentation in this new landscape. While pursued in the
context of research cyberinfrastructure, the topic is relevant to other
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the XSight project
explores how to effectively leverage new kernel modifications enabling TCP
instrumentation installed at Data Transfer Nodes (DTNs) to: collect flow level
TCP connection performance data; correlate this performance data among DTN?s
participating in large scale data transfers; and communicate with a Network
Operations Center (NOC) to signal the presence of network performance problems.
XSight, through its approach to near real time flow level data collection,
analysis and reporting on real scientific data flow TCP performance, leads to a
deeper understanding of end to end network behavior of scientific data flows.
Further, the system has potential to directly lead to improvements of
instrumented scientific data flows. The project targets the distributed DTN
environment within the NSF-supported XSEDE environment with a light-weight data
collection client deployed on the DTNs.