* 1521972
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Diagnostic Driving: Real Time Driver Condition Detection Through Analysis of Driving Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Avelino Gonzalez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,011.00

The automobile presents a great opportunity for healthcare monitoring. For one,
most Americans engage in daily driving, and patient's time spent in vehicles is
a missed opportunity to monitor their condition and general wellbeing. The goal
of this project is to develop and evaluate technology for automatic in-vehicle
monitoring of early symptoms of medical conditions and disrupted medications of
patients, and to provide preventive care. Specifically, in this project we will
focus on Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in teenagers and young
adults, a prevalent chronic medical condition which when uncontrolled has the
potential for known negative health and quality of life consequences. The
approach of using driving behavior to monitor ADHD symptoms could be applied to
many other medical conditions (such as diabetes, failing eyesight, intoxication,
fatigue or heart attacks) thereby transforming medical management into real-time
sensing and management. Identification of all these conditions from driving
behavior and alerting the proper agent could transform how we think about health
monitoring and result in saved lives and reduced
injuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to leverage the
large amounts of health data that can be collected while driving via machine
learning, in order to detect subtle changes in behavior due to out-of-control
ADHD symptoms that can, for example, indicate the onset of episodes of
inattention before they happen. Via lab-based driving simulator as well as on-
road studies, the research team will investigate the individualized behaviors
and patterns in vehicle control behaviors that are characteristic of ADHD
patients under various states of medication usage. The team will develop a
machine learning framework based on case-based and context-based reasoning to
match the current driving behavior of the patient with previously recorded
driving behavior corresponding to different ADHD symptoms. The key machine
learning challenge is to define appropriate similarity measures to compare
driving behavior that take into account the key distinctive features of ADHD
driving behavior identified during our study. The team will evaluate the
accuracy with which the proposed approach can identify and distinguish between
different out-of-control ADHD symptoms, which are the implications for long-term
handling of ADHD patients, via driving simulator experiments as well as using
instrumented cars with real patients.