* 1521775
* Novel Kernel Methods for Data Analysis in Dynamical Systems: Applications to Dimension Reduction and Prediction in Atmospheric and Oceanic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Zhizhen Zhao, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Large-scale datasets generated by dynamical systems are encountered in many
science and engineering disciplines. For instance, in climate, atmosphere, and
ocean sciences the dynamics take place in an infinite-dimensional phase space
where the coupled nonlinear partial differential equations for fluid flow and
thermodynamics are defined, and the observed data correspond to functions of
that phase space, such as temperature or circulation over a given geographical
region. Examples also abound in materials science and molecular dynamics. A
major challenge is to utilize the vast amount of data that is being collected by
observational networks or output by large-scale numerical models to understand
the operating physics and make inferences about aspects of the system which are
not accessible to observation, including the future state of the system. This
project seeks to develop novel techniques for data analysis and prediction in
dynamical systems, taking into account model error and spatiotemporal data
relationships. Applications are proposed in two high-impact areas in climate-
atmosphere-ocean science, namely, tracking and forecasting of multiscale
convective waves in the tropical atmosphere and reconstruction and forecasting
of Arctic sea-ice thickness. This research will create, document, and make
available software for analyzing large-scale data from complex dynamical
systems. It will also contribute to curricular development and training of
graduate students in this interdisciplinary arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
general framework of this research is dynamical systems operating in high-
dimensional phase spaces, but generating data with low-dimensional, nonlinear
geometric structures. Kernel methods form a natural mathematical framework to
construct function spaces on these low-dimensional objects with a well-defined
notion of smoothness, which can be used to carry out a variety of data analysis
tasks such as dimension reduction, feature extraction, and prediction. For
appropriately designed kernels, these tasks can be interpreted in terms of a
Riemannian geometry induced on the data. Kernels also provide operators to
extend functions on a reference dataset to another dataset of interest. The
dynamical systems addressed in the project can represent either nature, or a
numerical model approximating nature. In many real-world complex applications
the low-dimensional data structures generated by nature and the model will
differ. To extract the features of the imperfect model which are maximally
consistent with nature, or to assign weights in multi-model ensembles for
prediction, this project will study a novel approach where kernel-based out-of-
sample extension operators are used to define appropriate metrics for model
error. Taking dynamics into account through Takens delay-coordinate maps and
other features, these error metrics are incorporated into modified kernels,
biasing the geometry of the model data to extract states with high fidelity
relative to nature. This project is to use the modified kernels in regularized
schemes for learning functional relationships between quantities of interest in
dynamical systems. These methods will be applied in reconstruction and
forecasting of Arctic sea-ice thickness from observations of oceanic and
atmospheric variables, and blended parametric-nonparametric forecasting of
large-scale convective organization in the tropics. A further goal of the
project is to extend these ideas to operator-valued kernels (so-called multitask
kernels) for analysis of vector-valued observables, such as spatially extended
fields. Compared to the canonical scalar-valued kernels, these kernels should
have significantly higher skill in capturing spatiotemporal intermittency, with
geometry and dynamics also playing a role through delay-coordinate maps. This
project is to apply these kernels to objectively extract traveling convective
waves in the tropical atmosphere from large datasets acquired via remote
sensing.