* 1521532
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Replicating Clinic Physical Therapy at Home: Touch, Depth, and Epidermal Electronics in an Interactive Avatar System
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Sri Kurniawan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 133,679.00

Physical therapy is often hampered by lack of access to therapists, and lack of
adherence to home therapy regimens. This research develops a physical therapy
assistance system for home use, with emphasis on stroke rehabilitation. As a
person exercises, inexpensive cameras observe color and depth, and unobtrusive
tattoo sensors monitor detailed muscle activity. The 3D movement trajectory is
derived and compared against the exercise done with an expert therapist. The
patient watches a screen avatar where arrows and color coding guide the patient
to move correctly. In addition to advancing fields such as movement tracking,
skin sensors, and assistive systems, the project has the potential for broad
impact by attracting women and under-represented minorities to engineering
through health-related engineering coursework and projects, and because home
physical therapy assistance can especially help rural and under-served
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses bio-electronics, computer
vision, computer gaming, high-dimensional machine learning, and human factors to
develop a home physical therapy assistance system. During home exercises,
patient kinematics and physiology are monitored with a Kinect color/depth camera
and wireless epidermal electronics transferable to the skin with a temporary
tattoo. The project involves optimization of electrode design and wireless
signaling for epidermal electronics to monitor spatiotemporal aspects of muscle
recruitment, hand and body pose estimation and tracking algorithms that are
robust to rapid motion and occlusions, and development of machine learning and
avatar rendering algorithms for multi-modal sensor fusion and expert-trained
optimal control guidance logic, for both cloud and local usage. The system aims
to provide real-time feedback to make home sessions as effective as office
visits with an expert therapist, reducing the time and money required for full
recovery.