* 1521616
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation): Internal wave-generated turbulent mixing and vertical nitrate flux during spring and neap tides along the Mid-Atlantic Bight shelf break
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* NONE NONE, Haskell                 William
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

The marine biological carbon pump transforms carbon dioxide into organic carbon
and transports it from the surface ocean to the abyss. Biological productivity
in the oceans is dependent on the rate at which deep water nutrients mix upward
into the surface ocean. Tides are believed to contribute to this mixing in the
coastal ocean, but we do not know the extent to which they influence the
biological carbon pump. In this project, the fellow will address the fundamental
question: Do tides significantly impact biological production and organic carbon
export in the coastal ocean by increasing the rate at which essential nutrients
enter the sunlit surface ocean? In addition, the fellow will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in the ocean sciences by leading hands-
on educational activities teaching introductory robotics to students of
Baltimore City public schools; presenting findings to the local community during
the an open house at Horn Point Laboratories, including students in the Maryland
public school system; and collaborating with the University of Maryland's Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minorities Participation program to mentor an undergraduate
researcher.

The marine biological carbon pump, a critical process in reducing atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentration, is the fixation of carbon dioxide into organic
material (Corg) during primary production and subsequent transport from the
surface ocean into the abyss. Over the continental shelves, the proportion of
total Corg that is exported is much greater than that in the open ocean, so even
small fluctuations in biological productivity over the shelves can have a large
impact on the global carbon budget. In much of the surface ocean, biological
productivity is limited by nutrient availability and the vertical transport of
nutrients is controlled by turbulent mixing. During interaction with the
shelf/slope topography, a portion of tidal energy is lost to turbulence during
conversion into internal waves, which lose further energy to turbulence as they
move onshore. This mechanism likely increases the rate vertical nutrient flux
and biological productivity over the continental shelves. Given the ubiquity and
frequency (hours to months) of tides worldwide, mixing caused by internal tide-
shelf break interaction may be a globally important mechanism of nutrient supply
to surface ocean ecosystems.

The goal of this study is to quantify the effect of internal waves on vertical
nutrient flux. Using a propelled Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV), the fellow
will make simultaneous in-situ measurements of vertical turbulent mixing rate
and nitrate concentration profiles over two semidiurnal tidal cycles during both
a spring and neap tide over the southern New England shelf. These measurements
will be used to estimate the change in vertical nitrate flux on unprecedented
temporal and spatial scales. The fellow test the hypothesis that tidal energy
dissipation caused by the interaction with the continental shelf edge will
increase the rate of vertical turbulent mixing, and thus vertical nutrient flux,
near the base of the euphotic zone in the Mid-Atlantic Bight.