* 1521653
* Exchange Between the Surfzone and Inner Shelf: The Contribution of Transient Rip Currents
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* NONE NONE, Suanda                  Sutara         H
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Rip currents - narrow jets of strong, offshore-directed flow - are a dangerous
beach hazard. They account for the majority of the U.S. life guard rescue effort
and potentially play a role in many coastal processes by exchanging material
such as sediments, pollutants, and intertidal invertebrates across nearshore
ocean systems. Because of their episodic nature, transient rip currents are
particularly challenging to observe and our understanding of the processes that
drive, sustain, and determine their offshore extent is limited. In this project,
the fellow aims to quantify transient rip current exchange across nearshore
systems. Results may provide valuable information for the safety of recreational
beach goers and improve understanding on the transport of materials across and
health of our coastal ecosystems. To broaden participation in marine science,
the fellow will mentor a summer undergraduate intern on the use of numerical
ocean models. The fellow will also work with a local high school to develop and
deliver a marine science curriculum culminating with a career-oriented workshop,
the Surf Science Teen Conference.

The transition between the surfzone and the inner continental shelf involves a
transition across dynamical regions. While wave breaking dominates the forcing
of circulation within the surfzone, the inner shelf is subject to a combination
of forces including wave shoaling, buoyancy, and the earth?s rotation. On
alongshore-uniform beaches, transient rip currents are potentially the dominant
mechanism driving the exchange of material across these regions. In this
project, using a wave-resolving Boussinesq model, the fellow aims to develop a
better understanding of transient rip current driven exchange. To accomplish
this aim, the fellow will conduct a series of simulations over a wide parameter
space including both normally and obliquely incident wave conditions and
multiple beach slopes. Nearshore vortices will be tracked to analyze their
dynamics and quantify the strength as well as offshore extent of transient rip
currents. Predictive relationships will be determined between rip current
characteristics, their bulk exchange, and the array of incident wave and beach
conditions. These characteristics can then be compared to other coastal exchange
processes such as wind, Stokes? drift, and internal wave-driven transports.
Transient rip current exchange occurs over small scales generally unresolved by
coastal circulation models. This work will also contribute towards the
parameterization of transient rip current behavior in such models.