* 1521158
* Gaussian-Localized Polynomial Approximation: A Well-Conditioned Spectral Method  for Solving Partial Differential Equations in Complicated Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* John Boyd, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 159,087.00

Radial basis functions (RBF) are a numerical technology that has proven to be of
great value in many fields. For example, three-dimensional laser scanners
convert objects, such as a human face, into a "point cloud," that is,
measurements of the position of points on the face. RBF interpolation connects
the dots into a smooth surface so that face appears as a recognizable face
instead of a cloud of unconnected markers. RBFs have been applied to solve the
partial differential equations of fluid flow so as to track hurricanes and
predict weather, tidal flows in harbors, combusting flows in an automobile
engine, and so on. Unfortunately, RBFs also have flaws. Calculations scale
poorly to a large number of degrees of freedom, round-off errors can turn a
forecasting model into a useless random number generator, and poor accuracy is
sometimes present in problem classes where RBFs have hitherto been a great
success. One goal of this research project is to understand RBFs at a deeper
level. Why do they work so well (much of the time)? Why do they triumph when
similar polynomial-based methods fail? What is the relationship between RBFs and
polynomials? This project will explore the foundations of RBFs to better
delineate their domain of application, improve performance where feasible, and
potentially mark some application domains as unsuitable for RBFs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To cope with their shortcomings and to also understand
RBFs at a more fundamental level, the PI will intensively study RBF-substitutes:
these are products of polynomials with Gaussians, equivalent to extending the
infinite interval basis of Hermite functions to interpolation and PDE-solving on
a finite interval. Earlier work of the PI established a rigorous convergence-
and-error theorem and also numerical comparisons showing the superiority of
Hermite functions to RBFs in some applications. Conventional single-domain
pseudospectral methods fail unless the domain is a rectangle or ellipse, a so-
called tensor product domain. The PI plans to extend these Hermite pseudo-RBFs
to solve multidimensional PDEs in geometrically-complicated domains using
irregular grids, problems where RBFs are sometimes good and sometimes failures.
Such complicated domains include a telescope with a hexagonal lens or an ocean
ringed with bays and pierced with islands. Hermite functions and RBFs are easy
to program and therefore ideal for preliminary design, classroom modeling, and
complementing and enriching theory. An applied goal of the project is to advance
numerical rapid prototyping, that is, to devise algorithms that, despite
complicated domain boundaries, combine brevity of code with spectral accuracy.