* 1521374
* Atom-Photon Entanglement and Functional Quantum Network Nodes with Atomic Ensembles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Thad Walker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

The development of quantum mechanical approaches to processing, storage, and
transmission of information is being actively pursued around the world. Quantum
processors are distinct from existing classical systems in that they harness
unique features of quantum physics to enable beyond classical capabilities.
These include the potential for efficiently solving currently intractable
computational problems, for simulating complex physical systems in order to
develop new materials, and the ability to transmit information securely between
distant locations.

One of the approaches being actively pursued is to use quantum bits (qubits)
stored in neutral atoms for memory and processing and to use optical photons
(particles of light) for long distance transmission of information. A necessary
step is entanglement, that is where a single particle of light, a photon, and/or
an atom can be correlated with another photon or another atom such that
measuring the properties of one instantaneously affects the properties of the
other even if they are not in the same location. While entanglement between
atoms and photons has been demonstrated in many experiments what has not yet
been achieved is the ability to combine atom-photon entanglement with atomic
qubits that can process and store information. The major goal of this research
is to demonstrate atom-photon entanglement and atom based quantum logic gates in
a single system that can form the basis for future quantum networks.

The research program will also contribute to the training of students for
careers in science and engineering. People from diverse backgrounds will be
educated and trained in modern experimental science, and will be equipped to
bridge the boundary between physics and information science. Training will occur
via curriculum enrichments, and through direct participation in the University
based research program. We will also inform the local Madison community about
the importance of physics to information technology, and the new developments in
the area of quantum information science. Outreach to the public will be
facilitated by public visiting days at the Physics department, laboratory tours,
faculty visits to local schools, and mentoring of high school students.

Our technical approach is based on the use of small clouds of atoms with from
10-100 Rubidium atoms for the dual purpose of creating entanglement between
atoms and photons, and as qubits in a small quantum processor. We will use long
range interactions mediated by highly excited Rydberg states of atoms to create
deterministic entanglement between qubits encoded in multi-atom ensembles and
between ensembles and light. These capabilities will form the basis for
efficient quantum repeater architectures needed for long distance distribution
of entanglement and quantum networking.