* 1521153
* STTR Phase I:  Automation and Optimization of Aquaponics for Urban Food Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Sabine O'Hara, Clearton, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 224,955.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be to develop an automated high-intensity food
production system that can be operated in urban neighborhoods to provide fresh
food to urban populations. This innovation, through the development and testing
of the automation technology, will enhance scientific and technical
understanding of how computer science and information technology can be used for
urban food production. Food systems address not only the environmental/physical
dimensions of urban sustainability, but they are also intensely cultural. Food
creates communities. Food systems can, therefore, address both the
social/cultural and the environmental/physical aspects of urban sustainability.
The goals are to make disruptive and innovative contributions to urban food
security, and to improve the state of the food-related illnesses such as
obesity, diabetes, and hypertension in urban neighborhoods.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop an "automated and continuously
optimized" aquaponics system that can be operated in urban neighborhood for
high-intensity food production. This system builds on the symbiotic relationship
of animal farming and growing vegetables. The waste produced by the animal
supplies nutrients for the plants. Yet, such a symbiotic relationship is not
simple. The main research objective is to control the symbiotic nutrition flow
in order to maintain the optimal balance of the delicate ecosystem in a
continuous and maximally automated manner. This project will develop an urban
neighborhood aquaponics automation package that consists of sensor-actuator
technologies and an automated controller based on Big Data and Internet of
Things technologies. This will enable research that will determine if linear
control theory with perturbation theory or nonlinear time-domain state-space
methods can be effective in the automation. This research and development will
redefine the state-of-the-art in the area of high-tech aquaponics using control
theory, Internet of Things, cyber-physical computing, and Big Data technologies
at the juncture of human and nature intersection.