* 1521399
* STTR Phase I:  An intuitive and tactile quantum mechanical molecular modeling tool for instruction of chemistry students
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Todd Martinez, Spectral Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 224,775.00

This STTR Phase I project is focused on development of a hands-on instructional
tool based on interactive molecular dynamics simulations that will engage
organic chemistry students in the study of chemical reactions. There is
currently a need for educational tools that teach chemistry more effectively to
young American students, as well as inspire them to pursue careers in the
physical sciences. Because chemistry is the study of objects (atoms and
molecules) too small to experience directly, an unusually large amount of
abstract thinking is required to learn the subject. This can present a problem
that can be very difficult for students to overcome. The fun, game-like,
educational tool that is the focus of this STTR project will not only offer the
student the ability to induce a chemical reaction by hand but also to see how
the molecule behaves while the reaction is taking place, allowing the student to
gain chemical intuition in a way that is virtually unprecedented. Ultimately,
this software is expected to serve as a powerful tool for chemistry, biology,
and materials science researchers as well, and as a result it should have a
positive impact on many of the important challenges facing the world
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The product of this STTR project will be a tactile
and interactive instructional computer tool along with a set of computer
laboratory exercises that will more effectively teach organic chemistry and
chemical intuition. The key advantages this technology has over existing
chemistry simulation tools are that 1) accurate simulations of very complex
molecular interactions are computed in real-time in response to a student's
input and involvement in the reaction environment, and 2) a 3D haptic or no-
touch input device allows the student to manipulate the evolving chemical system
during the simulation. Graphical processing units (consumer graphics cards
primarily used for video gaming) and redesigned computer algorithms for first
principles quantum chemistry modeling serve as the enabling technologies for the
instructional tool. The main tasks to be performed during the STTR Phase I
project are 1) development of a user interface and 2) development of a set of
organic chemistry laboratory exercises that render the technology suitable for
educational applications. In addition, although the underlying software
technology (including the input device interface) is advanced enough to allow
instruction of nearly all organic chemistry concepts, further development will
continue in order to improve the efficiency and expand the capabilities of the
software.