* 1521666
* EPSCoR Workshop Series: Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Translational Research
* O/D,OIA
* 04/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Michael Khonsari, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 09/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funding to
conduct a workshop series on innovation, entrepreneurship, and translational
research. Two workshops are supported by the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and focus on facilitating EPSCoR jurisdictions,
assessment of current processes and resources that support innovation and
translation, increase their capacity in these areas, and develop circumstance-
specific action plans that will improve innovation-related outcomes in their
respective jurisdictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutions in general grapple
with the intrinsic challenges of technology transfer for university-based
inventions. Many EPSCoR jurisdictions, however, face the additional hurdles of
limited availability of entrepreneurs, lack of a connected business development
eco-system, and difficulty in finding capital to support technology maturation
and start-up growth. The workshops address these issues, increase the tangible
discoveries emerging from funded research programs, and improve the processes
for translating discoveries into commercially viable applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
series, comprised of two workshops, seek to improve, both individually and
collectively, the capacity of EPSCoR jurisdictions to develop and implement
processes for accelerating research-based innovation and the translation of
innovation into products and services that benefit society. The immediate goals
include evaluating the environment within the community and jurisdictions (first
workshop) and then tailoring individual jurisdiction-specific action plans based
on a menu of experiential best practices (second workshop). Jurisdictions will
work on implementing their action plans after the second workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The action plans will have impact by improving processes
for encouraging disclosure of inventions, establishing and strengthening
partnerships with industry, engaging students in entrepreneurial programs,
supporting technology licensing and business development, and collaborating with
regional business development support resources. In addition, a shared clearing-
house (called an Innovation Hub) will be developed for communicating innovation-
based partnering opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Longer term outcomes
include improvements to the processes for translating fundamental research
results into applications. Improvements in quality of life, economic
development, and job creation are some of the resulting significant derived
benefits.