* 1521556
* University of Georgia Research Foundation/R/V Savannah/SSSE
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* James Sanders, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2018
* USD 421,236.00

A request is made to fund Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment for the
Research Vessel Savanna, a 92 foot coastal research vessel, owned and operated
by Skidaway Institute of Oceanography as part of the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since being put into service in the fall of 2001, this
coastal/local class research vessel has proven to be a capable and cost-
effective platform for a range of research and education projects. The primary
working area for the vessel has been the continental shelf, coastal and
estuarine environments of the Southeastern United States. The ship has also
conducted cruises that have crossed the Gulf Stream into the western Sargasso
Sea and as far as Curacao in the SE Caribbean. The R/V Savannah has been
specifically designed with a large science berthing capacity to provide learning
opportunities in ocean and estuarine environments and to demonstrate
oceanographic research methodologies to diverse and often under-served student
populations. These educational experiences continued in 2014, with the vessel
hosting 80 graduate and undergraduate students and 16 high school and middle
school teachers on 8 of its cruises. In 2014, the R/V Savannah completed 165
days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 92 days (56%) of the total
sailing schedule. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2015 request is for replacement of
Trawl Winch on R/V Savannah. The cost is $431,236&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.