* 1521719
* The Role of Maternal Sensory Stimulation on Postnatal Development of Language and Communication Skills in Extremely Preterm Infants
* SBE,BCS
* 11/20/2014,10/31/2019
* Amir Lahav, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 10/31/2019
* USD 0.00

Infants born extremely prematurely undergo extensive hospitalization, during
which they are deprived of the maternal voice stimulation they would otherwise
receive in utero. This population is typically faced with language delays and
other developmental disabilities. Because premature infants are the same
gestational age as late-stage fetuses, the premature newborn presents a unique
opportunity to investigate how different aspects of prenatal exposure to
maternal activity may influence language and cognitive development.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The researchers aim to investigate whether and what types of maternal
sensory stimulation promote generalization of learning and development of
language skills in postnatal development. This project will experimentally
modulate the sensory environment inside the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU)
incubator to introduce different aspects of the fetus's prenatal sensory
experience. Infants will experience daily transmission of maternal voice via
either sounds (auditory), vibrations (tactile), or both during their stay in the
NICU. The effect on subsequent language development will be examined through
longitudinal follow up over two years. Results will inform the impact of
linguistic and sensory environment on early human development. Data obtained
from the proposed study will provide evidence to clarify the extent to which
language development begins before full gestation. The work could also inform
the development of inexpensive, non-intrusive methods for improving healthy
development of preterm infants, who make up 12% of births in the US and are at
risk for atypical language and cognitive outcomes.