* 1521215
* WORKSHOP: ACM Creativity and Cognition Conference Graduate Student Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Brian Bailey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2016
* USD 23,200.00

Creativity is the cornerstone and the fundamental motive of both the aesthetic
and engineering disciplines. It is a critical element of our economic and social
prosperity, as a precursor to scientific discoveries, technological advances,
and new forms of cultural and aesthetic experiences. Held every other year in an
international location since 1993, the ACM Creativity & Cognition (C&C)
conference serves as a gathering place for the diverse communities of
researchers, designers, engineers, and artists who provide an innovative and
cross-disciplinary perspective on creativity and cognition as well as
technological innovation. C&C is the only ACM-sponsored conference in which
human creativity is the central focus, and as such it provides pathways for
substantially different kinds of work including interactive art pieces, user
studies of creativity support tools, and new sensor technologies for creative
practice. It serves as a premier forum for presenting the world's best new
research investigating computing's impact on and ability to promote creativity
in all forms of human experience. The conference particularly values research
that explores new, synergistic roles for computing and people in creative
processes, or that addresses situations where computing, as contextualized in
sociotechnical systems, may sometimes have an undesirable impact. Work presented
at the conference is archived in the ACM Digital Library. More information about
the conference may be found online at http://cc15.cityofglasgowcollege.ac.uk/.

This is funding to support participation by students and faculty based in U.S.
educational institutions in a Graduate Student Symposium (workshop) to be
organized in conjunction with C&C 2015, which will take place June 22-25 in
Glasgow, UK. The GSS will bring together up to 12 promising doctoral students
(not all of whom who be eligible for funding) and 4 distinguished researchers
from academia and industry as mentors, in a day-long event that will be held on
June 26, 2015, immediately following the main C&C conference. During the
morning, each student will briefly present his or her work in a short formal
talk. Mentors will lead a brief discussion of the work, including the research
question, method of addressing the question, possible results and findings,
significance of the work, and pointers to related work and research areas. The
mentors will also offer a critique of each student's written and oral
presentation. These discussions will continue through a working lunch. In the
afternoon, following additional individual presentations and discussions, the
mentors will lead a broad discussion that relates the presentations to one
another and to the other work in the field. They will attempt to highlight
common themes that emerged across the individual student works, and note
differences and similarities in research methods both across individual research
projects as well as across diverse intellectual threads within the creativity
and cognition field as a whole. In the last portion of the day, the mentors will
lead a discussion on pursuing a career in this interdisciplinary field and what
the opportunities are from different disciplinary perspectives (e.g., arts and
design vs. technology, academia vs. industry, etc.). Through this process, the
student participants will gain experience and skills in communicating their own
work and critiquing the work of peers. They will come away with new research
insights and possible directions, with better understanding of prior work and of
the field overall, and with new awareness of potentially useful methods that
draw from different disciplines. And they will have the opportunity to build
professional and social connections that transcend the event, and to gain
awareness of potential career paths in both academia and industry. The student
submissions will appear in the C&C Proceedings, and they will be indexed in the
ACM Digital Library. The students will also be invited to present their work at
the main conference during the Poster Session, which will give their work wider
visibility in the community while also affording an opportunity for them to talk
one-on-one with peers and other senior researchers, in addition to the focused
mentoring of the GSS itself. To promote diversity, no more than two graduate
students will be accepted from any one institution, and if there are two then at
least one of them must be a female.