* 1521728
* RAPID: Optimizing Experimental Approaches to Ebola Membrane Fusion Inhibitor Peptide Design through High-Throughput Biomolecular Simulation Workflows on Blue Waters
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Thomas Cheatham, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 03/31/2017
* USD 199,995.00

This project seeks to greatly reduce the overall experimentation time for
finding promising drugs that fight Ebola. A very early stage of Ebola infection
is viral entry, when the Ebola virus attaches to and enters the host cell. A
promising type of antiviral drug is one that is "entry-inhibiting" or "entry-
blocking". This type of drug inhibits the entry of the Ebola virus into the
cell. In order for this drug to work well, it must be made up of Ebola inhibitor
molecules that bind strongly to the Ebola virus, that is, these inhibitors must
have a strong "binding affinity" to the virus. This project seeks to greatly
speed up the process of finding Ebola inhibitors (that can then be incorporated
into anti-viral drugs) by analyzing promising inhibitors and improving their
binding affinity by simulating and optimizing their behavior on supercomputers.
Inhibitors are found and initially vetted through "virtual" testing and only
promising inhibitors are sent for laboratory testing. The new software for high-
performance computing based simulations, that this project will develop and use,
will run on the Blue Waters Petascale Resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to develop steerable, high-throughput simulation workflows that
facilitate the rapid investigation of modifications to the lead peptides of
potential inhibitors of the Ebola virus to improve their binding affinity to the
virus. The results of each experiment can feed back into further rounds of
optimization to speed the peptide design process. This proposal builds on work
done previously: (a) lessons learned from previous simulations (b) the
availability of a simulation package named AMBER MD, that already has code
optimized for GPUs on Blue Waters that will make simulations run faster, and (c)
prototype code for analysis steps and input staging. Also, the PI plans to use
an existing workflow engine (such as PEGASUS) to build the workflows. Thus,
there is a stated intent to make robust software and reuse software that already
exists, which aligns with the ACI programs strategic goals.