* 1521224
* Effects of Urbanization on Sources and Transport of Dissolved Inorganic Carbon in Watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Sujay Kaushal, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 400,201.00

Human activities have increased dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) in streams and
rivers, which impacts drinking water supplies across large regions of the U.S.
Increased transport of DIC to surface waters complicates drinking water
treatment, encourages algal growth, increases water hardness, and corrodes of
water infrastructure, such as water mains and pipes. DIC also provides buffering
capacity (it can act as an "antacid") in rivers and the coastal ocean.
Agricultural and urban areas have the potential to increase DIC sources and
transport because of agricultural liming, breakdown of concrete structures, and
sewage leaks. However, previous research has not focused on urban areas. This
project will investigate how agricultural and urban land uses impact sources,
amounts, and transport of DIC in streams and how the sources change with storms
and different land uses. It will compare the amount and sources of DIC
transported to streams with forest reference conditions. The research will first
"fingerprint" DIC sources (concrete, soils, wastewater, rocks, etc.) using
state-of-the-art geochemical tracers. Then, it will estimate the ability of
urban streams to retain DIC before it is transported to sensitive receiving
waters, like Chesapeake Bay. This project will be one of the first to provide
simultaneous information on sources and transport of DIC contributing to
increased river alkalinization in the U.S. Results and outcomes will be
important for predicting impacts of increasing land development on drinking
water quality, estimating the effects on acidification of coastal oceans,
informing urban watershed management, and restoring urban streams. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Concentrations of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) have increased in
streams and rivers in the eastern U.S. The transport of DIC from watersheds to
streams contributes to river alkalinization, which impacts on drinking water
hardness, shifts the coastal carbon cycle, and increases bicarbonate
availability for primary production. Some studies suggest that transport of DIC
and carbonate alkalinity are significantly elevated in streams and rivers
draining urbanized watersheds. Most work on DIC fate and transport has focused
on forest and agricultural watersheds; so we know little about changes in
sources and transport of DIC in urbanized watersheds. This research investigates
3 questions: 1) How does land use influence the amounts and hydrologic timing of
DIC exports; 2) How do sources of DIC change with increasing urbanization and
throughout storms; and 3) How does urbanization alter in-stream fate and
transport of watershed DIC export? The research will: a) analyze concentrations
and fluxes of DIC and other weathering products weekly in forest, agricultural,
suburban, and urban watersheds at the Baltimore Long-Term Ecological Research
(LTER) site; and b) estimate cumulative DIC distribution curves and changes in
DIC export timings across the land-use gradient. Then, the research will: a)
geochemically identify potential end members of stream DIC sources in watersheds
of similar lithology (two forested and two suburban) using DIC delta 13C, major
element geochemistry, and DIC speciation; b) evaluate shifts in DIC
concentrations and potential sources during the evolution of storms in these
same watersheds; and c) measure DIC uptake rates and transient storage using
stream injections of 13C-labelled NaHCO3 in selected stream reaches. Expected
outcomes will link watershed urbanization to changes in DIC dynamics as a
function of land use, streamflow, and channelization and will elucidate
mechanisms for increased river alkalinization. This will be one of the first
projects to produce simultaneous information on the sources, transport, and fate
of DIC in urban streams using integrated hydrologic and geochemical approaches.