* 1521470
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of the fate and transport of dust-borne trace metals and solutes during snowmelt
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Diego Fernandez, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 68,531.00

Collaborative Research: Investigation of the fate of dust-borne trace metals and
solutes during snowmelt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind-
blown dust contributes trace metals and soluble salts to mountain snowpack, with
potential negative impacts on water quality during snowmelt. Sediment records
from mountain lakes in the western U.S. suggest that dust deposition has
increased five-fold over the past 150 years due to human disturbance of desert
soils, with more dust expected in the future due to climate change. Little is
known, however, concerning the impacts of dust on the chemistry of mountain
streams. Snowmelt-fed streams are a primary source of drinking water in the
western U.S. The Provo River is a prime example of this, supplying water to over
50% of the residents of Utah. This project investigates the effects of dust on
water quality during snowmelt in the upper Provo River watershed in the Uinta
Mountains. Assessment of dust contributions to mountain snowpack and
demonstration of pathways of trace metal and salt transport during snowmelt have
the potential to extend across the Intermountain West and beyond the U.S. to
other mountainous areas receiving substantial dust input, including the Andes,
Himalayas, and European Alps. This project provides K-16 student outreach
opportunities during inquiry-based field exercises, fosters cross-campus
collaborations for graduate students at Utah's three major research institutions
(University of Utah, Utah State University, and Brigham Young University), and
broadens participation of underrepresented groups by involving women and
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the fate and
transport of dust-derived trace metals and solutes during snowmelt building from
detailed field sampling and comprehensive analyses. Dust contributions to stream
solute budgets during snowmelt are quantified with isotopic tracers (e.g.,
strontium, boron, sulfur, oxygen and hydrogen) and mixing analyses. The role of
organic matter-facilitated trace-metal transport from snowpack to streams is
examined through application of several novel analytical methods. Spatial
heterogeneity in dust deposition is quantified, and the availability of trace
metals in dust is characterized via sequential leaching experiments. The Provo
River watershed is an ideal location for investigating impacts of dust on water
chemistry because it is underlain by relatively simple siliciclastic bedrock
that permits clear observations of exogenous dust and is well instrumented with
atmospheric and aquatic monitoring stations from the Innovation Urban
Transitions and Aridregion Hydro-sustainability (iUTAH) observatory funded by
NSF. The geological setting and extensive instrumentation provide an
unprecedented opportunity to explore the impacts of dust deposition on stream
chemistry during snowmelt.