* 1521933
* Young Physicist Support for UHECR2014 Symposium October 13-15, 2014 in Springdale, Utah.
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* John Matthews, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jean Allen
* 01/31/2016
* USD 7,000.00

The UHECR2014 Symposium is the third in a series of meetings dedicated to the
physics and astrophysics of cosmic rays, with a particular emphasis on the
ultrahigh energy regime. The meeting was held from October 13 to 15, 2014 in
Springdale, Utah and brought together researchers from around the world. This
award supports the participation of graduate students and postdocs in the
UHECR2014 Symposium. The meeting was organized with plenary sessions and working
groups focused on the spectrum, anisotropy, and composition of cosmic rays,
cosmic ray theory, hadronic interaction models, new detector technologies,
planned upgrades to existing experiments, and descriptions of future
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The UHECR2014 Symposium
helps to disseminate results in the field of cosmic ray physics. The study of
cosmic rays is progressing rapidly, and it is important to bring together
leaders in the field, plus young physicists such as graduate students and
postdocs, to see the latest results and take part in discussions about the
field. Proceedings of the symposium are planned for publication. Presentations
and details of the symposium are publicly available on the symposium website.
This award expands and enhances the experiences and education of young
physicists.