* 1521151
* STTR Phase I:  Collaborative Relative Navigation System for Autonomous UAV Following
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Damien Jourdan, Wasatch Autonomy Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in the increased
safety and efficiency of public safety operations in law enforcement, search-
and-rescue, and firefighting throughout the U.S. as the personal UAVs operate
autonomously alongside users regardless of the operating environment. Even small
public safety entities will be able to acquire and operate such systems as
skilled and dedicated operators will not be necessary, dramatically decreasing
the cost of UAV operations. Aerial support will no longer be limited to large
public safety jurisdictions, but will be made available at low-cost nationwide,
with the information provided directly to the individual responder. In the
technology area of robotics and assistive technologies, personal UAVs that can
autonomously follow mobile users and objects is a transformative technology with
applicability that goes far beyond public safety operations. It has direct
applicability to autonomous aerial delivery, videography for amateur and
professional athletes, cinematography, heavy industry (e.g., mining), and
infrastructure inspection. These markets are expected to grow to hundreds of
millions of dollars within the next few years. This STTR project will provide
the reliable GPS-independent relative navigation and obstacle avoidance
capabilities necessary to unleash these applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of an innovative collaborative relative navigation system (CORENav)
enabling small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to autonomously follow and relay
real-time information to ground personnel with multiple sensors as they maneuver
indoors and outdoors, in wide-open or confined spaces, by day or night. The
personal UAVs will carry a variety of payloads (e.g., electro optical/thermal
imaging cameras) and broadcast raw and/or processed information in real time to
the individual they support, providing individualized local aerial support that
will radically improve the safety and efficiency of all response operations.
CORENav addresses the navigation, guidance and control challenges posed by
operating UAVs autonomously close to the ground and relative to mobile users.
This technology enables small UAVs to accurately solve for position,
orientation, velocity, and acceleration relative to their user regardless of the
operating environment. It also fully addresses the obstacle detection and
avoidance challenge, even for small UAVs with limited payload capacity. The UAV
will operate completely autonomously so the user can remain mission-focused,
while receiving critical real-time information through local aerial sensing.