* 1521045
* Research on String Theory and Gauge Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Alfred Shapere, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 269,999.00

This grant funds the research activities of Professor Sumit Das at the
University of Kentucky.

Over the past 150 years we have attained a fairly good understanding of physical
systems which are already in equilibrium, but we have rather limited
understanding of processes out of equilibrium. This project aims at
understanding some aspects of non-equilibrium systems. Remarkably, it turns out
that concepts and techniques developed in String Theory can be used to attack
this fundamental problem. This project will use these new tools to understand
universal features of this process, i.e., features which are common to a wide
class of systems. As such, research in this area advances the national interest
by promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions:
the understanding of universal physical phenomena. The broader impacts resulting
from this project will be to enhance the quality of undergraduate and graduate
physics education, and to support frontier physics research in the Kentucky
region.

At a more technical level, Das will study non-equilibrium phenomena in strongly
coupled quantum field theories using gauge-gravity duality. In addition, gauge-
gravity duality will be used to understand the meaning of yet another non-
equilibrium system: the expanding universe. More specifically, holographic
techniques will be used to understand the nature and possible resolutions of
cosmological singularities.