* 1521314
* STTR Phase I:  Probe for High Field Dynamic Nuclear Polarization (DNP) at Room Temperature
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Jagadishwar Sirigiri, Bridge 12 Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (SSTR) project is the development of a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
probe that will enable research in the field of protein structure determination
for dug development and analytical chemistry. The goal is to improve the signal-
to-noise ratio in measurements taken at room temperature by a factor of 200
using a technique called Dynamic Nuclear Polarization (DNP). This increase in
signal-to-noise ratio will reduce the experiment time by a factor of 40,000, and
will enable the study of sensitive phenomena not possible with current NMR
methods. Current DNP instrumentation and methods require operation at cryogenic
temperatures in the range of -180 degrees C, which requires expensive cryogenic
systems, and limits the NMR characterization of biologically important proteins
that have important dynamics around room temperature (0-20 degrees C). A novel
NMR probe will be developed that will enable researchers to achieve the same
increase in NMR signal strength at room temperature by improving the delivery of
terahertz power to the NMR sample. The NMR probe and methods to achieve the
benefits of DNP at room temperature will reduce the cost of cryogenic
infrastructure necessary for current DNP setups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase I project proposes to develop an NMR probe head that uses a novel rotor-
resonator integrated with an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) cavity to
increase sensitivity by a factor of 200 at room temperature using DNP. The rotor
resonator will increase the EPR/microwave field intensity by a factor of 10
compared to currently available DNP instrumentation. The proposed DNP-NMR probe
will enable DNP at room temperature with the following advantages to currently
employed cryogenic DNP methods: a) Molecular dynamics (motion) can be determined
experimentally; b) molecular structure will not be altered by cryogenic
conditions; and c) the spectral resolution will be improved (sharper NMR lines).