* 1521904
* SCH: INT: Disposable High Sensitivity Point of Care Immunosensors for Multiple Disease and Pathogen Detection
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Jennifer Blain Christen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,832,432.00

This research program proposes to investigate substances sometimes found in
sweat, such as protein, which can detect health and disease (biomarkers). The
sweat is a biofluid that can provide a window to a person's health. At this
time, there is no rapid method to measure the changes in proteins in the sweat
that signal disease. The goal is to measure changes in these proteins in the
sweat before, during, and after physical activity, including measuring levels of
stress hormones and immune markers using a low cost and disposable point-of-care
biosensor. In essence, the aim of this proposal is to develop a cheap and
disposable patch sensor that can be worn on the skin, and eventually become as
widely used as the box of bandages or oral thermometer found in most home
medicine cabinets. One of the key engineering roadblocks to such a device is the
availability of a low-cost manufacturing technology that can be combined with
state-of-the-art biomarker proteomic detection technology to diagnose and
monitor multiple diseases with medical laboratory level sensitivity. This
proposal presents a new approach combining low-cost commercial display
technology (found in your TV, computer monitor, or cell phone) with protein
microarray printing technology to fabricate a low-cost, disposable skin patch
for more effective self-management of patient health care in the home or in
other non-clinical settings. The measurements will be available in real time for
both patients and their caregivers using smart-phone technology. To meet this
research objective, a fabric-like flexible skin patch is proposed that would
provide non-invasive monitoring of multiple biomarkers in human sweat. This new
approach is designed to use existing commercial manufacturing technology that
can be readily adapted to produce hundreds of millions of devices per year at a
cost of only a few dollars each.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program
proposes to utilize multiple proteomic research platforms (mass spectrometry,
protein, and antibody microarrays) to establish a profile of the sweat proteome
that will have a fundamental impact on furthering the biological understanding
of sweat and skin, and transition high-cost fluorescent-based assay platforms
into a low-cost, disposable, highly sensitive fluorescent point-of-care based
assay that is minimally to non-invasive. Highlights of the proposed development
effort include: a detailed proteomic analysis utilizing mass spectrometry as
well as custom protein and antibody microarrays for the discovery of proteins
and antibodies present in sweat; development and optimization of the biosensor's
optical and electronic components for the utilization of low-cost fluorescent
recognition lateral flow assay; development of fluorescent recognition lateral
flow assays utilizing identified serum and sweat biomarkers and the integration
of the assay with our optical biosensor. This research program accelerates the
development of technology that will transform healthcare from reactive and
hospital-centered to preventative, proactive, evidence-based, and person-
centered. This next generation health care solution will provide breakthrough
sensor technology for in-home monitoring. This transformation in healthcare is
especially critical for immune-compromised individuals, such as organ transplant
recipients, cancer patients, post-operative patients, and the elderly.