* 1521441
* Advances in Understanding Pore-Scale Dispersion
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Brian Wood, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 384,073.00

A porous medium is any material consisting of solids and voids (or pores).
Sponges, beach sand, and furnace filters are familiar examples of porous
materials (porous media). Other examples are petroleum reservoirs, aquifers that
supply groundwater, and catalytic converters that reduce car emissions. With the
recent advances in computer speed and power, scientists now have methods to
simulate and understand the way that water and dissolved matter, as well as
small particles, move through porous media. This can be used to help fabricate
porous materials with specific useful qualities and to understand the behavior
of natural porous materials. The way that chemicals spread in porous media as
they flow though the intricate network of the pores is called dispersion.
Dispersion is important because it influences how quickly chemical reactions and
mass transfer happen at the solid interfaces of a porous material. For example,
understanding of dispersion is essential to understanding how blood is
oxygenated in the lungs during breathing. As a second example, understanding
dispersion is important for understanding the spread and eventual cleanup of
contaminants spilled into the subsurface. In this research, 3-dimensional X-ray
images (much like a medical CAT scan) of real porous materials will be
collected, and state-of-the-art computational methods will simulate the
dispersion process within the porous media. This information will be useful in
developing new theories for describing dispersion in porous materials, and this
will have potential utility in engineering applications (such as filtration) and
in fundamental science (such as understanding how our lungs work!)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although dispersion in porous media has been studies for
over 100 years, the interaction of diffusion with the complex variations in the
flow field within a porous medium are still not understood at the level of basic
continuum mechanics. It has only recently become possible to conduct numerical
simulations of flow within the geometry of a complex, three-dimensional porous
medium of sufficient size and resolution to generate the kind of data needed to
connect the microscale physical processes within a porous medium with the
observable macroscopic behavior of the material as a whole. This research will
combine theory, numerical computation, and experimental data to examine the
process of dispersion in monodisperse and polydisperse porous media at an
unprecedented level of detail. Because dispersion in porous media is relevant to
a host of subsurface processes relevant to practicing hydrologists (e.g.,
bioremediation, contaminant spreading, mass transfer between rivers and the
hyporheic zone), it is important to understand the dispersion process so that we
can determine how it affects transport in the subsurface. This research also has
applications to engineered systems outside of hydrology (such as chromatography
and catalysis). The goal is to bring new understanding about the dispersion
process by: 1) experimentally measuring (via X-ray tomography) beds of random
porous media at unprecedented resolution; 2) conducting direct numerical
simulations of the flow and dispersion process in these porous media (up through
the steady inertial flow range) using state-of-the art numerical methods; and 3)
developing modified descriptive theory (via the method of volume averaging) to
predict the macroscopic behavior of the dispersion process from representative
structure of porous materials.