* 1521590
* Numerical Analysis of Partial Differential Equation Constrained Optimization Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Harbir Antil, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 139,985.00

Every process in nature tries to optimize certain quantities under the available
resources. The limited available resources act as constraints and, for this
reason, constrained optimization problems are ubiquitous in science and
engineering. Such optimization problems are inherently nonlinear due to the
presence of constraints. This makes the development and analysis of algorithms
and computational techniques to simulate the relevant phenomena extremely
challenging and of practical relevance. A systematic approach is needed to
allocate resources, without violating constraints, and remain effective in
minimizing cost. This project will lead to development of advanced, efficient
algorithms to design micro- and nano-scale lab-on-chip devices, as well as novel
materials with desired configuration and user specified properties. As an
outcome of shape optimization tools, robust algorithms for image processing and
structural design will be developed. A significant amount of effort will be
devoted to develop new models for cardiac electrical response and diffusion of
water molecules in brain tissue.

Many of the partial differential equations (PDEs) that describe the constraints
are geometric, nonlinear, and multiscale, with an unknown domain, i.e. free
boundary problems (FBPs). This makes the development and analysis of numerical
techniques for the solution of these problems challenging. This project focuses
on constrained optimization problems with PDE constraints -- the so-called PDE
constrained optimization problem. In fact, it aims to develop and study
numerical techniques for a new collection of such problems for which classical
ideas and methods do not work. They are: optimization with Stokes FBP (including
surface tension) as constraint, problems where the Hessian appears in the cost
functional, multilevel techniques for shape optimization and image segmentation
problems, optimization with nonlocal (fractional) operators, and degenerate
parabolic equations as constraints. The applications range from micro- to nano-
scales, where surface effects dominate bulk effects. This will have impact in
designing next generation lab-on-chip devices. By manipulating curvature, one
can drive particles towards a desired assembly or a specific configuration. This
will lead to highly sophisticated materials with user specified properties. The
multilevel techniques developed to solve shape optimization problems will
provide a general tool to study inverse problems (acoustic scattering, for
example), image processing, structural design, and fluid dynamics (for example,
in aircraft design).