* 1521950
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Transitions To A Nomadic Lifestyle
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Maria Zedeno, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 12,934.00

PhD Candidate Brandi Bethke, of the University of Arizona, will examine the
extent to which the adoption of the horse altered landscape uses, bison hunting
practices, and worldviews of the Blackfoot during the protohistoric and historic
periods in the northwestern Plains of the U.S. and Canada. Inspired by the
richness of hunter-gatherer archaeology in the northern Plains, theoretical and
methodological advances in geospatial mapping, and Blackfoot traditional
knowledge, this work provides new insights into the region's equestrian culture
and society. Employing a framework that integrates archaeology, Geographic
Information Systems (GIS), social history, and ethnography, Bethke's research
will provide a contemporary model and nuanced narrative of the influence of the
horse on Blackfoot lifeways. Specifically this research will answer the
question: to what extent (if any) did the Blackfoot become true nomadic
pastoralists? Overall Bethke's work provides an opportunity to evaluate and
update the history of the horse and its incorporation into social, economic, and
political systems of nomadic hunters on the northern Plains, a story that is
integral to the United States' shared heritage and history of western expansion.
More broadly, this work will promote an archaeological practice that is not only
scientifically sound but also responsive to the traditional knowledge and
practices of Blackfoot tribal members. Present-day Blackfoot peoples offer
unique perspectives and hold significant knowledge regarding cultural change
associated with the introduction of the horse among their ancestors. This
collaboration and constructive dialogue between archaeologists and Blackfeet
non-archaeologists will benefit the discipline of archaeology in that it will
provide new modes of analysis for interpreting relationships between humans and
their domesticated animals both in the past and present.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bethke's work will refine and expand models developed in
earlier works in order to evaluate how the transition from a bison-centered to a
horse-centered lifestyle altered land use patterns as the Blackfoot began to
follow habits of horses instead of bison for their own annual cycles of
subsistence activities, integrative ceremonies, labor organization, economy, and
trade. Additionally, while the socio-economic consequences of the horse have
been studied from a historical perspective, the archaeology of this transition
remains ambiguous. This study will integrate locational information of multiple
archaeological site types from Montana, Alberta, and Saskatchewan with historic
and ethnographic data, in order to produce a comprehensive GIS database that
will then be used to analyze shifts in land use patterns over the whole of
Blackfoot territory that is not limited by modern geopolitical borders. In this
way Bethke's research presents a new, archaeological dimension to the dynamics
of the Blackfoot equestrian transition by incorporating material culture with
traditional knowledge, historic accounts, and scientific data into a multi-
scalar, transnational interpretation within the framework of world pastoralist
studies. Pastoralism as a mode of production has never before been formally
considered as a way of life experienced by Native North Americas. This project
will therefore contribute new theoretical and methodological approaches as well
as substantive data to our understanding of hunting and pastoralism among people
of the North American Plains.