* 1521615
* Quantifying the biogeochemical consequences of viruses in marine food webs
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Alexis Pasulka, Pasulka                 Alexis         L
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Over the past decade, marine viruses (bacteriophage and eukaryotic viruses) have
become increasingly recognized as juggernauts in ocean food webs, influencing
microbial community structure, shaping the trajectory of carbon and nutrient
flows, and serving as agents of gene transfer. While the collective impact of
viral activity in the ocean has become more apparent over the last decade, our
current understanding of the biogeochemical impact of marine viruses is limited
by our ability to measure exchanges of energy between viruses and their
environment. This research aims to develop techniques to examine virus-host
interactions at the resolution of individual viral particles. These single-cell
resolution approaches will provide the unprecedented ability to fill critical
gaps in our understanding of the biogeochemical impact of viruses in ocean
ecosystems. In addition, research results will be shared broadly and used to
increase diversity in the ocean sciences. Through the implementation of
interactive microbial-focused lesson plans into both a formal (high-school
biology classroom) and informal (aquarium/science center) setting, the
investigator aims to increase the number of students from under-represented
groups that successfully transition from high school to college with an interest
in science.

By integrating marine viruses into food web studies, we can better understand
how interactions with their microbial hosts influence ecosystem structure,
biogeochemical cycling, and potential responses of ecosystems to future climate
changes. The application of fluorescence-based activity assays and single-cell
stable isotope analysis to marine viruses will open new doors to studying these
microscopic entities in our oceans. More specifically, the use of a
fluorescence-based click chemistry approach to study marine viruses would
provide a relatively inexpensive and fast way of determining the fraction of
free virioplankton that are actively involved in cell lysis over a defined set
of conditions and time period. Furthermore, the development of nanoscale
secondary ion mass spectrometry (nanoSIMS) techniques for studying marine
viruses will allow us to track C and N exchange between viruses and host
microorganisms and ultimately enable the direct quantification of the proportion
of active virioplankton involved in the recycling of new primary production vs.
those targeting marine heterotrophs. Technological and methodological
advancements are key to the success of oceanographic research as they enhance
our understanding of organisms and processes in ocean ecosystems. By developing
new tools to study marine viruses, we can continue to make progress in our
ability to link small-scale processes (e.g., single-cell level microbial
interactions) with large-scale biogeochemical cycles and climate.