* 1521620
* OCE-PRF Track 1: Biological Mercury Hotspots: The Role of Phytoplankton Blooms in Nearshore Marine Mercury Bioaccumulation
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* NONE NONE, Ganguli                 Priya          M
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 10/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Phytoplankton are the entry point for mercury in marine food webs, and
subsequent mercury accumulation in fish is the primary route of human exposure.
Yet despite the fact that phytoplankton form this critical link, their role in
marine mercury dynamics is not clear, especially with respect to seasonal and
geographic variability. This study is designed to evaluate trends in mercury
cycling in highly productive coastal marine environments, with a focus on the
seasonal effects of phytoplankton blooms in a range of coastal lagoon systems.
Lagoons provide an accessible natural laboratory and are potential hotspots for
mercury accumulation in animals. Because the processes at play in coastal
lagoons are prevalent in nearshore marine habitats (e.g., the occurrence of
algal blooms, the dynamics of freshwater-seawater interaction), results from
this study will be applicable to coastal marine systems in general and will
close major gaps in our understanding of nearshore mercury-food web dynamics.
This topic is relevant to environmental regulators who are tasked with selecting
viable remediation alternatives and evaluating strategies for contaminant
reduction. Furthermore, because this project is lab and field intensive, it will
provide hands on training for 20-30 undergraduate volunteers, many of whom will
be recruited from underrepresented groups.

Coastlines support a range of productive marine ecosystems that sustain complex
food webs. Such environments are particularly susceptible to biologically
persistent contaminants, such as mercury, that accumulate exponentially along
trophic levels. Phytoplankton represent the first and largest step in this
process by concentrating mercury in their cells up to 100,000x above ambient
levels. Yet little is known about phytoplankton mercury uptake mechanisms or how
phytoplankton growth rate and/or biomass affects uptake rates in diverse
ecosystems. To evaluate how effectively mercury enters the food web during algal
blooms, and to assess the long-term effects of blooms on seasonal mercury
cycling in nearshore systems, three coastal lagoon systems will be studied.
Lagoons provide a semi-enclosed water body with a captive food web, and are
therefore ideal locations to sample phytoplankton over the entire duration of a
bloom cycle. To constrain the drivers of mercury accumulation, field sampling
will be augmented with lab-based experiments to (1) quantify how rapidly
different species of phytoplankton assimilate mercury, (2) assess the mechanism
by which phytoplankton take up mercury (internal assimilation vs. external
sorbtion) and (3) evaluate whether groundwater-surface water interaction
enhances mercury bioavailability at the coastal margin. This investigation will
identify fundamental biogeochemical processes that lead to the toxicity,
accumulation, and transport of mercury in coastal marine systems and enable a
more accurate account of coastal mercury sources and sinks. These issues are of
interest to both research and environmental resource organizations.