* 1521296
* STTR Phase I:  Development of Biochip and Cartridge Components of a Rapid, Point-Of-Care, Diagnostic Technology Platform with the Diagnosis of Liver Cancer as the First Application
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,10/31/2015
* Johann deSa, Advanced Biosensors Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2015
* USD 11,984.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project lies in the area of personalized and
preventative medicine. The proposed work is aimed at brining current laboratory-
based blood/urine/saliva-tests, to the point-of-care, such as
primary/urgent/emergency care facilities, community centers, and for some
diseases, retirement homes, and self-testing. Current standard time-to-results,
ranging from days or weeks, will be reduced to a few minutes, allowing for
disease screenings during routine physician visits resulting in early-diagnosis
and improved treatment monitoring. It will promote preventative care, and
therefore lead to improved treatment outcomes, patient satisfaction, and
eventually reduced healthcare costs. This work will result in the development of
a portable, low-powered, hand-held device that can be operated in-the-field, in
low-resource settings, here in the US and internationally, thus supporting
better health management in these under-served communities. This unique
technology has the potential to further improve the current standard of care by
reliably and reproducibly detecting multiple diseases from the same few drops of
blood in a few minutes. Although a single disease, liver cancer, is the initial
target, future generations will target diseases ranging from cancers to viral
and bacterial infections and can be expanded to environmental and veterinarian
applications.

The proposed project aims to develop a proprietary multimodal approach
(essentially lab-on-chip) that will translate the entire laboratory based
diagnostic testing procedure to a rapid and disposable point of care test. The
challenge lies in low sample volume availability (few drops), complex sample
type (unprocessed whole-blood), short time-to-results (15 minutes) and need for
high accuracy and reliability. To address these stringent requirements, Advanced
Biosensors is developing a platform technology based on a unique combination of
label-free, very high frequency piezoelectric biochips, magnetic nanoparticles,
and microfluidics. During this Phase I, key technology component designs and
specifications that are required for the point-of-care detection of 1-1500ng/mL
Alpha Fetoprotein with performance (sensitivity, linearity, and dynamic range)
comparable to the current gold standard centralized laboratory method, i.e.
ELISA, will be developed. At the end of this Phase I project, the critical
designs of individual cartridge components will be fabricated and tested. These
components will serve as critical inputs to the integrated prototyping to be
performed in phase II that will result in a portable point of care diagnostic
device.