* 1521928
* From the Field to the Folder: Workshop on Herbarium Specimen Curation and Best Practices
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2018
* Wendy Zomlefer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2018
* USD 16,000.00

The vision of CSBR is preservation of biological collections in the U.S. that
will lead to new discoveries through research and better understanding and
appreciation of biodiversity through improved education and outreach, resulting
in improved environmental and economic policies. This workshop seeks to engage
students, women and individual from groups under-represented in STEM. The
activities proposed will broaden participation by targeting curators and
managers at MSIs in Georgia and adjacent states.

This award will support participant costs and supplies for a workshop for
collections managers and curators with the goal consolidating efforts of the
Georgia Herbarium Alliance Consortium. The workshop would provide participants
with hands-on training in best practices in workflows that are critical to
collections security, preservation and digitization. In addition to targeting
herbaria within Georgia, the workshop seeks to enhance practices in neighboring
states and use expertise from iDigBio personnel in training activities. These
activities strengthen the infrastructure for biodiversity research, goals of the
Collections in Support of Biological Research (CSBR) and the Advancing
Digitization of Biodiversity Collections (ADBC) programs. The CSBR program
supports collection security and preservation while the ADBC program increase
visibility and access to data and images for millions of biological specimens
through digitization. These data are made available to the research community,
government agencies, students, educators, and the general public. Improving the
ability of natural history collections managers and curators in Georgia and
surrounding states will strengthen this resource and include the best practices
learned as part of the normal workflow in their facilities.