* 1521294
* STTR Phase I:  A novel wound dressing for infection control and tissue regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Denis Kole, Histogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to overcome limitations that prevent
effective treatment of major wound infections. The U.S. spends over $50 billion
per year on wound care; thus there is a large potential market for this product.
Current wound care products have a high risk of rejection, scarring, and
antibiotic resistance. This will be a novel wound care product to reduce the
costs to treat infected wounds and limit the number of operations required to
restore tissue function. The product consists of a patented human ECM, loaded
with a novel anti-infective protein. The main innovation of the proposed product
compared to current treatments is that it is designed to be toxic to infective
bacteria and other pathogens, without harming human tissue. Furthermore, the
human cell-produced material has regenerative and anti-inflammatory activity,
may enhance wound healing and improve treatment outcomes. In addition to
creating a transformative product in a global market, achievement and assessment
of AMP extracellular matrix tethering will lead to a broader understanding of
AMP activity and unlock their commercial utility. The product can be used as a
temporary wound dressing, a tissue restoring implant, or an implant
coating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will utilize a patented
recombinant protein with an antimicrobial peptide (cathelicidin-LL37) and a
collagen binding domain, combined with a human extracellular matrix (ECM)
material. The patented protein is designed to bind collagen in the ECM, and
tether the antimicrobial peptide to the material. The research objectives are to
improve yield, scalability and purification of antimicrobial protein production,
validate the antimicrobial and collagen binding activities of the protein in
vitro, measure antimicrobial peptide binding within the ECM material in vitro,
and, importantly, to test the efficacy of the antimicrobial peptide-ECM product
in vivo. Two in vivo models are proposed; 1) a chick chorioallantoic membrane
contaminated with bacteria will be used to test antimicrobial activity, and 2)
the material will be implanted in mice to assess its pro-regenerative and anti-
inflammatory activity. We anticipate that the antimicrobial peptide will bind to
the ECM material, and materials with antimicrobial peptide will exhibit
decreased bacterial contamination in vitro and in vivo. The Phase I project team
will develop and validate systems for larger scale manufacturing and quality
testing of the product in preparation for large animal and human clinical
trials.