* 1521118
* CAREER: Dynamics and Damage of Void Collapse in Biological Materials Under Stress Wave Loading
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Joanna Austin, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 06/30/2015
* USD 55,885.00

Title: CAREER: Dynamics and Damage of Void Collapse in Biological Materials
Under Stress Wave Loading&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Joanna
Austin&lt;br/&gt;Institution: U of Ill Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
CBET-0954769&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collapsing voids
cause extensive damage in diverse applications from biomedicine to underwater
propulsion to explosives. While there is extensive research into shock induced
void collapse, if there are mechanisms for wave attenuation or if the impact
velocity is relatively low, stress wave loading will instead occur. The
objective of this research is to quantify the effect of loading wave profile on
the hydrodynamic interaction and damage mechanisms of multiple void collapse.
Under distributed loading, the wave profile and void and inter-void length
scales can be comparable, potentially resulting in a strongly coupled
interaction and precluding the direct application of shock wave collapse models,
for example to predict cell and tissue injury in biomedical applications. Tissue
and cell destruction by pulsed laser induced waves can have enormous biomedical
treatment benefits for example in retards to cancerous tumor growth, however,
severe collateral damage of surrounding tissue can also result. One mechanism
for trauma is the dynamic response of voids subjected to the pressure pulse,
which is attenuated from an initial shock with an increase in rise time by
interaction with acoustic heterogeneities in the body. Predictive models for
tissue damage under these loading conditions are critical to the use of these
powerful techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic experiments are designed to highlight the
interaction and damage mechanisms of voids collapsing after passage of a stress
wave. In biomedical applications, the ramped wave profile (or rise time) is
found to correlate better with tissue damage than the peak pressure. To the PI's
knowledge, the collapse of voids under these conditions has not been previously
studied. Experimental time resolved visualizations of void collapse, the first
velocity field measurements in the surrounding material, and internal and
external temperature measurements will be carried out in a model experimental
setup which allows accurate placement of 2D and 3D void arrays in a tissue
surrogate polymer material. Initial work by the PI has shown the internal volume
history is nonlinear, in agreement with simulations but in contrast to existing
linear experimental data fits. The role of rise time will be examined as
additional parameter to the overall pressure ratio across the wave. In the case
of multiple voids, velocity measurements show the stress wave diffracts in
response to the upstream void, affecting the subsequent loading condition. Both
collapse-inhibiting (shielding) and collapse triggering effects are observed and
will be quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts The capability for
accurate prediction of tissue and cellular damage has a profound impact on
treatment options across a broad range of biomedical applications including
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, laser induced plasma surgery, and
ultrasound. The CAREER research and educational plans are interwoven through the
incorporation of research results in hands on activities that reach three age
groups: local community children, middle school students, and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this integrated research and education
plan, undergraduate students will be exposed to interdisciplinary study and will
showcase their research results to demonstrate opportunities to middle school
students, particularly through the Girls Adventures in Mathematics, Engineering,
and Science (GAMES)and Girls Do Science programs. These programs target girls at
middle school age level, when a dramatic decrease in self esteem in academic
settings has been widely reported. The Aerospace Engineering GAMES program is
currently being developed by the PI in coordination with the College of
Engineering at Illinois. The overarching goal is retention of academically
talented middle school girls in math and science by demonstrating the social
validity, breadth of opportunity, and the community benefits of engineering, and
by providing the opportunity for learning through team based projects, exposure
to the University, and meetings with role models and mentors. The PI will also
continue her successful record of recruiting and mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students in engineering, as well as on going participation in outreach
activities such as Girls Do Science.