* 1521584
* Collaborative Research: Expeditions in Computing: The Science of Deep Specification
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2020
* Adam Chlipala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 11/30/2020
* USD 1,148,325.00

In our interconnected world, software bugs and security vulnerabilities pose
enormous costs and risks. The Deep Specification ("DeepSpec", deepspec.org)
project addresses this problem by showing how to build software that does what
it is supposed to do, no less and (just as important) no more: No unintended
backdoors that allow hackers in, no bugs that crash your app, your computer, or
your car. "What the software is supposed to do" is called its specification. The
DeepSpec project will develop new science, technology, and tools--for specifying
what programs should do, for building programs that conform to those
specifications, and for verifying that programs do behave exactly as intended.
The key enabling technology for this effort is modern interactive proof
assistants, which support rigorous mathematical proofs about complex software
artifacts. Project activities will focus on core software-systems infrastructure
such as operating systems, programming-language compilers, and computer chips,
with applications such as elections and voting systems, cars, and
smartphones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better-specified and better-behaved
software will benefit us all. Many high-profile security breaches and low-
profile intrusions use software bugs as their entry points. Building on decades
of previous work, DeepSpec will advance methods for specifying and verifying
software so they can be used by the software industry. The project will include
workshops and summer schools to bring in industrial collaborators for technology
transfer. But the broader use of specifications in engineering also requires
software engineers trained in specification and verification--so DeepSpec has a
major component in education: the development of introductory and intermediate
curriculum in how to think logically about specifications, how to use
specifications in building systems-software components, or how to connect to
such components. The education component includes textbook and on-line course
material to be developed at Princeton, Penn, MIT, and Yale, and to be available
for use by students and instructors worldwide. There will also be a summer
school to train the teachers who can bring this science to colleges
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstraction and modularity underlie
all successful hardware and software systems: We build complex artifacts by
decomposing them into parts that can be understood separately. Modular
decomposition depends crucially on the artful choice of interfaces between
pieces. As these interfaces become more expressive, we think of them as
specifications of components or layers. Rich specifications based on formal
logic are little used in industry today, but a practical platform for working
with them will significantly reduce the costs of system implementation and
evolution by identifying vulnerabilities, helping programmers understand the
behavior of new components, facilitating rigorous change-impact analysis, and
supporting maintainable machine-checked verifications that components are
correct and fit together correctly. This Expedition focuses on a particularly
rich class of specifications, "deep specifications." These impose strong
functional correctness requirements on individual components such that they
connect together with rigorous composition theorems. The Expedition's goal is to
focus the efforts of the programming languages and formal methods communities on
developing and using deep specifications in the large. Working in a formal proof
management system, the project will concentrate particularly on connecting
infrastructure components together at specification interfaces: compilers,
operating systems, program analysis tools, and processor architectures.