* 1521560
* Institute for Theoretical, Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2023
* Hossein Sadeghpour, Harvard University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 02/28/2023
* USD 4,161,218.00

Atomic, molecular and optical (AMO) physics is a fundamental science that has
contributed to some of the most significant scientific and technical advances of
the last century, including the invention and understanding of the laser, atomic
clocks, and the creation of new types of matter. Applications connected to the
core of AMO physics are found in abundance in navigation (GPS and atomic
clocks), medicine (lasers, MRI, imaging), and global internet communication
(optical fibers). AMO Physics is also an enabling discipline connecting with
several areas of science in condensed matter physics, chemistry, astrophysics,
plasma and nuclear physics, and biology. With a new quantum revolution underway,
spurred by remarkable advances in exquisite precision and control of
interactions between atomic species and manipulation and study of the coherent
properties of light and matter, a center of excellence in AMO theory will serve
as the integrator of activities in helping lead this revolution in quantum
technologies. This newly-established theoretical center (ITAMP) will serve a
broad community of physicists in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITAMP
at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (CfA) in Cambridge, MA will
serve as the meeting place for novel and innovative ideas, and in which highly
motivated theoretical physicists interact in close proximity to
experimentalists, visiting fellows and faculty working on broadly defined topics
in AMO physics, and flourish in the larger AMO physics ecosystem in Cambridge.
ITAMP will strive to be an incubator facility for theoretical AMO physics by
providing resources and access to the rich AMO-related ecosystem of excellence
in Cambridge, such as the NSF PFC- Center for Ultracold Atoms at Harvard and
MIT- to create a collaborative environment for the visiting fellows and for the
training and mentoring of junior fellows, to broadly advocate for the field, and
to lead in forefront research in AMO physics and outreach efforts to the
community. ITAMP will hold and host targeted topical group meetings in which
large groups of practitioners will gather in critical mass to mount coordinated
attacks on topical challenges in AMO physics and find novel solutions to these
problems. Postdoctoral fellows and students will benefit from proximity to these
recognized figures in theoretical and experimental AMO science. Visiting
fellows, housed in a contiguous office environment, will interact with the
postdoctoral and scientific fellows in ways not otherwise possible. Winter
Graduate Schools will be scheduled to train students keen in learning
fundamental and advanced topics in AMO physics.