* 1521179
* STTR Phase I:  Development of Modular Selectivity High-Pressure Liquid Chromatography Bonded Phases
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Philip Smith, Peak Diagnostics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is aimed at the
development of improved instrumentation for analytical chemistry, via the
production of novel and improved phases for high-pressure and ultra-high-
pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC/UHPLC). This effort will develop a
synthetic route to diverse surface chemistries built on an underlying phase
based on known polymer chemistry which is stable and easy to further
functionalize. The resultant chemistries will provide a new series of HPLC
products, in the form of columns and solid phase extraction (SPE) devices,
exhibiting separation selectivities which are significantly different from
commercially available products. These new phases will also feature high
selectivity for hydrophilic analytes, and chiral and geometric isomer
selectivity. This technology will provide greater power to achieve difficult
separations with the added possibility of customizable phases. The envisioned
new phases are expected to have immediate applicability in the areas of
metabolomics and pharmaceutical applications. The proposed research will aid
other market sectors utilizing HPLC/UHPLC separations including environmental,
clinical and forensic analysis. The HPLC consumables industry is estimated to
reach $3.7 billion in 2015.

The intellectual merit of this project involves the use of proven polymer
technology applied to an alternate field. The polymer technology bonded to a
silica surface offers a template upon which a large variety of organic moieties
may be "snapped" into the polymer-type network to yield the final products.
Applying this technology to chromatographic phases presents a tremendous
opportunity to enhance the field by providing truly new and unique HPLC phases
including reversed phase, hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC),
chiral and macromolecule phases. Application areas are many and can be easily
scalable from analytical to preparative work if desired. The simplicity of the
chemistry coupled with the low cost of raw materials will provide a diverse
product set at relatively low price. In this Phase I work, three prototype phase
types (alkyl, aryl, and chiral) will be developed and refined. Uniqueness of
selectivity will be demonstrated using diverse sets of model pharmaceutical
analytes. Metabolomics applications will also be evaluated. This work will
demonstrate phase robustness and column performance to be equivalent to or
better than similar commercially available HPLC products. The anticipation is
that quality HPLC column technology will result offering robust reproducible
products with dramatically altered selectivity.