* 1521238
* Including tree water storage dynamics in modeling of stomatal conductance
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Gil Bohrer, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 496,537.00

Water stored in trees has an important role in regulating how much water the
trees lose through their leaves, a process called transpiration. As plants
transpire, water is lost from branches and stems more quickly than it can be
replenished by water uptake from the soil by the roots. In order to prevent
excessive drying, plants respond to this "hydraulic stress" by reducing
transpiration rates. However, current land-surface models do not represent these
hydraulic processes and the level of water storage within trees, but predict the
transpiration rates based directly on soil moisture. This can produce typical
daily patterns of error in simulations of transpiration. This research proposes
a model to represent these missing within-tree water dynamics. The FETCH2 model
resolves water flow through the tree stem to simulate realistically reductions
in transpiration due to hydraulic stresses. Data from a large scale ecological
disturbance experiment will be used to validate this approach. FETCH2 will be
developed so that it can be coupled with other ecosystem and land-surface
models. We will test the effectivity of FETCH2 by comparing the results of
several ecosystem models with and without FETCH2 simulations with observations
of tree water status and transpiration made in the disturbance experiment site
and in a nearby undisturbed control site. The research team has partnered with
the Ohio Water Resources Center (OWRC) to develop a hands-on activity package to
illustrate porous-media flow based on the curricular activities template drafted
by Project 'WET' (Water Education for Teachers), which will use games and
experiments to illustrate the scientific principles at the primary school level.

Above-ground water storage in trees plays a key role in regulating transpiration
in forest canopies. Plants transpire water from the stem storage. As
transpiration rates are higher than the maximal recharge rate from the soil
through the roots, stem, and branches, the above-ground storage becomes depleted
and stomata close to restrict transpiration in response to the negative xylem
water potential. These hydraulic limitations control transpiration in forest
ecosystems under both wet and dry conditions. Current land-surface models do not
represent the above-ground storage in trees. These models impose water resource
limitations on transpiration by directly linking stomatal conductance to soil
moisture. As the intra-daily dynamics of soil moisture are very different than
the dynamics of water storage in the tree xylem, the current approach leads to
deviations from the observed dynamics of transpiration. As a result, land
surface models produce characteristic intra-daily patterns of errors in
simulations of latent heat flux. This research will develop a framework to
resolve such tree hydrodynamics that could be incorporated into hydrologic, land
surface, and Earth System Models to replace the current empirical link between
stomatal conductance and soil moisture. The FETCH2 model resolves the water flow
and water potential in the tree stem and realistically links stomatal
conductance to the water potential in the xylem, while water availability in the
soil provides a bottom boundary condition for the hydrodynamic system. Data from
a large scale ecological disturbance experiment at a forest in Michigan will be
used to validate this approach. FETCH2 simulations will be compared to
observations of sap flux and stem water storage in the forest plots and to land-
surface model simulation results without the hydrodynamic module. Improvements
to the simulation of stomatal conductance and transpiration in atmospheric,
hydrologic, and Earth system models will propagate to connected variables such
as soil moisture, the surface energy budget, and gross primary productivity. By
incorporating the effects of forest canopy structure, tree water storage, and
hydraulic strategy on stomatal conductance, this study may impact many types and
classes of climate, hydrologic, and meteorological models.