* 1521564
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation): Cryptic Sulfonate Cycling between Marine Phytoplankton and Heterotrophic Bacterioplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* NONE NONE, Durham                  Bryndan        P
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 174,000.00

Information in the form of chemicals and energy flows constantly through complex
networks of marine microbes. In the surface ocean, sunlight and atmospheric
carbon dioxide are captured by autotrophic unicellular phytoplankton and
transformed into a vast pool of organic matter that microbes use as metabolic
currencies and signaling molecules to form the basis for different trading
alliances. Several little-known sulfonate compounds have recently been
identified as key currencies underlying marine bacterial-phytoplankton
mutualisms and appear to be widespread in coastal communities. In this project,
the fellow will investigate the prevalence and role of sulfonates in marine
microbial interactions and their resulting impact on the Earth's
biogeochemistry. With sponsor Dr. E. Virginia Armbrust at the University of
Washington, the fellow will advance professionally through interdisciplinary
training in microbial ecology and marine biogeochemistry. Broadening
participation activities include mentorship of an undergraduate and development
of an outreach program for a local minority-serving high school where students
will conduct classroom laboratory exercises using microbiological and
bioinformatics concepts. Sulfonates are produced and degraded by several
important phytoplankton and heterotrophic bacterial taxa, respectively. Yet,
these compounds represent a poorly understood component of the marine organic
matter pool. To the extent that sulfonates account for an unquantified flux of
carbon and sulfur that supports mutualisms between bacteria and phytoplankton,
sulfonates represent cryptic missing links in both carbon and sulfur
transformations in the ocean. In this study, the fellow will use laboratory-
based approaches to examine physiological and ecological controls on sulfonate
production in model phytoplankton species and field-based approaches to examine
taxonomically driven dynamics of sulfonate pools in the coastal waters of Puget
Sound and surrounding North Pacific. Specifically, the fellow will perform
metabolic profiling of model sulfonate-producing phytoplankton taxa (Aim I) and
measure spatiotemporal gradients and turnover rates of sulfonates in the ocean
environment using targeted in situ metabolite surveys (II) and stable isotope
incubations (III), respectively, together with transcriptomics-based
identification of marine microbes that control the fate of sulfonate-derived
carbon (IV). The planned experiments will provide the first intensive
characterization of sulfonates in the environment in terms of their contribution
to the marine organic matter pool, their taxonomically driven spatiotemporal
dynamics, and their roles in ocean ecosystem interdependencies.