* 1521607
* CAREER:  Solitary Waves and Wavetrains in Dispersive Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/31/2014,05/31/2019
* Mark Hoefer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2019
* USD 323,438.00

This interdisciplinary project examines solitary wave and wavetrain solutions of
certain nonlinear, dispersive partial differential equations utilizing a
combination of analytical, numerical, and experimental approaches. The aim is to
provide an accurate, practical, detailed description of these coherent wave
structures that is useful for applications in nanomagnetism and the fluid
dynamics of dissipationless, dispersive media. Motivated by recent experiments,
time-periodic, localized solutions of a modified Landau-Lifshitz equation that
incorporates a spin transfer torque forcing term to compensate damping will be
computed and studied analytically using asymptotic methods. These magnetic
droplet solitons and their generalizations have potential for technological
applications. Another research front will be developed involving modulated
nonlinear wavetrains or dispersive shock waves (DSWs). The generation of DSWs
represents a universal mechanism to resolve hydrodynamic singularities in
dispersive media such as water waves, plasma, optics, interfacial fluids, Bose-
Einstein condensates, and two-phase, viscously deformable fluids. Theoretical
studies will focus upon central questions of modern DSW theory including loss of
genuine nonlinearity/strict hyperbolicity in the modulation equations, multi-
dimensional DSWs, and stability. In collaboration with undergraduate and
graduate students, the principal investigator will undertake experiments
involving a viscous fluid conduit system in order to make quantitative
measurements of DSW properties for comparison with theory.

When wave properties intrinsically depend upon the wave amplitude, novel
physical behavior can arise. With a view toward applications, this project
encompasses two classes of these nonlinear waves: solitary waves in
nanomagnetism and shock waves in dispersive media. Spintronics encompasses the
effort to develop information transport, processing, and storage using the
electron's spin in addition to its charge, for example, to continue Moore's Law
(the doubling of the number of transistors per unit area every eighteen months)
beyond present technological limitations. The spatially localized spin
excitations in a nanomagnet to be studied in this project possess features that
hold great promise for future spintronic applications. Viscous shock waves that
form when a projectile exceeds the speed of sound in air are commonly
understood. The dispersive shock waves studied in this project are of a very
different type, lacking dissipation and realized as expanding, oscillatory
wavetrains. A fluid experiment will be developed to carefully measure these
shock properties while also being used as an educational, outreach, and
demonstration tool, providing young mathematicians direct experience with
nonlinear waves. Presentations at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences
will provide the general public with exposure to this fascinating field.