* 1521610
* OCE-PRF Track 2 (International) - Plasticity of Inorganic Carbon Use in Marine Calcifying Macroalgae Across a Latitudinal Gradient and Consequences of Global Change
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* NONE NONE, Hofmann                 Laurie         C
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 01/31/2018
* USD 194,000.00

Crustose coralline algae (CCA) are calcifying algae that are important to
coastal stability, beach formation, and coral reef structure. There is growing
concern that these organisms are sensitive to global climate change, which will
have important consequences for coastal and reef stability. Despite their
significance and sensitivity, their basic photosynthetic and calcification
mechanisms are not well understood. In this project, the fellow will establish a
better understanding of these mechanisms by studying CCA specimens along a
latitudinal gradient in the Northeast Atlantic. The research will be conducted
at the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology in Bremen, Germany within
the Microsensor Research Group led by Dr. Dirk de Beer. The activities and
results of this project will be shared on a Blog and Facebook page to enhance
public awareness of the project. Furthermore, the fellow will facilitate
development of a Virtual CCA Research Group to foster communication among
scientists world-wide working with CCA which will elevate the impacts of this
project to a global scale.

Both field sampling and laboratory experiments are used to pursue the goals of
the project, which are: 1) to determine the environmental factors influencing
the stable carbon isotope signatures of Lithothamnion spp. along a latitudinal
gradient, 2) to determine the plasticity of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC)
uptake mechanisms in response to light and temperature and 3) to determine how
photosynthesis and calcification are linked to DIC uptake mechanisms. The
latitudinal gradient consists of eight sampling locations in the North Atlantic
from Svalbard to Cape Verde in the east and from Florida to the Caribbean in the
west. The stable carbon isotope signatures of collected samples are measured to
determine the plasticity of DIC uptake along the latitudinal gradient in
relation to environmental conditions measured at long-term monitoring stations.
In the lab, microsensors are used to measure pH, oxygen and calcium fluxes
within the diffusive boundary layer (DBL) at the surface of the algae. Because
DIC uptake depends heavily on the DBL, microsensors provide a unique method for
determining the effects of temperature and light on photosynthesis and
calcification within the microenvironment at the interface between the external
seawater and the algal surface. Successful completion of the project will
provide the first study on latitudinal patterns and the flexibility of DIC
uptake mechanisms in a calcifying macroalga and will improve the scientific
knowledge of the relationship between DIC uptake, photosynthesis and
calcification under changing environmental conditions and across biogeographical
ranges.