* 1521746
* Collaborative Research: Novel and Unified Statistical Learning Procedures for Massive Dynamic Multiple-Input, Multiple-Output Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Anura Jayasumana, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 56,099.00

This project is to develop an innovative, unified, and flexible methodology to
model the input-output transformations in massive multiple-input, multiple-
output (MIMO) networks. With the ability of modern technology to gather large
volume of high-dimensional and inhomogeneous data, traditional techniques have
become inadequate or incapable of modeling the underlying MIMO systems from the
data. Novel statistical approaches and methods are needed for extracting
knowledge from complex, large, inhomogeneous network data sets. This project
seeks to develop new modeling techniques, statistical learning tools, and
computational approaches geared towards gaining knowledge arising from different
aspects of network data. This development starts with a novel functional dynamic
model that accounts for inherent characteristics of network data, such as node
latencies, dynamics associated with network coupling, etc. Next, the
investigators will develop statistical inference tools to test and identify
underlying inherent network connectivity. Furthermore, the investigators will
develop statistical learning techniques for network state identification and
change-point detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly
enrich the toolkit for the analysis of massive network data by providing an
alternative data-driven approach. These new tools are expected to provide new
solutions to the existing problems and novel and creative solutions to unsolved
problems. The research topics address many fundamental problems, for example
dynamic modeling, parsimonious network representation, and network learning, for
complex MIMO networks when the dimensionality (e.g., the number of nodes) and
the sample size grow. It will enhance understanding of existing techniques in
the big data context. More importantly, advanced modeling methodology and data
analytical tools will be developed with fast-to-implement algorithms, which
allow researchers and practitioners to explore, understand, and eventually
reverse-engineer complex networks. The investigators will interact with
researchers from different fields to derive and validate hypotheses and refine
the design of experiments to provide deeper insight into system internals for
potential scientific discovery.