* 1521274
* STTR Phase I:  Wave Rotor Constant-Volume Combustion for Energy Efficiency and Greenhouse Gas Abatement in Gas Turbine Engines
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Peter Schubert, Aerodyn Combustion, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase I project will likely be the dramatic improvement in the energy
efficiency of power plants, aircraft and other vehicles, through the development
of a novel pressure gain combustor for gas turbine engines. Today, these engines
consume about a third of all natural gas and generate one fifth of the
electricity in the US. The novel wave-rotor combustor being developed in this
project will likely enable reduction of fuel consumption, carbon emission and
weight of gas turbines dramatically, each by a factor of 18-20% along with
lowering other emissions. Further, this research project will potentially lead
to new combustion engines for lighter and more efficient road vehicles, engines
for distributed generation, hybrid vehicles and robotic aircraft, larger engines
for utility power generation, aviation and ships.

The objectives of this Phase I research project are to apply research on jet
ignition phenomena and pulsatile flow to create the novel wave-rotor-constant-
volume combustor for gas turbines. Ignition of a combustible mixture by
transient high speed jets of hot reactive gas allows fast repeating combustion.
Pulsatile flow results in efficient and compact gas compression and expansion
processes. The new combustor circumvents the weight, vibration, noise and
maintenance requirements of piston crank engines and the pressure and
temperature limits of gas turbines. The concept combines multiple innovations.
First, constant volume combustion creates a fundamentally more efficient
thermodynamic cycle relative to current Brayton cycle gas turbine and the
Otto/Diesel cycle positive displacement engines. Second pulsatile flow and
pressure waves are used to further improve thermodynamics and reduce engine size
and weight. Third, accelerated combustion is achieved through controlled jets of
reactive gas and shock flame interaction. The research thus enables a
transformative combustion process and a superior class of combustion engines,
while retaining proven compact turbomachinery components.