* 1521127
* Collaborative Research:  GPS-based terrestrial water storage anomalies during hydrologic extremes: linking hydrologic process, solid-earth response, and monitoring networks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Duncan Carr Agnew, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 204,402.00

Terrestrial water storage (TWS) is the total amount of water stored as soil
moisture, groundwater, snow, in surface water bodies, and in the biosphere.
Variations in TWS reflect the watershed-scale response to changes, such as
drought and groundwater pumping. Observations of TWS are needed to study the
water cycle and its role on the Earth, but existing tools for monitoring TWS
variations are not satisfactory. Recently, global positioning system (GPS)
observations of the height of the land surface have been used to quantify TWS
variations. However, errors in TWS estimated from GPS data have not been
quantified. This research has three components to study how GPS observations can
be used to monitor TWS. First, the resolution and accuracy of TWS variations
estimated from GPS land surface heights will be quantified by combining
hydrologic data and a model of how the Earth deforms. Second, GPS data from
several thousand stations will be used to estimate TWS variations across the
continental United States for the past decade and forward in time. Third, a
comparison will be made between existing TWS estimates and estimates based on
GPS observations. The expected outcomes of this project will advance the start-
of-the-art in TWS monitoring by evaluating the magnitude and sources of errors
in GPS-based TWS data. This is a necessary step towards applying these data to a
range of wide hydrologic applications, including estimates of soil water volumes
and groundwater recharge, the effects of drought, and subsidence caused by
changes in groundwater storage.

Observations of TWS anomalies are critical for understanding how the hydrologic
cycle responds to forcing such as drought. Existing tools for monitoring TWS
anomalies are not optimal for many hydrologic applications. Recently, GPS
observations of land surface vertical displacement have been used in novel ways
to quantify the spatial and temporal variations of TWS anomalies associated with
groundwater mining, seasonal snowpack, and drought. These results suggest that
GPS-based records of displacement could greatly enhance monitoring of the
terrestrial water cycle. However, none of the studies to date have quantified
the errors in TWS anomalies estimated from GPS observations. The research plan
has three components designed to assess how GPS observations can best be used to
monitor TWS. First, the resolution and accuracy of TWS anomalies estimated from
GPS vertical position data will be quantified by combining hydrologic loading
data and models of the Earth's elastic response. Second, vertical position data
from several thousand stations will be used to estimate TWS anomalies and
associated errors across the continental United States, retrospectively for the
past decade and forward in time. Third, a comparison will be made between
existing TWS anomaly products and the product based on GPS positions.
Differences will be related to hydrologic processes through analyses of in situ
hydrologic observations of groundwater, soil moisture, and snow water
equivalent. The expected outcomes of this project will advance the start-of-the-
art in TWS monitoring by evaluating how errors in GPS-based TWS anomalies are
related to interactions between hydrologic process, the solid earth response,
and the monitoring network at the continental scale. This is a necessary step
towards applying these data to a range of hydrologic applications.