* 1521552
* Computation and Visualization of Multi-Parameter Topological Invariants of Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Matthew Wright, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 210,217.00

Topological data analysis (TDA) is a relatively new branch of statistics whose
goal is to apply topology to develop tools for studying the coarse-scale,
global, non-linear, geometric features of data. Persistent homology, the most
widely studied tool for TDA, has been applied to many areas of science and
engineering, including image processing, time series data in biological systems,
and sensor networks. Persistent homology yields invariants of data, called
barcodes, by associating to the data a sequence of nested topological spaces
called a filtration, and then applying standard topological and algebraic
constructions. However, for many data sets of interest, such as point cloud data
with noise or non-uniformities in density, a single filtration is not rich
enough to encode the structure of interest in the data. This motivates the
consideration of multidimensional persistent homology, which associates to the
data a topological space simultaneously equipped with two or more filtrations.
Multi-D persistent homology yields algebraic invariants of data far more complex
than in the 1-D setting. New methodology is thus required for working with these
invariants in practice. The goal of this project is to introduce such
methodology in the 2-D setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
is to develop algorithms and design practical software tools that extend the
usual persistent homology methodology for exploratory data analysis to the 2-D
setting. The proposed tools provide an interactive visualization of the barcodes
of the restriction of a 2-D persistence module to affine 1-D lines. At the heart
of the computational approach is a novel data structure, based on planar line
arrangements, on which one can perform fast queries for these barcodes. The
tools also provide a visualization of the multi-graded Betti numbers of a 2-D
persistence module. It is proposed to apply the tools to the study of scientific
data - especially data arising from biological systems - in much the same way
that ordinary persistent homology has been applied to the study of data over the
last ten to fifteen years. This project will intend to establish statistical
foundations for the corresponding methodology.