* 1521735
* WORKSHOP: Graduate Student Consortium at the 2015 Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI'15) Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Brygg Ullmer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2016
* USD 19,940.00

The technological advances of the past decade have given rise to an increasing
number of creative practices and research areas that seek to overcome the long-
standing separation between the physical and digital worlds. One key area of
innovation has been tangible computing, which pushes the user interface beyond
the screen into the physical world by means of mobile devices, graspable
interfaces and interactive surfaces. Closely related is embedded interaction in
which the everyday objects and environments we interact with are computationally
augmented in new ways. As physical artifacts acquire new computational
behaviors, they become reprogrammable, customizable, repurposeable, and
interoperable in rich ecologies and diverse contexts. They also become more
complex, and require intense design effort in order to be functional, usable,
and enjoyable. Designing such systems requires interdisciplinary thinking, and
making them encompasses not only technical knowledge of software, electronics,
and mechanics, but also the use implications of a system's physical form and
behavior as well as its impacts on society. This is funding to support a
Graduate Student Consortium (workshop) of about 9 promising doctoral students (5
from the United States and 4 from abroad), along with 3 distinguished research
faculty. The event will take place in conjunction with the ACM SIGCHI 2015
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI
2015), which will be held January 15-19, at Stanford University in Palo Alto,
California. Launched in 2007 and now in its ninth year, the annual TEI
conference is about creating compelling experiences that bridge bits and atoms
through research in human-computer interaction, design, interactive arts, tools
and technologies. TEI brings together researchers, designers, engineers, and
artists who provide an innovative and cross-disciplinary perspective on
physical/digital interaction design and technological innovation. The intimate
size of this single-track conference (about 200 participants in recent years)
provides a unique forum for exchanging ideas through talks, interactive
exhibits, demos, posters, art installations and performances. More information
about the conference may be found online at http://www.tei-conf.org/15/.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TEI 2015 Graduate Student Consortium will take place
on Friday, January 16, immediately preceding the main conference, with follow-up
activities during the conference's main technical program. Students will present
their research to their peers and the faculty mentors, who will constructively
critique the students' work from diverse viewpoints. The students will also get
to show their work in posters at the conference, and their short papers will be
included in the conference Proceedings. The reception following the Consortium
sessions, which will be held in conjunction with other TEI workshops and
studios, will facilitate open-ended follow-on discussion and networking. The
organizing committee has made a special effort to recruit a diverse set of
student participants, particularly seeking persons with disabilities and members
of groups that are under-represented in computer and information science and
engineering; 4 of the 9 students are women, and at least one (and likely two) of
the 3 faculty mentors are women as well. This workshop will sharpen the research
skills of a new generation of scientists, engineers, and designers who will
shape human-centered computing as it takes place in physical things and places.
Already we are observing the impact of this field in our daily lives, as
computing becomes embedded in our phones, our bus stops, and soon even our
clothing. Now is a critical moment in the field, as a wave of early exploratory
prototypes begins to give way to disciplined investigations, the development of
toolkits, and more rigorous evaluation methods. Mentoring a next generation of
TEI researchers is crucial if the field is to retain its initial vigor and
openness as it gains foothold in the academic establishment of human-computing
research.