* 1521097
* Probing Fundamental Physics on Cosmological Scales
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Matias Zaldarriaga, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 322,500.00

from PI, not yet edited:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the research
activities of Professors Matias Zaldarriaga at the Institute for Advanced Study
in Princeton, New Jersey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of the Cosmic
Microwave Background allow us to directly image regions of our Universe as they
were only three hundred and eighty thousand years after the Big Bang. Recent
observations have shown that the structures that we see at that time originated
even before the hot big bang phase in the history of our Universe, a tiny
fraction of a second after the Bang. These structures are the earliest fossils
we have from our Universe's history. A wide array of new observations are
underway to better characterize these structures to try to learn more about the
earliest history of our Universe. This proposal will explore theoretical models
for the period during which the structures originates as well as for the later
history of our Universe. Both studies are needed to interpret these upcoming
observations. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts. Professor Zaldarriaga will involve postdoctoral students in this
research which will contribute to their training at a critical stage in their
career. Professor Zaldarriaga will continue to give public lectures and organize
a course for senior citizens in the local senior community center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professors Zaldarriaga will study new
mechanisms for generating gravitational waves and non-Gaussianities in the
scalar seeds during an inflationary period. He will work on the so-called
consistency conditions applicable both during the early Universe and to the
later development of structure. Professor Zaldarriaga will also study the theory
behind additional probes of both the Early Universe, such as spectral
distortions in the CMB and the properties of the dark matter, such as upcoming
measurements of substructure as traced by gravitational lensing.