* 1521684
* Hemivariational Inequalities: Numerical Methods and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Weimin Han, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 167,806.00

Certain systems in physical sciences and engineering cannot be described by
mathematical equations but are instead described by more complicated relations
known as inequalities (stating that one quantity is greater than or smaller than
another). Solving a system of inequalities numerically can be very challenging.
This research project aims to develop a rigorous and comprehensive mathematical
theory, as well as reliable and efficient numerical methods, for the numerical
solution of a class known as hemivariational inequalities. In addition to the
resultant advances in computational mathematics, the research will have impact
in the petroleum industry through application to analysis of borehole pumping
systems. Numerical simulations are used by the petroleum industry to infer the
downhole oil pump conditions based on measured surface conditions. For deviated
(non-vertical) oil wells, methods for reliable simulation have yet to be
developed, mainly due to the complicated friction and dynamics in deviated
wells. Appropriate models can be cast in the form of hemivariational
inequalities; this research project is expected to facilitate practically useful
numerical simulations for diagnostics of oil pump conditions in deviated wells.
Collaboration with researchers in the petroleum industry will ensure the
transfer of the new mathematical results to applications. The results from the
project are expected to help correctly control downhole oil pumps to save energy
and avoid pump damage. Graduate students will actively participate in all
aspects of the research and will thus be trained in high level mathematics and
numerical methods on challenging and important problems from
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Inequality problems in mechanics can be
divided into two main classes: that of variational inequalities, which is
concerned with convex energy functionals (potentials), and that of
hemivariational inequalities, which is concerned with nonsmooth and nonconvex
energy functionals (superpotentials). Through the formulation of hemivariational
inequalities, problems involving nonmonotone, nonsmooth, and multivalued
constitutive laws, forces, and boundary conditions can be treated successfully.
During the last three decades, hemivariational inequalities were shown to be
very useful across a wide variety of disciplines, ranging from nonsmooth
mechanics, physics, and engineering, to economics. However, relatively little
work on the numerical analysis of hemivariational inequalities has been done. In
this research project, a comprehensive theory will be developed for the
numerical solution of various hemivariational inequalities, including several
families of elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic hemivariational inequalities.
For each family of hemivariational inequalities, numerical schemes will be
introduced based on the finite element method for spatial discretization and
finite differences for temporal discretization. Convergence of the numerical
solutions will be shown under the basic solution regularity, and error estimates
will be derived under appropriate solution regularity assumptions. The error
estimates will be of optimal order when linear elements are used. Numerical
experiments will be performed to illustrate convergence orders predicted by the
theory. Results from this project (such as a posteriori error analysis, adaptive
algorithms, and discontinuous Galerkin methods) will form a solid foundation for
further developing numerical methods to solve hemivariational inequalities.