* 1521227
* STTR Phase I:  Ultrasonic Nanocoining for Creating Large, Low-Cost Arrays of Sub-Wavelength Features
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Stephen Furst, Smart Material Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2016
* USD 244,933.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase 1 project is to drastically reduce the cost of creating
large surfaces coated with functional nano-scale features. One example is the
moth-eye structure, consisting of a continuous pattern of 200 nm wide by 200 nm
tall features, that gives surface anti-reflective properties. An anti-reflective
surface can increase efficiency of solar cells, conceal aircraft or ships, or
prevent glare on windshield glass or computer screens. Nano-features can also be
used to create surfaces with superior durability and cleanliness through self-
wetting and anti-fouling characteristics, as well as anti-fogging or de-icing
properties. The low-cost scale-up is done through "roll-to-roll" processing,
where a drum-shaped metal cylinder coated with nano-features is used as the mold
for rolling miles of thin film, replicating the functional coating.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is focused on
accurately and inexpensively creating nano-scale features on the metal drum mold
that is used in the roll-to-roll replication process. This is done using the
recently-developed nanocoining process, whereby nano-features are indented into
a metal surface using a diamond die indent features into the surface 40,000
times per second. Current machining methods rely on scraping material away with
a sharp tool and cannot create features on nano-scale. This is because any tool
sharp enough to create such a small feature will be prohibitively fragile and
susceptible to rapid wear. Indenting is fundamentally different, and has been
used for millennia to create coins. No material is removed; it is simply pushed
aside, leaving behind the pattern on the die. The reduction of rubbing
drastically reduces wear and the absence of a chip of removed material enables
the process to work on the nano-scale. The objective of the initial phase of
research is to indent a small test drum and replicate a plastic film coated with
the features from the diamond die. The film will then be tested for anti-
reflective and wetting properties, and scale-up will follow in later phases.