* 1521231
* STTR Phase I:  Emulating Biological Actuation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Kiisa Nishikawa, Bionx Medical Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2016
* USD 224,009.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes development of
robust control algorithms for a robotic, foot-ankle prosthesis based on the
winding filament hypothesis, a transformative new idea about how muscles
contract. The winding filament hypothesis is uniquely able to account for
properties of muscles that allow instantaneous and automatic adaptation of
stiffness to unexpected changes in load. In the U.S. today, 1.6 -1.8 million
persons live with loss of a limb. Despite the success of the latest
technological improvements, significant challenges remain in development of
robotic prostheses and other assistive devices. No devices available on the
market today can reproduce normal walking movements under variable conditions
(e.g., sand or other compliant substrates, stairs, steep ramps). These
limitations affect quality of life by limiting participation in activities of
daily life, including maintenance of physical fitness. Benefits of a robust
powered prosthesis include increased versatility from level walking at a range
of speeds, to stairs, ramps and varied terrain. The technology could also be
extended to ankle orthoses for people whose mobility is limited by stroke,
diabetes, or other conditions of disease and aging. In addition, development of
bio-inspired control algorithms will enhance the scientific and technological
understanding of muscle-like actuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project involves collaboration
between a leading provider of robotic foot-ankle prostheses for persons with a
lower limb amputation, and developers of the winding filament hypothesis, a
transformative new idea about how muscles contract. The goal of the project is
to demonstrate the technical and commercial feasibility of developing a robust
control algorithm for a robotic prosthesis, based on the winding filament
hypothesis. A powered, foot-ankle prosthesis will be modified to accommodate the
bio-inspired control algorithms, the algorithms will be modified to account for
prosthesis properties, and performance will be optimized for a broad range of
terrains and conditions, including ramps, stairs and compliant surfaces. If the
winding filament hypothesis algorithm can outperform the stock prosthesis
controller in the range of conditions under which it emulates normal walking,
this would provide proof-of-concept that a robust prosthesis controller is
technically and commercially feasible. Robust control represents a disruptive
market advance not only for prosthesis technology, but also for orthotic
devices. A more versatile prosthesis would improve the quality of life for
millions of Americans with limb loss.