* 1521624
* Employing bioassessment parameters to monitor mine-impacted streams flowing onto the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Dan Kinsey, Aaniiih Nakoda College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 03/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will increase the body of knowledge on the effects
of unremediated mining operations on water health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A'aniiih
Nakoda College (ANC) will conduct a comparative analysis of the health of two
types of streams, impacted and non-impacted by the lingering contamination of
two cyanide-leech gold mines in central northern Montana. This will be
accomplished using state-approved rapid bioassessment protocols for benthic
macroinvertebrates and periphyton. Using samples collected from five reservation
streams on a periodic basis, project personnel will sort, identify, count and
analyze samples using a multi-metric approach that will include indices for taxa
richness, community composition, pollution tolerance/intolerance, and other
parameters. Split samples will be analyzed at a certified independent laboratory
to ensure quality control.