* 1521446
* Particles and Strings in the Evolving Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Mina Aganagic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,470,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Petr Horava, Mina
Aganagic, Raphael Bousso and Yasunori Nomura at Berkeley Center for Theoretical
Physics, University of California, Berkeley. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first
decade of the 21st century, we witnessed a remarkable convergence of the
fundamental questions about the origin, structure and the future fate of our
Universe. Now, in the middle of the second decade, we experience the exciting
confrontation of the fundamental theoretical questions (what is the Universe
made of? what are matter, energy, space and time?, etc.) with the experimental
data which are now becoming available in experimental particle physics,
observational cosmology and astrophysics. These experimental findings are in
turn challenging the remarkable developments on the theoretical front. The co-
PIs of this award will perform fundamental theoretical research at these
crossroads of particle physics, quantum gravity, cosmology and string theory,
confronting the experimental challenges from beyond the Standard Model, the
ideas of the multiverse, the interface of string theory and condensed-matter
physics, the nature of space and time, and the mathematical implications of
topological strings. Research in this area thus advances the national interest
by promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions:
the discovery and understanding of new physical law. The significant broader
impacts of this research include the training of students and postdocs who
become the next generation of scientists in the nation and the world. The
fundamental questions addressed in this research are of deep interest to the
general public, and the co-PIs will continue promoting the importance and
excitement of fundamental science to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, Mina Aganagic will focus on the
interplay of string theory and gauge theories with pure mathematics. She will
study the refined topological string, the refined Chern-Simons theory and
M-theory. Raphael Bousso will work on extracting predictions from the
multiverse, and the interconnections of geometry, holography and information, as
recently crystallized in the black-hole "firewall" conundrum. He will further
study the string landscape and the holographic entropy bounds. Petr Horava will
study quantum gravity, especially in the context known as "Horava-Lifshitz
gravity" and its broad applications, including the puzzles of naturalness in
particle phenomenology and cosmology, and implications to condensed-matter
physics. He will apply methods of nonequilibrium field theory to quantum gravity
and strings. Yasunori Nomura will work on ideas relevant to the recent and
upcoming experiments, such as the LHC, with emphasis on supersymmetry breaking
and its mediation, the origin and nature of dark matter, and the conceptual
understanding of the implications of the multiverse for the TeV-scale physics.
All four co-PIs will seek unexpected new opportunities for transformative
interdisciplinary research in all areas related to theoretical particle physics.