* 1521502
* Geochemical Characterization of Prince William Sound and Copper River Sediments: A Proxy Development to Assess Climate-Driven Variations in a High-Resolution Sedimentary Record
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2017
* NONE NONE, Williams                Joshua         R
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 11/30/2017
* USD 174,000.00

As part of a two-year postdoctoral research fellowship, this project focuses on
determining the elemental composition of Prince William Sound (PWS) and Copper
River sediments by analyzing a time-series throughout varying environmental
conditions. These data will be used to interpret preserved sedimentary
signatures contained within cores whose record extends into the last century,
the period for which relatively robust instrumental records of discharge,
climate, and oceanographic conditions exist. Ultimately, it is hoped the results
of this research will allow high-resolution characterization of climatic drivers
over the last several millennia. This knowledge will further understanding of
how this system has responded in the past, and may provide crucial predictive
information concerning future climate variations. Additionally, a key outreach
component for this study is the development of a teaching curriculum to be used
by underserved populations within rural Alaska who have limited access to
science education or current research. The program will aim to further student
understanding of how scientists use sediment cores to identify climate trends in
PWS and the northern Pacific Ocean, and the subsequent impact on fisheries
distribution, subsistence, and commercial harvests. This project will be
conducted under the mentorship of Dr. Steven A. Kuehl at the Virginia Institute
of Marine Science.

The PWS is a sensitive sub-arctic region where rapidly changing climate patterns
strongly alter hydrological and oceanographic conditions in ways that have
profound ecological and economical implications. This research seeks to exploit
the potential for a high-resolution environmental record contained within PWS
sediment, which may allow us to understand changing river sediment dispersal
and/or climate-driven oceanographic patterns throughout the Holocene. Previous
X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) analyses reveal that PWS sediment cores contain
geochemical and sedimentological signatures that can potentially resolve varying
source input. Elemental ratios (e.g. Sr/Mn, Zn/S, K/Ca) may provide a basis for
differentiating Chugach/northern PWS derived sediment loads from those of the
upper Copper River. However, there is a paucity of information on compositional
variations within the major drainage basins, and understanding seasonal
variability influenced by changing provenance/ freshwater sources (e.g., snow
melt, glacial melt, and rainfall, Chugach vs. Wrangell Range) in Copper River
discharge is critical for the development of environmental proxy records. Once
constrained, these proxies have the potential to resolve climatic oscillations
on sub-annual to decadal timescales. Therefore, this project focuses on
collecting a high-resolution time-series of representative samples of PWS and
Copper River basin sediments with the aim to confidently constrain elemental
variations observed in sediment core XRF records. Elemental composition of
suspended sediment concentrations will be determined using Inductively Coupled
Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICPMS). Samples will also be analyzed for cosmogenic
7Be to test the hypothesis that the ubiquitously used tracer for recent fluvial
sedimentation may be problematic in high latitude settings during spring
discharge/ glacial melt.