* 1521676
* Statistical Analysis of Massive Spatio-Temporal Datasets Using Distributed Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Matthias Katzfuss, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

Automated sensing instruments on satellites and aircraft have enabled the
collection of massive amounts of data indexed in space and time. If these kinds
of datasets can be efficiently exploited, they can provide new insights on a
wide variety of issues, such as greenhouse gas concentrations for climate, soil
properties for precision agriculture, and atmospheric states for weather
forecasting. However, traditional spatial-statistical techniques are not
computationally feasible for big datasets. This project will develop fast and
user-friendly software that can fill gaps, capture inhomogeneous spatial
structure from very fine to very large scales, and properly quantify
uncertainty. As an illustration, the software will be applied to millions of
satellite measurements of hourly Total Precipitable Water fields, which are
critical in severe weather forecasting.

The goal of this project is to develop methodology for the statistical analysis
of massive, high-resolution spatial datasets. The employed model is specified in
terms of spatial basis functions at multiple resolutions. The basis functions
are chosen to optimally approximate a given covariance function. No restrictions
on the covariance function are necessary, and observations can be irregularly
spaced. It is crucial that the structure of the basis-function representation
results in scalable, parallel inference algorithms that can take full advantage
of the many nodes available in modern computing environments. The methodology
will be extended to the analysis of spatio-temporal data, allowing real-time
analysis of massive, streaming spatio-temporal datasets. All methods will be
implemented in software suitable for both multi-core desktop computers and
supercomputing environments.