* 1521388
* Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation - A 2015 SI^2 PI Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 01/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Francis Timmes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2016
* USD 75,527.00

This project will host a 1.5-day workshop in Arlington, VA, which will bring
together the community of SI2 awardees (with the goal of involving one principal
investigator from each SSE and SSI project, many of which are collaborative
awards) from 214 awards. The workshop will also solicit participation from NSF-
supported science and engineering projects that rely on the national research
cyberinfrastructure for their computation, communication, and data management
needs. In addition, the proximity to NSF will encourage participation by Program
Officers from across the Foundation. Goals of this workshop include: (1)
Providing a focused forum for PIs to share technical information with each other
and with NSF Program Officers; (2) Encouraging exploration of emerging topics;
(3) Identifying emerging best practices across the supported software projects;
(4) Stimulating thinking on new ways of achieving software sustainability; and
(5) Disseminating the shared experiences of the researchers via an online web
portal. The workshop is expected to host 85 SI2 awardees and several other
speakers and panelists. The workshop will use a hybrid style, blending a
traditional, top-down driven agenda with a interactive, adaptive, participant-
driven agenda. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will support the
exchange of ideas among the current software cyberinfrastructure development
projects. It will provide guidance on issues related to the development of
robust software and to the problem of software sustainability. Involvement of
program officers across NSF is expected to help the interdisciplinary SI2
awardees understand the relevance and impact of cyberinfrastructure throughout
the NSF. The participation of these researchers and program officers in a common
forum will help ensure that the cyberinfrastructure software developed as part
of SI2 projects will be relevant and broadly applicable to the most science and
engineering domains possible. The hybrid approach is innovative and holds the
promise of creating rich interactions among PIs, resulting in richer
collaboration and learning. The results of this workshop thus have the potential
to guide cyberinfrastructure development and cyberinfrastructure driven research
for both the participating projects and for the wider software development
community.