* 1521466
* Photon Temporal Modes as a Quantum Information Resource
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Raymer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 475,000.00

Quantum information science (QIS) promises means for storing, transmitting, and
processing information in ways not achievable using conventional (classical-
physics-based) information technology. Success in QIS could revolutionize both
technology and science through new computation and communication capabilities.
Major breakthroughs are still needed before these can become reality. It is
generally recognized that the most powerful quantum computation will take place
using material systems (atoms or electrons). In contrast, quantum communication
across a network (a "Quantum Internet") will take place using light (photons).
In addition, specialized quantum-information processing will take place using
light or a combination of light and interacting atoms, as needed, for example,
to construct signal repeaters for extending the range of quantum communication
over longer distances. This project will develop a radical, yet practical, new
approach to using photons to encode quantum
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photons in a light beam have four distinct
properties, any of which could be used to encode quantum-information:
polarization (e.g., vertical or horizontal), two-dimensions of beam profile
(spatial shape), and temporal shape (variation in time of brightness during a
light pulse). In order to fully utilize light for transmitting information in a
quantum network, it is necessary to be able to manipulate and sort a beam of
light according to the states associated with each of these properties. While
polarization and spatial beam profiles have been previously developed as means
for encoding quantum information on photons, the temporal shape of photons has
gone largely unrecognized as an important potential technique. The project
endeavors to complete the "tool kit" for photon-based QIS by developing means to
use photon temporal shape to encode information. This approach has predicted
benefits in that 1) it allows more than one bit of information to be encoded on
a single photon, 2) the encoding method is robust against the alterations of
light that occur while traveling in a long optical fiber, and 3) the method
nicely interfaces with atom-based quantum-light memories, which will be used in
the future construction of a Quantum Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling
quantum systems is of broad interest in science and information technology,
metrology, quantum chemistry, and nano-mechanics. Optical technology and
quantum-optics-based information science offer excellent opportunities to
integrate research with science education. To improve the quality of general
science education for non-science majors, the P.I. cofounded in 2010 the Science
Literacy Program (SLP) at the University of Oregon, and serves as its Co-
Director. The SLP has provided mentored instructional opportunities to many
graduate students and undergraduate science majors serving as co-instructors in
science literacy courses. He developed and taught an SLP course, Quantum Physics
for Everyone, which presented quantum information science to non-science majors,
using active learning techniques to engage the students. He will continue
serving as SLP Co-Director.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a more technical
perspective, the project will develop the idea that in QIS, temporal modes (TMs)
of photons, and more generally light fields, should be viewed on an equal
footing with polarization and transverse modes. TMs are wave-packet modes that
have the same carrier frequency, polarization, and transverse spatial mode, and
occupy the same time bin, but yet are temporal orthogonal. To enable the
development of TMs for use as qubits and qudits, the central needed technology
is the quantum pulse gate (QPG), which will implement a near-100% efficient
spatial sorting of field-orthogonal TMs. Based on their recently proposed method
of temporal-mode interferometry (TMI), the researchers will demonstrate the
elements of a complete quantum information framework that employs field
orthogonality of single-photon temporal modes. The three requirements -
generation of resource states, the targeted and efficient manipulation of TMs,
and their detection and characterization - can be fulfilled with current
technology. In particular, the researchers will study, experimentally and
theoretically, means for implementing single-qubit quantum-logic operations
(Pauli-X, -Y, and -Z gates; and phase-shift gate) using the quantum pulse gate
device as the basic building block. They will also demonstrate that the QPG can
act as a real-time controllable switch that is temporal-mode selective, by
varying a phase shift internal to the device. In addition, they will demonstrate
means for verifying the fidelity of such gate operations, using a new form of
quantum-state tomography, which can determine the quantum state directly in a TM
basis.