* 1521601
* AGU Chapman Conference on The Width of the Tropics: Climate Variations and Their Impact; Santa Fe, New Mexico; July 26-31, 2015
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Brenda Weaver, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 04/30/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The past decade has witnessed increasing scientific focus on detailed aspects of
tropical climate, at and above the Earth's surface, and on the location of the
boundary between the tropical and extratropical zones. A growing body of
literature addresses the possibility of changes in the position and strength of
the Hadley cell, jet streams, and zonal mean atmospheric circulation. These
changes could manifest as changes in surface climate, particularly
precipitation, and have important societal and ecological consequences. A number
of studies have identified poleward movement in the boundary between tropical
and extratropical zones; this phenomenon has been referred to as "tropical
widening" or "expansion of the tropical belt."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Chapman
Conference will bring together scientists from a wide range of backgrounds to
explore and summarize the state of the science and identify future research
directions relevant for the problem of tropical widening. A particular emphasis
will be on the multi-disciplinary nature of the problem with the goal of
enabling cross-fertilization among the wide range of climate science subtopics
represented by the participants of the conference. To facilitate this, the
following four session topics are planned: What determines the width of the
tropical belt? 2. How and why has the tropical width changed in the past? 3. How
and why might the tropical width change in the future? 4. What are the impacts
for the oceans, cryosphere, hydrologic cycle, human society, and
ecosystems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held July 26-31 2015 at
Santa Fe, New Mexico. NSF funds will go towards support of approximately 15
graduate students and early career scientists.