* 1521326
* STTR Phase I:  Eco-friendly Thermal Insulation Composite Foam Boards
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Nadir Yildirim, Revolution Research Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 247,496.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a
novel, environmentally-friendly thermal insulation composite foam board. The
environmental and economic impacts of energy production and use are key areas of
concern in the world today. One of the largest uses of energy is for heating and
cooling of buildings; thus construction companies are always searching for
products which can improve the insulation performance of buildings. The rigid
foam board insulation products in widespread use today are produced from
petroleum-based chemicals. The availability of insulation which supports green
building initiatives will be a great boon to eco-conscious customers, and will
provide an excellent incentive for others to use the foam board product. The
foam board is the first of a number of envisioned products which will leverage
cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs), which have been long-studied but are now on the
verge of becoming available in sufficient quantities to realize their potential
in commercial products. Successful conclusion of this effort will demonstrate a
unique, innovative product that will have excellent mechanical and thermal
properties at comparable prices to incumbent petroleum-based materials.

The intellectual merit of this project is to determine the feasibility of
creating a CNF-reinforced corn starch foam to produce an eco-friendly thermal
insulation foam board for use in the construction industry. The raw material,
cellulose, is an abundant material, obtainable from renewable sources including
a broad range of plants and sea animals (tunicates). CNFs have a significant
ability to reinforce otherwise weak materials, permitting new composite products
with extremely beneficial characteristics. Corn starch, a readily available
renewable resource, has many important industrial uses in films, foams, and
aerogels, but on its own is weak and brittle. The project objectives are to
create the first corn starch based foam board with the desired material
properties of low density, high mechanical properties, fire retardancy, water
repellency and low thermal conductivity. The team will explore various materials
combinations and chemical treatments to produce foam boards that have the
material properties required to meet market needs. The foam board will have
comparable or better mechanical and thermal properties to typical petroleum-
based polystyrene foam boards on the market, but with a dramatically lower
carbon footprint.