* 1521497
* STTR Phase I:  SMART Colorimetric Sensor for Airborne Methane Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Don Wang, Calyx, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will develop phage-based
colorimetric sensors to provide cost-effective, low-powered detection and
quantification of natural gas. Currently, there is no technology that can
reliably detect early natural gas leaks on-site in real-time; existing solutions
are either not sensitive enough (handheld infra-red detector) or too bulky (gas
chromatography). In the United States alone, almost $3 billion in annual losses
results from natural gas leak related disasters ($900 million from lost gas, $2
billion from downstream environmental cost, and $80 million from property
damage); the number will only grow with the aging of an estimated three million
miles of pipelines in the country. The proposed sensor will offer a selective,
yet portable sensing capability for improving natural gas leak detection.
Assuming widespread implementation of the phage-based sensor, the anticipated
domestic market size is over $60 million initially. In addition, our proposed
sensor system has the potential to be designed to rapidly share sensing results
through existing telecommunication networks, and thereby reduce the losses due
to natural gas leaks. This also has downstream implications in terms of
geomapping of methane emission levels, as well as improving pipeline safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to create a
sensor platform that can rapidly develop gas sensor matrices based on engineered
M13 bacteriophage (phage). The properties of the sensor, based on highly
specific peptide receptors and broadly reactive surface chemistries, are a big
advantage over existing colorimetric sensors that require complex synthetic
methods in order to incorporate selective elements. This project intends to
create a new type of engineered bacteriophage with the capability to display
color matrix arrays that can detect and measure components of natural gas.
Recognition software that can quickly decipher the phage color change associated
with the presence of methane will also be developed through principal component
analysis. Finally, initial feasibility tests will be conducted on the phage film
to analyze sensor response in isolated operating conditions. The anticipated
technical results for this project are the creation of prototype sensor matrix
to distinguish methane gas molecules and a corresponding smartphone-based reader
and algorithm. These outcomes are vital to the determination of sensor
limitations and scalability requirements.