* 1521730
* Fingerprinting Methods for Detection and Attribution of Changes in Climate Extremes with Spatial Estimating Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jun Yan, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Changes in climate extremes often influence natural and human systems with more
severe consequences than changes in climatic mean states. Detection of changes
in climate extremes and attribution to possible causes, however, are much less
studied than the counterpart in climatic mean states due to sparsity of data,
low signal noise ratio, and the unique features of extremes. The optimal
fingerprint method, which is standard in detection and attribution of changes in
climatic mean states, has no satisfactory analog for changes in climate
extremes. This project aims to close this gap by developing a close analog of
the optimal fingerprint method for detection and attribution of changes in
climate extremes with high power using spatial estimating equations. The project
has cross-boundary impact in both statistics and climate research. The optimal
fingerprinting method for extreme value analysis has wide applications and
impact on climate research. Applications of the methods will increase the public
awareness of the possible climate changes and their impact on environment and
society. The open source software implementation under the strict quality
control of the R system will not only make the methods widely accessible to
practitioners in climate change, but also make them openly available for public
scrutiny, both of which are important in understanding changes in climate
extremes and attributing to possible causes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the project aims to 1) develop inferences for spatial estimating equations as an
analog of the fingerprint method for changes in climate extremes; 2) develop
inferences for spatial estimating equations with measurement errors that are
spatially and temporally dependent; 3) identify and attribute changes in extreme
temperature at the regional scale for global lands and in extreme precipitation
in North America; and 4) develop an open-source, high-quality, and user-friendly
software package accompanying the proposed methodologies. The spatial estimating
equations will be constructed by combining the score equations of the marginal
generalized extreme value distributions at all sites, without specification of
the spatial dependence. The combining weight that controls the efficiency will
be based on the inverse of a working covariance matrix or multiple matrices each
of which contrasts the score at a site with those from sites nearby. The
spatially and temporally dependent measurement errors will be approached with
the simulation extrapolation method, the simulation step of which will be
handled by a random normalized contrasts approach to preserves the dependence
structure. The methods will be applied to detection and attribution of changes
in extreme temperature with multiple external forcings and in extreme
precipitation with a single forcing. This project embraces the statistical
challenges in detection and attribution of changes in climate extremes from the
climate research community. The focus on extremes was made possible only
recently by the large amount of observed data and climate model simulations. The
proposed methods advance knowledge in statistics with the development of 1)
efficient spatial estimating equations for inferences with primary focus on
marginal regression coefficients, and 2) measurement error models with spatially
and temporally dependent measurement error. These methods offer a close analog
of the optimal fingerprint method for extreme value analysis. Applications in
detection and attribution advance knowledge about the possible causes of changes
in extreme temperature and extreme precipitation.