* 1521608
* Collaborative Research: Joint Analysis of Correlated Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Leonidas Guibas, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 140,000.00

Across science, engineering, medicine and business we face a deluge of data
coming from sensors, from simulations, or from the activities of myriads of
individuals on the Internet. Furthermore, the data sets we collect are
frequently highly inter-correlated, reflecting information about the same or
similar/related entities in the world, or echoing semantically important
repetitions/symmetries or hierarchical structures common to both man-made and
natural objects. This project will assist scientists and engineers working with
correlated data sets in getting the most information and value out of their
data. Key to the approach is the idea of joint data analysis, the notion that
each piece of data is best understood not in isolation but in the context
provided by its peers and partners in a collection of related data sets, using
the web of relationships referred to above. The key aim is to complement the
social networks of scientists and engineers as they exist today with parallel
networks that interlink the data they base their work on, using domain-specific
semantic links and aiming at mechanisms that allow algorithmic transport of
information between data used by scientists working in the same domain. The
resulting system amplifies scientific insights by allowing an observation of one
scientist on one piece of data to automatically be transported to other relevant
data sets and aggregated and also enables the automated discovery of shared
structures or common abstractions that can inform multiple data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish this joint analysis this
project interconnects data sets into networks along which information can be
transported and aggregated. These data set links are based on efficient matching
algorithms using domain-specific features. In the associated setting, these
matching or maps are used not to estimate distances or similarities but to build
operators that can transport information between different data sets. The
research team will exploit a functional analytic framework that allows for
encoding of information as functions over the data and leads to linear operators
for mapping, enabling the use of many powerful tools from linear algebra and
optimization. Using inspiration from homological algebra, this team will join
multiple related data sets into networks connected through these operators in a
way that allows information transport, correction, and aggregation, with the
ultimate goal of using the "wisdom of the collection" to provide as much
information as possible for specific data sets to specific scientists.