* 1521595
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Computationally designed probes to experimentally characterize mechanisms of Ebola virus membrane fusion
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Robert Rizzo, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2017
* USD 66,500.00

Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The 2014 Ebola epidemic is the largest outbreak in
history (http://www.cdc.gov) and according to the World Health Organization
(WHO), "There have been 9936 Ebola virus disease cases, and 4877 deaths, up to
the end of 19 October." Just as alarming are the recent reports of Ebola
transmission to hospital caregivers despite official warning to the contrary
that spread would likely not be an issue in more developed countries such as the
United States. Together, these unprecedented events highlight the severity of
the potential of Ebola virus to become pandemic and the urgent need to more
fully characterize how the virus replicates so that steps can be made to stop
the current and likely future outbreaks. This project employs atomic-level
computer modeling (docking, virtual screening) to predict and characterize how
small molecule compound probes bind to and interact with specific viral proteins
located on the surface of the Ebola virus. Top-scoring compounds will be
experimentally tested to determine which molecules can stop viral entry.
Characterization of how small molecules interact with Ebola proteins will
ultimately enable a better understanding of how viral entry can be stopped and
Ebola infection controlled. This will also be important for the study of other
enveloped viruses such as influenza, HIV, SARS, MERS, among others. Broader
impacts of the work include increased knowledge as to what types of molecules
are most effective at stopping Ebola infection which will benefit study of
related enveloped viruses and targeting of similar viral entry events mediated
by analogous viral proteins. An important component of the project is
educational training in use of cutting-edge computational and experimental tools
for viral research at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels that
includes the planned participation of women and underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will conduct computational and experimental studies to identify and design small
molecular probes that will arrest early membrane fusion events necessary for the
life cycle of the virus. The project will employ a powerful new computational
docking strategy that allows putative binding interfaces, such as those on Ebola
viral entry proteins GP2 and GP1, to be mapped and exploited at the atomic
level. Specifically, computational footprinting methods employing per-residue
interaction energies will be used to identify targetable events in the Ebola
pre-hairpin and pre-fusion models followed by docking to identify the most
promising top-scoring compounds for additional in-depth characterization and
experimental testing. The goal is to identify compounds that target favorable
positions for disruption of N-helical coil formation and C-helix association,
using large-scale high-throughput-virtual screening of commercially available
compounds and experimental testing. An experimental pseudotyped virus system
that uses a quantitative reporter gene in a non-replicating virus-like particle
containing Ebola virus envelope proteins GP2 and GP1 will be used to confirm
that compounds from the virtual screen arrest viral entry/fusion. Such compounds
will be prioritized for additional study and development. Broader impacts of the
work include increased knowledge as to what types of compounds are most
effective at stopping Ebola infection which may both lead to development of
Ebola virus-targeted therapeutics and also benefit study of related enveloped
viruses and targeting of similar viral entry events mediated by analogous viral
proteins. The project will also educate undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students in the use and analysis of innovative computational
docking and experimental biophysical methods to help prepare the next generation
of scientists to attack important research problems in the future.