* 1521828
* Building a TERM Roadmap for Organ Disease, Washington, DC, March 16-17, 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2015
* Josh Neubert, The Methuselah Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

PI: Neubert, Josh &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1521828&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the last decade, research groups have made great advances in stem cell science,
tissue and biomedical engineering, cryopreservation, and other areas of
regenerative medicine that have begun to show promising results. However, the
ability to produce clinically applicable solutions to organ disease and
impairment, especially in complex organs such as the heart, liver, lungs, and
kidneys, has for the most-part eluded researchers. The need for solutions to
organ impairment has never been greater. The organ waitlist has grown rapidly
over the last two decades while the number of donors has stagnated. It is
estimated that 35% of all U.S. deaths could be prevented or significantly
delayed by organ repair or transplantation. New solutions are required to meet
this demand. The investigators propose a landscape analysis study and workshop
to identify key milestones toward creating these solutions. The work will create
a critical-path roadmap toward solutions to organ impairment. Included in this
roadmap will be specific opportunities to incorporate innovative methods for
technology advancement such as prizes and awards that can be used to supplement,
enhance, and leverage traditional research grants. The workshop will be hosted
in Washington DC on March 16-17, 2015, convening key stakeholders from academia,
industry, and government agencies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators have
defined three primary outcomes for this workshop: (1) Identify key quantitative
milestones that will open critical opportunities on the road to solving organ
disease; (2) Determine how to best identify when a proposed research avenue or
milestone will not be achieved to help focus future research initiatives on
potentially successful outcomes; and (3) Identify opportunities to advance
quantitative milestones and supplement or better target existing research grant
programs using incentivized innovation models (prizes, challenges, awards,
etc.). Four topic areas of potential milestones have been identified for
discussion during the workshop: Regulation, Tissue &amp; Biomedical Engineering,
Cryopreservation, and Manufacturing/Clinical support. Prior to the workshop, key
stakeholder interviews will be conducted to gather preliminary information
defining the content of the scientific discussions for each of these four
sessions. Upon conclusion of the workshop, specific guidelines, milestones, and
criteria will be presented and disseminated to the public concerning the
roadmap, milestones, and new methodologies for advancing solutions to organ
disease.