* 1521633
* Quantifying bivalve calcification dynamics through early life ontogeny
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Annaliese Hettinger, Hettinger               Annaliese
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 174,000.00

Bivalves (oysters, clams, mussels) provide vital ecosystem services through
habitat formation, water filtration, and food supply, but have suffered
population reductions from a combination of overharvesting, disease, habitat
degradation, and ocean acidification (OA). Further population declines could
lead to habitat restructuring, changes in food webs, and losses of marine
resources for human society. Recent studies of the California Current Ecosystem
highlight that rapid OA of coastal waters is occurring in some regions of the
U.S. Pacific Northwest, and this is predicted to cause irreversible losses to
natural marine resources of commercial, recreational, and cultural importance,
like bivalves. The causes of bivalve sensitivity to OA have not been fully
described, but young bivalves (larvae) appear to be more vulnerable to OA than
adults. This work will advance our understanding of calcification in bivalve
larvae, an essential process that will ultimately determine whether bivalves
thrive in future ocean conditions.

In addition,the PI's research activities incorporate mentoring opportunities to
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in STEM education. She will
work with the established OSU program FIESTAS (Families Involved in Education
Sociocultural Teaching and STEM) to develop national ocean literacy initiatives
in local school classrooms with specific focus on enhancing knowledge of Latino
and under-represented youth. She will also mentor undergraduates who will be
working in the OSU research labs.

Ocean acidification (OA) has emerged as a critical stressor for coastal
ecosystem function, and is predicted to cause irreversible losses to natural
marine resources of commercial, recreational, and cultural importance. The
emerging and significant concern for marine ecosystems is rooted in the growing
body of literature that documents negative effects of OA either directly or in
conjunction with other environmental factors, such as temperature. However, the
specific mechanisms that cause sensitivity of organisms to OA have not been
fully described. We know that bivalves show particular sensitivity to OA and
early life stages are more vulnerable than adults. Several hypotheses have been
suggested to explain early life stage vulnerability to OA, but few have been
tested rigorously at the earliest stages of development. This research will
address the role of organic-inorganic interactions during calcification in early
larval life by (1) quantifying ontogenetic changes in shell carbon balance and
(2) measuring those differences across a gradient of marine carbonate chemistry.
This work will determine the distinct role of the larval shell organic matrix in
exceedingly rapid calcification at this hyper-critical life stage. The outcomes
of this research will transform our understanding of calcification and allow for
well-parameterized predictions of the future of calcifying organisms in a
globally-changed ocean. A highly interdisciplinary approach will be applied to
address mechanisms of initial shell formation in larval bivalves. Scientific
advancements resulting from this work will include: (1) a comprehensive
description of the interaction between organic matrix and inorganic larval shell
components and (2) evidence for how rapid shell formation occurs in larval
bivalves. This work will generate new testable hypotheses to advance our
understanding of calcification mechanisms in larval bivalves, an uncharacterized
but vital process that will ultimately determine whether bivalves thrive in
future ocean conditions.