* 1521060
* STTR Phase I:  New Synergistic Biofungicides - Novel Aminoglycoside and Azole/Strobulin Combinations
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Gene Miller, Baicor L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2016
* USD 224,809.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology (STTR)
project is the development of new and transformative fungicidal strategies that
are more effective, ecofriendly, less toxic, but still produced and available at
reasonable and competitive cost. More than 80% of crop and turf diseases are due
to fungal infections. Direct application of chemical fungicides continues to be
the most effective and widely used strategy to control these diseases. A large
fraction of the crop fungicide market includes two fungicide classes: The
triazoles and strobulins. Both classes are used in increasingly larger amounts
to overcome developing resistance, and both have known human and animal
toxicities when used at high levels. Emerging resistance to therapeutic
antifungals for treatment of acute human and animal fungal diseases (e.g.
aspergillosis) has been directly linked to the overuse of the most widely used
triazole crop fungicides. Therefore, declining effectiveness due to resistance,
environmental impacts, animal/human toxicity, and costs challenge the use of
these and other chemical fungicides. The research and use of the novel
antifungal aminoglycoside K20 that acts synergistically with triazoles and
strobulins as described in this proposal address these challenges, and the need
for such transformative strategies.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop the synthetic protocol for
production of aminoglycoside fungicide K20 in high yield and purity, and
determine the fractional inhibitory concentration index (FICI) for each batch of
K20 in combination with metconazole or pyrachlostrobin using standard
checkerboard analyses. In addition, the plan is to conduct greenhouse and field
tests of K20-fungicide combinations against Fusarium head blight (FHB) disease
of wheat. Among the combinations showing synergy are K20 mixed with metconazole
and pyrachlostrobin. The widespread and heavy use of these fungicides has been
linked to a number of environmental and human/animal health issues. Striking and
consistent synergistic inhibitory activities are observed with the crop pathogen
Fusarium graminearum - the causative agent of Fusarium head blight (FHB) of
wheat, barley and corn. The synergism between K20 and these widely used
fungicides has broad and important implications. It offers the possibility of
using dramatically smaller amounts of fungicides for crop protection, which will
counter the increases in global fungal resistance, and reverse the rise in human
and animal health problems.