* 1521687
* Collaborative Research: CompSustNet: Expanding the Horizons of Computational Sustainability
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2021
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,400,000.00

Poverty, saving species, repowering the world with renewable energy, lifting
people up to live better lives - there are no easy answers to guiding our planet
on the path toward sustainability. Complex problems require sophisticated
solutions. They involve intricacy beyond human capabilities, the kind of big-
data processing and analysis that only advanced large-scale computing can
provide. This NSF Expedition in Computing launches CompSustNet
(http://www.compsust.net), a vast research network powered by the nation's
recognized university computer science programs, charged with applying the
emerging field of computational sustainability to solving the world's seemingly
unsolvable resource problems. Put simply, the project will enlist some of the
top talents in computing, social science, conservation, physics, materials
science, and engineering to unlock sustainable solutions that safeguard our
planet's future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational Sustainability is, at its
core, the belief that with sufficiently advanced computational techniques, we
can devise sustainable solutions that meet the environmental, societal, and
economic needs of today while providing for future generations. In much the same
way IBM's supercomputer Watson could defeat any challenger in Jeopardy!,
computational sustainability posits that a computer-engineered solution can be
applied to world's difficult and challenging problems - from helping farmers and
herders in Africa survive severe droughts to developing a smart power grid
fueled entirely by renewable energy. CompSustNet is a large national and
international multi-institutional research network led by Cornell University and
including 11 other US academic institutions: Bowdoin, Caltech, CMU, Georgia
Tech, Howard University, Oregon State, Princeton, Stanford, UMass, University of
South California, and Vanderbilt University, as well as collaborations with
several international universities. But CompSustNet is not just an academic
enterprise, as it also includes key governmental and non-governmental
organizations that specialize in conservation, poverty mitigation, and renewable
energy, such as The Nature Conservancy, The World Wildlife Fund, The
International Livestock Research Institute, The Trans-African Hydro-
Meteorological Observatory, and the National Institute of Standards and
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CompSustNet's core mission is to significantly
expand the horizons of computational sustainability and foster the advancement
of state-of-the-art computer science to achieve the scale to tackle global
problems. Research will focus on cross-cutting computational topics such as
optimization, dynamical models, simulation, big data, machine learning, and
citizen science, applied to sustainability challenges. For example,
computational sustainability is being put to work to resolve the problem of
providing wetlands for shorebirds that migrate from the Arctic through
California during a time of drought. As California gets drier, the shorebirds
have nowhere to stop, rest, and refuel by eating wetland invertebrates.
Scientists are developing new dynamic precision conservation techniques that use
complex, big-data models to tackle the problem with NASA satellite imagery,
meteorological forecasts, and citizen science in the form of thousands of bird
location sightings from the Cornell Lab of Ornithology's eBird checklisting app
for birdwatchers. Through partnership with The Nature Conservancy, the program
forecasts when and where wetland habitat would be needed for shorebirds, and the
Conservancy pays Central Valley rice farmers to flood their fields at opportune
times - providing benefits for birds and farmers at a time when extreme drought
is making life tough for both. In similar ways, computational sustainability
projects will also be hard at work innovating automated monitoring networks to
protect endangered elephant population from poachers, promoting the discovery of
novel ways to harvest energy from sun light, and designing algorithms to manage
the generation and storage of renewable energy in the power grid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancements in computational sustainability will lead to
novel, low-cost, high-efficiency strategies for saving endangered species,
helping indigenous peoples improve their way of life, and scaling renewables up
to meet 21st century energy demand. CompSustNet is like the seed, the venture
capital, to help the field of computational sustainability achieve what's
possible.