* 1521080
* Dynamics of Entanglement in Dissipative Many-Body Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Ana Rey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

Quantum entanglement, a quantum mechanical phenomenon that quantifies the
interdependence of spatially separated parts of a system, has become a
fundamental concept in physics with broad applications, ranging from quantum
information, to quantum metrology, to the classification and understanding of
condensed matter systems. A vital part of this project, which is to develop new
methods to investigate the dynamics of entanglement, is to establish a close
connection between the theoretical effort and experimental realizations of long-
range interacting systems with a particular emphasis on arrays of trapped ions
in self-assembled crystals. In these systems it is possible to engineer long-
range interactions that depend on the internal states of the ions (spin) by
adjusting the frequency of laser beams that illuminate the ions and impart a
spin dependent force. The scope of the research effort can be placed in the
context of "quantum simulation": experiments will be conducted to simulate
models whose dynamics is difficult to access by existing numerical methods, and
approximate methods capable of reproducing the observed dynamics will then be
developed. This work will lead to a more fundamental understanding of spin
dynamics and entanglement in complex quantum systems, and will contribute
towards the realization of new classes of quantum materials and technologies.
Moreover, it will train and provide research experience to a graduate student
and a postdoc. They will have the opportunity to work with the NIST/Boulder
experimental ion trap group, in addition to the theory groups at JILA and the
University of Colorado at Boulder and thus will be exposed to a highly
collaborative atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to develop new methods capable to describe the dynamics of entanglement in
systems made of many particles with two internal degrees of freedom (spin), that
interact and crosstalk at long distances. The investigators will allow the
possibility that the spin system also exchanges energy and information with an
external reservoir (open system). The intellectual focus of the research will be
divided in three main thrusts: (i) Hamiltonian dynamics, (ii) Dissipative
dynamics with single particle decoherence and (iii) Driven-dissipative dynamics
with more complex many-body decoherence. Thrust (i) plans to investigate the
development of entanglement and correlations in spin 1/2 XXZ models with
arbitrary coupling constants after a quench, starting with easily preparable and
high fidelity product states. Thrust (ii) will delve on the interplay between
local Markovian decoherence and many-body interactions in these systems. Thrust
(iii) will study the interplay between elastic interactions and collective
dissipative couplings, in the presence of external driving sources. These are
challenging goals but the synergy of interests and abilities of the
investigators -- with expertise that spans the different but complementary areas
of quantum optics, condensed matter, and theoretical and experimental atomic
physics-- will allow the group to delve into a broad range of problems, which
would be difficult or unfeasible for a single investigator program.