* 1521546
* EAGER: The Carbondale Study: A Model for Student and Community Engagement in Research
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Scott McClurg, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 78,551.00

The traditional model of academic work is built on three pillars: 1) active
production of new research on scientific and creative work, 2) diffusion of
disciplinary knowledge through teaching, and 3) active engagement with and
service to public audiences. Nevertheless, universities and colleges are
criticized for supporting academic "silos" and "ivory towers" that prevent
blending these three pillars into coherent, impactful programs. This project
introduces a practical model into political science for combining research,
pedagogical, and service missions into a single project. Our model draws on
three basic principles. First, the project is intentionally interdisciplinary in
order to break "silos" of departments and to draw on the insight of multiple
disciplines in policy-relevant research. Second, students are explicitly
included in the project through class enrollment that requires participation in
data collection and analysis, both to enlighten pedagogical material and acquire
practical skills. Finally, the research topic is grounded in local issues that
are of interest to citizens and stakeholders. It is specifically focused on
concerns that are on the local agenda, providing new information about public
opinion into the debate.

Two research questions provide the substantive and methodological anchor of this
project: What is the impact of local stakeholders and citizens in local policy
issues? And, what do these impacts tell us about broader policy processes? Our
research design calls for collection of data on 1) the network of local
stakeholders and 2) a random sample of local citizens. The data will be used to
understand how horizontal power (connections among stakeholders, connections
among citizens) and vertical power (connects between citizens and elites)
relates to policy discussion. We will examine how these connections operate in
the context of five policy areas of interest to the community: economic
development, race and pollution, crime and policing, access to health care, and
town-gown relations. Students will gather data via in-person survey; local
policy-makers will be consulted on the survey to ensure relevance to the
community. The project will have deliverables that include academic publishing,
presentations to local organizations, and student theses and dissertations. This
project will gather a unique data set on how social connections intersect with
individual traits to produce attitudes on local policy issues. This data will
yield systematic measures of social networks of stakeholders and citizens, as
well as links between the two groups. Such measures allow us to examine the
representation of both groups in policy debates, as well as the underlying
impact of social structure on amplifying or muting particular voices in policy
discussion.