* 1521017
* Research in High Energy Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Matthew Kleban, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew B. Kleban at New
York University.

Some contemporary theories of fundamental physics predict the existence of a so-
called "multiverse" containing many distinct bubble universes. These bubbles
collide, and collisions with our own bubble produce "cosmic wakes" that travel
across our universe, creating specific patterns that are potentially observable
with cosmological data from satellite- and ground-based observatories. The
detection of such a collision would be a transformative discovery, demonstrating
that our observable universe is a tiny part of a vastly larger whole populated
by bubbles containing regions of highly exotic physics. It would confirm a
prediction of string theory, provide crucial evidence for the nature of "dark
energy", and permanently alter our view of the big bang. Professor Kleban will
advance a program of research focused on those aspects of string theory and
quantum gravity that predict effects --- like bubble collisions --- that can be
tested with cosmological observations. Professor Kleban's ongoing research seeks
to determine the microphysical origin of cosmic inflation, a period of explosive
expansion that took place in the very early universe. As such, Professor
Kleban's research advances the national interest by promoting the progress of
science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. Professor Kleban's work will also continue
to have broader impact in the form of public lectures and interviews, and in
inspiring undergraduate and graduate physics students at NYU. On another front,
Prof. Kleban will also train and assist in the professional development of a
postdoctoral researcher who will participate in this project.

More technically, Prof. Kleban will attempt to realize a model known as
"unwinding inflation" in a consistent, stabilized string theory
compactification. This model has a number of notable advantages that might make
it a plausible explanation for inflation, particularly the fact that it begins
spontaneously from a generic meta-stable de Sitter phase in the string
landscape. He will also continue his work on inflationary signatures of bubble
collisions, tunneling, and other initial-state effects, as well as dynamical
features produced during inflation that might indicate its microphysical origin.
Lastly, he will continue to study string theory in strongly time-dependent
settings, such as cosmology and relativistic brane scattering.