* 1521765
* Collaborative Research:  Computational methods for ultra-high sensitivity magnetometry of geological samples
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Benjamin Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2019
* USD 197,014.00

This project will develop new techniques and algorithms for analyzing high-
resolution high-sensitivity magnetic field maps of geological samples. Such maps
are built from scanning magnetic microscopy (SMM) data. This research, which
involves a collaboration of mathematicians and geoscientists, will help advance
scientific knowledge in several significant ways, such as unlocking the earliest
records of the Earth's magnetic field by analyzing ancient zircons; accessing
high temporal resolution records of variations in the geomagnetic field that may
be preserved in cave formations; and improving our understanding of the
evolution of the solar system and planet formation processes by analyzing
magnetization records preserved in primitive meteorites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will allow paleomagnetic studies to be
conducted on geological samples that are currently inaccessible due to lack of
sensitivity and spatial resolution of conventional instrumentation and
techniques. The computation of magnetic moments from field maps is generally an
ill-posed inverse problem. The multi-pronged approach to such problems under
study in this project will use different analytical and numerical strategies
(e.g., new sparsity and regularization methods) that will ensure the development
of tools applicable to a variety of specimens. Given the similar mathematical
framework, it is expected that the associated analysis will prove useful for the
analysis of data from aeromagnetic surveys and satellite magnetic observations.