* 1521443
* STTR Phase I:  Digital management of operating room workflow to promote efficiency, cost savings, and quality
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* David Song, ExplORer Surgical LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 269,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to optimize the workflow, coordination and
communication of surgical operating room (OR) teams. Recent technological
advances have allowed development of a simple solution to radically improve the
workflow and performance of OR team members. Historically, OR teams have relied
on archaic paper instrument lists and previous experience to orchestrate complex
tasks, resulting in lost time and waste due to non-coordination. In particular,
the two biggest frustrations for surgeons and OR teams is not having the precise
tools and equipment needed for a surgery and difficulty staying on the same page
as a surgery progresses. Research shows workflow distractions and disruptions
related to these instruments, equipment, and awareness issues are a major cause
for delays/errors in the OR, which lead to problems with costs, efficiency, and
most importantly quality of surgical care. By introducing a digital real-time
workflow management tool to the OR environment, this technology will set a new
benchmark for OR team performance. The proposed project aims to test and prove
the value of a digital application software that displays the tools, tasks and
preferences specific to the operating surgeon along each step of a given
procedure. This software solves decades old frustrations of OR teams by guiding
them through a surgery in real time, raising awareness as to the technical
progression of the case, and effectively decreasing the preventable disruptions,
distractions and delays related to the failure of having the correct
instruments/equipment available. Via a prospective multi-institutional study,
the technology will be tested during live surgical procedures to generate data
proving its value based on cost savings and efficiency. Ultimately, the use of
this technology will lead to improved surgical quality. Using an iterative
design and development approach, the testing of this technology will directly
feed back into the development of additional fundamental features and new
generations of this product, such that OR team satisfaction is maximized and it
fits as seamlessly as possible into existing workflow. The time has come to
harness modern technology to optimize the performance of our surgical teams and
thus improve delivery of care in the OR.