* 1522508
* A new research greenhouse at Blandy Experimental Farm
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* David Carr, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 335,035.00

Funds will support the construction of a new research greenhouse at Blandy
Experimental Farm, an environmental sciences field station in the northern
Shenandoah Valley operated by the University of Virginia
(http://blandy.virginia.edu/). Blandy supports a broad range of research in the
environmental sciences, but research on plant genetics and plant ecology are
particular strengths. The Blandy faculty anticipates that strength in these
areas is sustainable and that student training in this area will continue to
grow. Blandy's existing greenhouse is over 70 years old and has become
structurally compromised. Because it was originally built within the Orland E.
White Arboretum, it is now surrounded by trees that greatly reduce sunlight into
the greenhouse. Its inefficient design does not allow much flexibility for
expansion. This proposal represents the first phase of the replacement. The
proposed greenhouse would include two 510 square-foot bays that would provide a
total of 612 square feet of bench space. The floors of the proposed building
would be concrete to help minimize pest and disease problems. The new greenhouse
would have improved temperature and environmental control systems, including a
propane heating system, a simple ventilation and exhaust system, and a
retractable shade system. The new greenhouse will provide substantially better
support for Blandy researchers.

Undergraduate and graduate training is central to Blandy's mission, and a
research greenhouse is an essential resource for both of these programs. Past
graduate students at Blandy have continued on to productive careers in science
that range from K-12 science education to faculty positions at universities. The
undergraduate research program at Blandy has been highly successful in training
students, most of whom have gone on to highly regarded graduate programs in
ecology. These students include many talented young men and women from
underrepresented groups who have now gone on to higher degrees in science.
Blandy Experimental Farm is also home to the State Arboretum of Virginia and has
thriving K-12 and other public programs, all with an environmental science
focus. These programs build from the expertise and discoveries created in
Blandy's research program. For example, all Blandy undergraduate researchers
spend a morning presenting some aspect of their research to children attending a
summer nature camp at Blandy. The relationships that have developed in the K-12
program have made it relatively easy to identify and recruit local teachers into
NSF-supported programs for teacher training, and most of these teachers have
required greenhouse space for their projects. Blandy has also frequently served
as a source for research experience for high school students, and almost all of
these students have worked on projects in the greenhouse.