* 1522024
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Utilization Of Domestic Horses In Historical And Ecological Context
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,02/28/2017
* William Taylor, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 25,131.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Emily Jones (PI), William T. Taylor (co-PI) will
analyze skeletal remains of ancient horses to shed light on the origins of horse
herding and riding in eastern Eurasia. The use of the domestic horse for food
and transport has been linked with major social, political, and economic changes
to human societies, but its origins in prehistory are poorly understood. This
project will address these questions through demographic study to identify
ancient herding practices, morphological analyses to establish evidence for
horseback riding and/or driving, and radiocarbon dating. This research will
improve understanding of the links between domestic horse use, ecology, and
human behavior. In addition, the project will fund the completion of Mr.
Taylor's dissertation at the University of New Mexico, and will lead to the
creation of an open-access 3D database of ancient horse remains to preserve
these data for research and education. The work will be shared with the
international community through talks and peer-reviewed manuscripts in both
Mongolian and English.

Mr. Taylor's research will test predictions that horse-riding, herding societies
developed in response to new ecological opportunities during the 2nd millennium
BCE, centuries earlier than some existing models for East Asia suggest. By
comparing ancient horses and modern specimens with known histories, the co-PI
will characterize the impacts of bridling and riding on the equine skull, and
using a 3D scanner, develop quantitative techniques for identifying horse
transport in archaeological contexts. By estimating the age and sex of horse
specimens buried at late Bronze Age stone monuments in Mongolia, Mr. Taylor will
evaluate the possibility of ancient horse herding between 1300 and 700 BCE. With
the aid of a portable 3D scanner, he will analyze these archaeological specimens
for pathological changes, and use these data to assess the hypothesis that the
horses were ridden or used to pull chariots. Finally, using new and published
radiocarbon dates, Mr. Taylor will produce a chronological model to link changes
in ancient Mongolian horse use with key environmental and cultural developments
in Eurasia. These complementary studies will help to develop explanatory models
for the origins and spread of horse herding and riding, which can be applied to
modern and ancient societies around the globe.