* 1522531
* Collaborative Research: Analytic Approaches To Tracing Interaction Networks In The US Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Andrew Duff, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 9,853.00

This collaboration between Drs. Judith Habicht-Mauche at University of
California, Santa Cruz and Andrew Duff at Washington State University examines
ceramic technological practices and resources used to explore how emergent
social networks enhanced the flow of information, material and people in the
late precontact Southwest, transforming communities and identities in ways that
continue to have relevance today. The Pueblo IV period (A.D. 1275-1400) was
marked by a series of demographic upheavals that resulted in the formation of
radically reconfigured social landscapes. The depopulation of long-occupied and
densely settled regions instigated migrations that led to the displacement and
reorganization of local communities and regional social networks. In areas that
received a significant influx of new population, people from diverse ethnic,
linguistic and cultural backgrounds came together to remake their social worlds.
On the one hand, the Pueblo IV period appears to be a unique event in Pueblo
history that led to many of the social formations and cultural identities that
characterized the Southwest at European contact and that have largely endured to
the present day. On the other hand, it is only one moment in a cycle of
demographic reorganization and social negotiation that has characterized Pueblo
societies from the beginnings of agricultural village life. The nature of Pueblo
IV period reorganization,both what made it historically and structurally unique
and what linked it to cycles of movement and culture change in the
Southwest,remains a topic of central importance and anthropological inquiry.
Archaeologists investigating this time period are interested in tracing migrant
populations, in understanding how migrants merged with local groups to form
multi-ethnic communities, in modeling how new social identities were negotiated
and sustained, in documenting the emergence of novel social institutions and
ritual practices and in understanding emergent systems of leadership and power.
Data collected during this project will identify intra- and inter-regional
trajectories of ceramic technological innovation and transfers of knowledge that
illuminate subtle and complex interconnections among past and present
populations. These connections trace both contact and movement of people, which
have implications for contemporary Native American groups and public policy.

Habicht-Mauche and Duff will mobilize a variety of analytical techniques to
characterize local "recipes" and sources of raw materials used to prepare glaze
paints on pottery manufactured at Pueblo IV period sites in east-central Arizona
and west-central New Mexico. The project will chemically characterize glaze-
paint composition using LA-ICP-MS and isotopically source lead in glaze paint
using dissolution ICP-MS. These data will be integrated with other extant
regional glaze-paint databases. Relationships among composition and source will
be evaluated using Social Network Analysis. Thus, data from this project will
contribute to emerging macroregional models of how late precontact social
networks facilitated the exchange of technical information and materials,
created and sustained migration corridors, and served as arenas of social
reproduction that transformed Pueblo society. This project will enhance
understanding of the cultural history of the Native peoples of the Southwest,
while also making broader intellectual contributions to anthropological studies
of migration and the anthropology of technology.