* 1522575
* Physics of Strong Disorder and Correlation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Patrick Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2018
* USD 354,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education in
condensed matter physics. The theoretical work takes its inspiration from
experimental discovery in new materials and aims to explain and predict novel
phenomena. Such novel phenomena often arise in materials where electrons are
strongly interacting with each other, and this work will focus on this rich
arena. Past examples include Nobel winning discoveries such as the fractional
quantum Hall effect and high temperature superconductivity. The current project
involves studies of a novel state of matter called quantum spin liquid, as well
as the theory behind high temperature superconductivity. This research area is
particularly well suited for the training of graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows because both mathematical sophistication and an understanding of real
materials are required to make progress.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education in
condensed matter physics. Strong correlation refers to physical phenomena in
materials which are driven by the strong repulsive interactions between
electrons. These phenomena include the origin of magnetism and a large class of
insulators called Mott insulators. Recently there has been great interest in the
study of a new phase of matter called the quantum spin liquid, where the
tendency towards antiferromagnetic order is destroyed by quantum fluctuations.
It is predicted theoretically that when this happens, novel excitations emerge
which are not otherwise found in nature. Examples include fermionic particles
carrying spin 1/2 but no charge and emergent gauge fields. Several candidate
spin liquids have been discovered but their properties remain to be fully
explored experimentally and theoretically. The project will carry out
theoretical studies both to interpret existing data and to propose new
experimental probes. Advances in the spin liquid problem have encouraged the
P.I. to re-examine the long standing problem of high temperature
superconductivity, which arises by adding carriers to a Mott insulator. The
current project involves exploration of new ideas based on recent progress in
the understanding of quantum spin liquids.