* 1522798
* Numerical Solution of Constrained Optimization Problems Governed by Partial Differential Equations with Uncertain Parameters
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Matthias Heinkenschloss, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 209,999.00

This project will provide new mathematical algorithms and theoretical analyses
for the solution of optimization problems governed by partial differential
equations (PDEs) with uncertain parameters. These problems arise in many science
and engineering decision making applications, where a decision has to be made
before the realization of uncertain inputs can be observed that will impact the
outcome of the decision. The uncertainty can be incorporated into the
optimization formulation using so-called risk measures, which typically involve
the expected value of the quantity of interest and a measure of its deviation
from the expected value. In principle, these formulations allow one to compute
decisions that balance maximization of their expected outcome and minimization
of the risk due to uncertainty. However, the numerical solution of these
problems presents many theoretical and algorithmic challenges. For example, the
numerical solution requires some sort of sampling of the random inputs, which
can make these PDE constrained optimization problems extremely expensive to
solve. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address several of the above mentioned
challenges, this research will provide theoretical analyses of the well-
posedness and of optimality conditions for a class of semilinear elliptic PDE
constrained optimization problems, and it will derive discretization error
bounds for sparse grid and quasi Monte Carlo discretizations applied to PDE
constrained optimization. Furthermore, it will develop and analyze adaptive
methods which reduce the total number of samples needed, or incorporate reduced
order models. This research is at the interface between stochastic programming,
deterministic PDE constrained optimization, and solution of PDEs with random
inputs, and it will make algorithmic and theoretical contributions to these
areas. The application of theories and numerical methods to example problems
will serve as a model for other researchers and decision makers, and will lead
to more efficient algorithms for important classes of decision making under
uncertainty. Results will be disseminated through publication of algorithms and
results. In addition, the results of the project will be used in regularly
offered courses on the theory and applications of optimization as well as in
special courses on PDE constrained optimization under uncertainty aiming at
students in both mathematics and engineering.