* 1522544
* Tropical Cyclone Research Forum "Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research: Setting the Future Course"; Charleston, South Carolina
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Meg Austin, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The Tropical Cyclone Research Forum will be held on March 3-7, 2015 at the
Marriott Hotel in Charleston, South Carolina. The theme of the workshop is
"Tropical Cyclone Operations & Research: Setting the Future Course". Topics
include: snapshots of tropical cyclone R&D; federal numerical modeling
initiatives; transitioning research to operations; tropical cyclone model
development and technology transfer; observations and observing strategies
satellite, aircraft reconnaissance, unmanned aircraft systems, upper-ocean
observations/profiles; improvements in tropical cyclone forecast and warning
products and services; and social science applications to the tropical cyclone
forecast and warning notification problem. The Tropical Cyclone Research Forum
is sponsored by NSF/Physical and Dynamic Meteorology Program, NOAA/Office of
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, and the Office of Naval Research.

Intellectual merit: At the Tropical Cyclone Research Forum, representatives from
the academic research community, industry and Federal agencies will have the
opportunity to discuss the latest research on Tropical Cyclone activity and
forecasting such as: 1. Review of the 2014 hurricane/typhoon season from both an
operations and reconnaissance perspective. 2. The Research Priorities of the
Operational Centers 3. Observations and Observing Strategies 4. Tropical Cyclone
Model Development and Technology Transfer 5. Transitioning Research to
Operations 6. Advances in Tropical Cyclone Forecast and Warning Products and
Services 7. Applications of Social Science Research Results/Demonstration
Projects

Broader impacts: The workshop is important to society because it brings together
the academic research community, industry, Federal agencies and other user
communities such as emergency management, to prepare for the upcoming hurricane
season and make improvements to the United States hurricane forecasting and
warning program.