* 1522607
* I-Corps:  Formation of thin films with self-assembled monolayers embedded on their surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Pushpendra Singh, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

In many applications, thin films are coated onto the surface of materials to
modify their mechanical, thermal, electrical, and optical properties. The
coatings must be highly ordered two-dimensional crystals with a specific lattice
spacing which is application dependent. For example, to make a highly-efficient
anti-reflection coating for solar cells, the surface is textured with a periodic
pattern with the wavelength comparable to that of solar radiation. This can be
achieved by coating the surface by a thin film with a monolayer of particles
embedded on its surface. The particle size and the spacing between particles can
be selected for obtaining the desired pattern. These particle coated thin films
can also be used for making masks for nano-lithography, textured hydrophobic
surfaces, and membrane filters with regular pores. The membrane filters could be
used to precisely control the mass transfer rate of a drug-delivery patch, and
to separate proteins and other macromolecules based on their sizes.

Capillarity-driven clustering at fluid interfaces is a well-established method
for forming monolayers, but those monolayers are poorly ordered. In the proposed
technique an electric field in the direction normal to the interface is applied
to control the self-assembly process so to obtain a virtually defect-free
monolayer of electrically neutral nano-particles. When there are two or more
types of particles present, there is a hierarchical order in the assembled
monolayers which can be optimized by selecting a suitable fluid. The technique
also allows us to vary the lattice spacing as appropriate to the application.
The monolayer is then frozen onto the surface of a thin flexible film which can
be transferred to the surface of a material to modify its surface properties.
The technique is easy to implement and can be applied to a broad range of
particle sizes and types with a high level of controllability which will be
advantageous in many applications.