* 1522836
* Collaborative Research: Using Field Experiments to Understand Household Barriers to Energy Efficiency in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Dominique Pride, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 561,254.00

Energy efficiency is a policy goal of first magnitude. For individuals, it can
imply significant welfare gains. For the country as a whole, it can imply not
only improvement in energy independence but also attaining environmental goals.
The research team proposes to investigate the reasons why individuals fail to
adopt seemingly adaptive conservation technologies and behaviors. The proposal
is based on a series of studies that combine field experiments and data analysis
of large policies initiatives in the state of Alaska.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heating costs throughout the polar North stress community
resilience. Cold is extreme, hydrocarbon prices volatile, and local opportunity
to adjust cash income to price shocks limited. Energy conservation would appear
adaptive, and the State of Alaska provides substantial subsidies to facilitate
household energy conservation. Despite this, relatively few adopt energy
efficient technologies to reduce home heating costs. The research team proposes
three related studies to understand why. The project explores individual
decision rules, the role of cash payoffs, information, and nuisance and other
hidden costs of making investments to reduce energy for space and hot water
heat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on discovering opportunities
to design better policy. Taking seriously the complexity of household decision-
making, it will produce new information on engineering models, behavioral
models, program effectiveness and policy alternatives. It will generate the
first publically available data on household heating oil use -- a critical input
to Northern energy policy. The project works collaboratively with local
stakeholders, agencies, and academic communities, which will produce lessons for
building future effective partnerships. Finally, the project entails substantial
outreach and training with local participants through direct participation in
the project in combination with educational
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the research project
jointly analyzes participant records in Alaska's Home Energy Rebate Program
(HERP), which subsidizes investments to reduce space and hot water heat, and gas
utility billing records. Detailed program and energy consumption data permit
assessment of both program-predicted and actual household payoffs, point to
investments that may occur for reasons other than energy conservation, and
indicate cost-effective investments not pursued. This analysis will reveal the
way decisions about conservation are made in the face of relevant information
and their effectiveness in producing energy savings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second part of the research measures the comparative importance of hidden, non-
pecuniary costs of completing the HERP's initial home energy assessment. We will
conduct a field experiment that systematically isolates and removes participant
costs and uncertainty from the task. Also, the incentives to gather technology
information will give causal evidence of the importance of information on HERP
participation and completion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third part of the
research project measures behavioral impacts of providing rural consumers real-
time information on their consumption and expenditures for heat. Essentially all
rural Alaskan households use heating oil as primary heat source, but consumer
ability to map realized costs of behavior is limited: Costs are observed only
when the fuel oil tank is refilled, which may occur as little as 2-3 times a
year. By deploying new heating oil metering technology developed by the Alaska
Center for Energy and Power specifically for remote rural application, we assess
behavioral effects of a dramatic increase in information. This study will
generate the first Alaska dataset of measured residential heating oil demand.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will significantly improve knowledge of the
complex reasons why seemingly adaptive energy efficiency investments are not
made. The research team will access information not previously available to
researchers, and conduct experiments to create counterfactuals that
observational data cannot deliver, to: better understand the motivations of
adopters; recalibrate engineering models of building energy use to incorporate
human behavior; measure the causal effect of pecuniary incentives in the
adoption of energy savings technologies; produce a novel dataset of actual
demand for heating oil in rural Alaska; determine the importance of hidden costs
as a barrier to energy conservation program participation.