* 1522557
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Ebola-related Information Obtained by Healthcare Providers: Effects of Formal and Informal Communication Channels and Organizational Structure
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Le Zhou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/28/2017
* USD 34,677.00

The spread of Ebola from Africa to the United States has received much attention
among the general public and healthcare providers (e.g., nurses). Healthcare
providers need a diverse range of information in order to protect themselves and
the public. However, they may, or may not, be able to obtain such information
from their employers. In critical and time sensitive situations, they may obtain
information from other sources to complement employer-provided information. This
research aims to study the dynamics on the types of information healthcare
providers wanted and obtained and their relationships with organizational
network and structural characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
grounded in the literature on social network and organizational structure. It
also builds on the principal investigators' previous productive collaboration on
the health information wants (HIW) concept, framework, and questionnaire, which
emphasizes a bottom-up approach to understanding the types and amount of a broad
range of health information wanted by individuals. This study can advance
knowledge about social network and organizational structure by examining their
effects on healthcare providers in various healthcare organizations in time
sensitive situations like the current Ebola crisis. It can also advance the HIW
framework by examining its use in the context of healthcare organizations. It
bridges together these two previously separated bodies of literature and creates
new knowledge about the information healthcare providers wanted and obtained, as
well as their relationships with social network and organizational structure.
Study findings can help develop informational, educational interventions to
effectively and efficiently provide the right types and amount of information
healthcare providers in different organizations want in Ebola-like emergencies
in the future. The findings may lead to improved health and well-being of
healthcare providers and the patients they care for when similar crises occur.