* 1522012
* Collaborative Research: The Asthenosphere and Mantle Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Adrian Lenardic, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 88,327.00

The majority of changes that occur on our planet can be tracked back to one of
two energy sources: 1) Energy from the sun and 2) Energy from the Earth's
interior. How interior energy shapes the Earth's surface links directly to
understanding the dynamics of plate tectonics. Plate tectonics stands as one of
the three major scientific revolutions of the 20th century, along with quantum
mechanics and relativity. As a theory it remains a kinematic one in that it
describes the motion of plates at the Earth's surface but does not connect the
motions directly to the forces that drive the motion. Extending plate tectonics
theory from a kinematic one to a dynamic one has been a something of a grand
challenge in the geological and geophysical communities. From the inception of
plate tectonics as a kinematic theory, it has been suspected that the dynamics
of plate tectonics is connected to the existence of a low viscosity zone below
plates - the asthenosphere. Mapping, quantifying, and seeking to bring
conceptual understanding to several of the factors that tie into this long
suspected connection is the theme of this work. More specifically, over the next
one year cycle, the team will: A) Test the hypothesis that changes in
asthenosphere structure can drive rapid changes in plate motion of the type
recently identified to have occurred on the Earth 50-100 Million years ago and
B) Explore the interaction between plate tectonics and the cycling of volatiles
between surface reservoirs and the Earth's deep interior (e.g., deep water
cycling can effect the nature of the asthenosphere through its role on rock
melting).

The investigators will explore the effects of a low viscosity asthenosphere on
mantle dynamics. Numerical mantle convection experiments will be used to map the
combined effects of a low-viscosity asthenosphere and plate boundary failure on
maintaining a plate-tectonic mode of mantle convection. A specific goal will be
to identify conditions that allow for rapid changes in plate motions, as have
recently been inferred for the Earth's Cretaceous. Numerical work will be
augmented with theoretical scaling analysis. The analysis will provide insight
into energetic balances between the resistance to plate motion associated with
dissipation at plate margins, within the asthenosphere, and in the bulk mantle.
This will allow the PIs to link dynamic modeling to instantaneous flow studies
that isolate the balance of dissipation between plate processes and the bulk
mantle. That link will bring added observational constraints to bear on their
results and predictions. The analysis will also be extended to model deep
volatile cycling (water and carbon) within the Earth and volatile exchange from
the surface to the interior of our planet over geologic time. The key feedback
this introduces, relative to the role of the asthenosphere on maintaining plate
tectonics, comes from the ability of volatiles to effect melting in the upper
mantle, which can significantly alter the structure of the asthenosphere.