* 1522581
* Travel Support for Student and Speaker Participation at the Fifth International Conference on Self-Healing Materials; Duke University; Durham, North Carolina; June 22-24, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 03/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports the participation of graduate students, postdocs, and young
faculty presenters at the 5th International Conference on Self-Healing Materials
(ICSHM), Durham, North Carolina, June 22-24, 2015. ICSHM is a biennial
conference focusing on advances in self-healing materials science, engineering,
and technological applications. The conference provides a forum for knowledge
dissemination focused solely on self-healing materials, bringing together the
representatives from different communities that share interests and challenges,
but that would otherwise mix infrequently. This support will have a significant
impact by encouraging broad participation of young scientists from traditionally
disconnected science and engineering disciplines. All student and postdoctoral
recipients will be expected to present at the meeting, supporting their
professional development. The conference organizers will actively recruit
participants from groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences and
engineering. Active participation is further encouraged by student poster
awards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of ICSHM2015 encompasses all classes of
self-healing materials including polymers, ceramics, metals, and composites,
while bio-inspiration serves to guide potential future research advances. A
broad spectrum of industries are impacted and represented by the field including
aerospace, automotive, transportation, microelectronics, architecture,
electronics, medicine, and manufacturing. ICSHM2015 will introduce the community
to the newly emerging field of self-healing biomaterials and biomedical
implants. Expanding the range of length scales accessible by self-healing
strategies is a new and emerging trend, and special symposia on the extreme ends
of self-healing length scales will be featured: large-volume approaches and
truly molecular approaches that address damage at the level of individual
polymer sub-chains, interfaces, and grain boundaries. The following scientific
areas are covered: Anticorrosion coatings and paints; Bio-inspired materials;
Cementitious materials; Coatings &amp; paints; Fiber-reinforced composite
materials; Functional applications; Materials characterization;
Mechanochemistry; Metallic materials; Microvascular systems; Modeling &amp;
numerical analysis; Supramolecular polymers; Thermoplastics/thermosets; Energy
harvesting and storage; Self-reinforcing gels; 3D printing and self-healing
systems; Expanding range of length scales; Large volume repair; Biomaterials;
Self-healing at high temperatures.