* 1522597
* AG15: SIAM Conference on Applied Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Grigoriy Blekherman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 25,000.00

The award will be used to support travel of students and early career
researchers to the 2015 Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM)
Conference on Applied Algebraic Geometry, to be held at the National Institute
for Mathematical Sciences (NIMS) and at the Korean Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST) in Daejeon, South Korea on August 3-7, 2015. This is the
biennial conference of the SIAM Activity Group on Algebraic Geometry. The SIAM
activity group was founded in 2009 and the SIAM Conference on Applied Algebraic
Geometry has quickly grown to be the premier conference on applications of
algebraic geometry. This conference presents a significant opportunity to
establish new connections and collaborations with the algebraic geometry
community in Asia. The meeting promises to have a significant impact on the
growth of Applied Algebraic Geometry, and the conference offers a unique
opportunity for students and early career researchers.

The 2015 SIAM Conference on Applied Algebraic Geometry will continue the
tradition of covering a very wide range of topics in applied algebraic geometry.
"Algebraic Geometry" is interpreted broadly to include at least: algebraic
geometry, commutative algebra, noncommutative algebra, symbolic and numeric
computation, algebraic and geometric combinatorics, representation theory, and
algebraic topology. The conference will include more than 60 minisymposium
sessions with approximately 250 invited talks, and 9 plenary addresses given by
internationally renowned experts. The conference is a satellite of the
International Congress on Industrial and Applied Mathematics (ICIAM 2015) to be
held in Beijing on the following week, so the participants will have an
opportunity to attend both conferences. The conference website is
http://camp.nims.re.kr/activities/eventpages/?id=200&action=overview