* 1522663
* Higher-Order Methods for Interface Problems with Non-Aligned Meshes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Marcus Sarkis, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 189,344.00

Interface problems arise in several applications including heart models, cochlea
models, aquatic animal locomotion, blood cell motion, front-tracking in porous
media flows and material science, to name a few. One of the difficulties in
these problems is that solutions are normally not smooth across interfaces, and
therefore standard numerical methods will lose accuracy near the interface
unless the meshes align to it. However, it is advantageous to have meshes that
do not align with the interface, especially for time dependent problems where
the interface moves with time. Re-meshing at every time step can be
prohibitively costly, can destroy the structure of the grid, can deteriorate the
well-conditioning of the stiffness matrix, and affect the stability of the
problem. The first problem studied will involve new stable and higher-order
accurate Finite Element - Immersed Boundary Methods (FE-IBM) for evolution
problems where the interface moves with time. The second problem studied is the
design and analysis of robust higher-order discretizations for interface
problems with high-contrast discontinuous diffusion coefficients. Benefits of
the project include the strengthening of connections between numerical analysis
and other areas of science and engineering, particularly bioengineering, porous
media flows, material sciences and parallel computing. This project will impact
the development of numerical algorithms used in the fluid-structure interaction
communities. A broader impact will be the training of graduate and undergraduate
students of mathematics and related disciplines by exposing them to
interdisciplinary problems and collaborations addressing questions of great
technological importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the drawbacks of the
finite element and finite difference immersed boundary methods is that they are
only first-order accurate due to the non-smoothness of the solution across the
interface. Furthermore, very few mathematical analyses of these methods exist
for time dependent problems and for fluid-structure interaction problems. The
first part of the project involves the construction of higher-order FE-IBM
algorithms and establishing a corresponding mathematical foundation to obtain
rigorous time stability and a priori and a posteriori error estimates. The
second part of the project deals with new finite element methods which are able
to accurately capture solutions of elliptic interface problems with high-
contrast coefficients in the case that the finite element mesh is not
necessarily aligned with the interface. The goal here is to develop finite
element methods with optimal convergence rates, where the constants hidden in
these estimates are independent of the contrast and on how the mesh crosses the
interface.