* 1522240
* NRI: RUI: Autonomous Vehicles: Ethics, Design, and Risk
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Patrick Lin, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 164,436.00

This collaborative research project will examine ethical issues that arise in
connection with autonomous vehicles (such as self-driving cars), from
programming choices to guarding against abuse. Collaborators include engineers,
philosophers, and legal experts. Autonomous vehicles are starting to emerge, and
they are predicted to solve a lot of problems, especially traffic accidents and
fatalities. But they will not be foolproof, meaning that (just like any other
technology) they will be subject to error, misuse, and failure, and some designs
may be better or more responsible than others. Even if autonomous vehicles can
save thousands of lives each year, industry and researchers are not thereby
released from the obligation to consider ethical, legal, and policy implications
of the bringing about of unnecessary and wrongful deaths. The loss of lives in
this way could have a devastating, high profile effect on the nascent industry.
The results of this project will benefit both industry and the academia.
Deliverables will include a public report, a book, university-level courses,
conference talks, and academic as well as media publications. Beyond the
autonomous driving industry, this project provides research and materials in
robot ethics and technology ethics more broadly, as pressure mounts to integrate
ethics into engineering and science programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and
his team will examine the different ways that an autonomous vehicle could be
involved in an accident, as well as crash-avoidance and crash-optimization
options to mitigate the harm that occurs in unavoidable crashes. They will also
investigate the technical and policy feasibility of various ethical frameworks
to guide actions by autonomous vehicles by drawing from classical dilemmas in
ethics, ongoing work in technology ethics, and real engineering in academic and
industry labs on the front lines. They will also attend to broader issues, such
as how autonomous cars should handle medical emergencies, criminal conduct, and
other common situations. The project is aligned with the NSF's mission, as well
as the call of its NRI program for research to gain a better understanding of
the long-term social, behavioral and economic implications of co-robots. Because
autonomous vehicles are poised to be the first robots to be integrated with
society on a large scale, they will set the tone for the entire social or co-
robotics industry. It is crucially important to engage ethics ahead of these
developments to consider the issues and scenarios in advance of potentially
high-profile accidents.