* 1522545
* RUI: Experimental Seawater Laboratory at the Coastal Studies Center, Bowdoin College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Carlon, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 214,361.00

The Bowdoin College Coastal Studies Center (http://www.bowdoin.edu/coastal-
studies-center/) is awarded a grant to expand the capabilities of an existing
flowing seawater system so that climate variables can be independently
manipulated in experimental aquaria. The Coastal Studies Center (CSC) on Orr's
Island in mid-Coast Maine, is an educational and research laboratory serving
Bowdoin College and visiting students and researchers. The CSC has a sentinel
position at the southern boundary of the Gulf of Maine, a cold-water boundary
that is moving northward as the Earth's climate warms. Further, the once highly
productive Gulf of Maine faces other synergistic impacts including overfishing
and invasive species that are changing the structure and function of kelp
forests, the rocky intertidal, seagrass beds, and salt marshes. While several
research-focused marine laboratories rim the Gulf of Maine, the CSC is a unique
RUI focused center that is focused on facilitating undergraduate engagement on
the problems of a rapidly changing ocean. This project improves the RUI
capabilities of Bowdoin College, which has significantly increased female and
minority enrollment over the last ten years. The new experimental seawater
capabilities are also likely to attract new visiting students and faculty,
expanding the CSC research community. Finally, the improvements will allow
increased experimentation and monitoring of estuarine systems. Estuaries support
high biological productivity, yet they also experience stronger and more
variable impacts of ocean acidity than the open ocean due to the reduced
buffering capacity of freshwater inputs and high biological contributions of
carbon dioxide. A new cluster of sensors will sample key climate change
variables (including crucial pCO2) in Harpswell Sound and stream this data to
Internet portals year round, providing a much-needed estuarine node in the Gulf
of Maine.

The project has two major elements: 1. building four experimental seawater
modules that will independently control temperature, oxygen levels, pH, and
sterilize effluent; and 2. constructing a pier-mounted instrument array to
continuously monitor climatic variables. Element 1 includes a seawater cooling
system that combines an external centralized chilling unit with four independent
chilled water loops (modules) that can cool 400 gallons of seawater from summer
ambient temperatures to 4 degrees Celsius. Additionally, each module will be
fitted with the plumbing, controls, and sensors to manipulate dissolved oxygen
levels and pH via addition of nitrogen and carbon dioxide gasses respectively.
An inline UV filter system will be added for experimental applications that
culture non-native organisms and require effluent sterilization. Element 2 will
install a pier-based environmental monitoring platform, that will stream
temperature, salinity, pH, and pCO2 data to a global research community 365 days
a year. This new monitoring location in Harpswell Sound will provide key
environmental data on how estuarine marine systems are responding to climate
change, and provide essential data for parameterizing climate change
experiments.