* 1522717
* Exploring the WIMP Parameter Space Above and Below the Neutrino Floor
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2014,06/30/2018
* Louis Strigari, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 119,258.00

This award funds the research activities on dark matter of Professor Louis
Strigari at Indiana University. Dark matter comprises about 80% of the total
matter in the Universe. However, it has not yet been directly detected and its
identify remains a mystery. A leading candidate for dark matter would be a new
elementary particle of nature, and identifying this particle is one of the
foremost goals of modern science. The research within this project provides a
crucial input to experiments that are searching for dark matter particles over
the course of the next decade.

As the various experimental searches for particle dark matter increase in size
and improve in sensitivity, new challenges will arise in attempts to extract a
possible signal. For direct dark matter searches, an important background in the
future will be the "neutrino floor"; this is defined as the scale at which
detectors are large enough to detect neutrinos produced from the Sun,
atmosphere, and supernovae. Detectors are now fast approaching the scale at
which these neutrinos will appear, so it is imperative to make a concerted
effort towards understanding their spectra so that they may be properly
identified. The funding under this award will be utilized to study theoretical
and experimental methods to reduce the uncertainty on the neutrino backgrounds
in dark matter detectors. The work will involve theoretical predictions,
statistical data modeling, and analysis of many modern dark matter and neutrino
experiments.