* 1522052
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Wearable Devices for In-Home Monitoring of Patients at Risk for Heart Failure
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* David McManus, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 427,333.00

In the US, heart failure affects over 6 million people and is the most common
cause of hospitalization. New technologies are needed to enable in-home
monitoring and treatment of patients at risk of developing acute decompensated
heart failure. Early symptom detection will help clinicians reduce disease
progression and prevent hospitalization. Current home-based management relies on
monitoring weight gain, but weight alone does not accurately gauge the fluid
accumulation that predicts worsening of heart failure. Atrial fibrillation, a
heart rhythm abnormality associated with stroke, hospitalization, and 2-fold
higher risk of death, is also common in heart failure patients. Because atrial
fibrillation symptoms can be vague, intermittent, and short lasting, atrial
fibrillation detection requires continuous monitoring--a challenge in ambulatory
patients. A device that can measure vital signs (including heart rate,
respiration rate, and tidal volume), intrathoracic fluid status (using thoracic
bioimpedance) and heart rhythm will both detect atrial fibrillation and promote
quick and accurate identification of the early stages of acute decompensation in
chronic heart failure patients. Thus, the goal of this work is to develop a
novel device for in-home monitoring of heart failure patients who are at risk of
developing acute decompensated heart failure. The system will consist of a
bioimpedance monitor (a wearable vest with dry electrodes--no adhesives, gels or
wetting required) to detect trending to acute decompensated heart failure and of
a smart-watch to measure atrial fibrillation. These components will require the
development of novel sensor and information technologies, wearable monitors,
signal processing algorithms, and telecommunication systems. The long-term goal
of this project is to enable in-home monitoring of patients at risk of
catastrophic cardiovascular events in order to provide prompt, targeted
intervention, reduce symptom progression and avert preventable hospitalization.
A wireless cardiac monitoring system that will be comfortable to wear, easy to
use, cost effective, and feasible for home use with ambulatory patients will be
developed. The system will provide patients and their healthcare providers with
early warnings about cardiac decompensation and serious but difficult-to-detect
arrhythmias, which can empower patients and caregivers, improve quality of life,
and reduce health care costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to: 1)
develop reuseable carbon-black and polydimethylsiloxane (CB/PDMS) electrodes
that capture bioimpedance and electrocardiogram data; 2) develop hardware and
algorithms for acute decompensated heart failure detection, resulting in a
wearable monitor with embedded CB/PDMS electrodes; 3) develop hardware and
algorithms for atrial fibrillation detection using a smart watch; and 4)
evaluate the performance and usability of both detection systems in a
prospectively recruited cohort study. The clinical study will target
populations, including patients with psychosocial or cognitive limitations, that
are at high risk for acute decompensated heart failure and atrial fibrillation
progression but that typically are omitted from clinical studies. The central
hypothesis is that an innovative bioimpedance monitor with re-usable, non-wetted
bioimpedance electrodes embedded in a wearable vest device used in conjunction
with a smart watch will continuously collect and transmit key physiologic data.
Devices running decision-support algorithms will analyze this data to identify
patients with emergent acute decompensated heart failure symptoms that require
prompt attention. A second hypothesis is that a wrist-based continuous
monitoring device will provide unobtrusive and acceptable 24-hour heart rhythm
monitoring and will augment data collected by the bioimpedance monitor. Heart
rhythm, vital signs, and intrathoracic fluid accumulation measurements will be
collected via 24-hour data recordings. This data will be used to develop a
robust clinical decision support algorithm that accurately detects atrial
fibrillation and early acute decompensated heart failure.