* 1522267
* Numerical Analysis of Non-Equilibrium Turbulence
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* William Layton, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 298,613.00

This research project treats a central problem in many industrial and
environmental flow simulations. Complex turbulence not at statistical
equilibrium occurs in almost all engineering fluid flows. Its accurate
simulation is essential for many critical applications, including global change
estimation and energy efficiency optimization. For example, 85% of the energy in
the U.S. is generated by combustion; energy efficiency optimization requires
accurate simulation of turbulent mixing. However, there is little mathematical
theory, few effective models, and no systematic computational practice for
simulation of turbulent flows that are not at statistical equilibrium. This
research project aims to develop mathematical models and computational
algorithms to simulate such flows and to conduct a rigorous numerical analysis
of the new models and algorithms. Several graduate students will participate in
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to conduct research in
numerical analysis on turbulence not at statistical equilibrium. The goal of the
project is to extend current models and computational algorithms to turbulence
not at statistical equilibrium, allowing for backscatter (energy flow from
fluctuations back to means) without negative viscosities, and to develop
mathematical support for the new models and algorithms. The research will
develop, analyze, and test new models of turbulence adapted from models at
statistical equilibrium and will develop new unconditionally nonlinearly stable,
linearly implicit numerical methods for their approximation. The project
represents a systematic attack on modeling and numerical analysis, broadly
understood, of turbulence not at statistical equilibrium, investigating
fundamental mathematical, modeling, and computational issues in its predictive
simulation.