* 1522677
* Collaborative Research: Riemann-Hilbert Problems and Riemann Surfaces: Computations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Bernard Deconinck, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,707.00

Riemann-Hilbert problems (RHPs) arise in a plethora of applications, varying
from equations describing tsunamis to the understanding of nuclear energy. In
its most basic form, a RHP determines a function that jumps in a prescribed way
along a curve in the plane and has specified behavior far away from where the
jump occurs. Such problems were first posed by Riemann and later by Hilbert at
the end of the 19th century. Their study has been at the forefront of pure and
applied mathematics. Until recently, little effort had been devoted to the
actual computation of solutions of such problems. This research project extends
recent work in carrying out numerical investigations. It is anticipated that
major advances will be made in the solution of RHPs, allowing for the increased
understanding of tsunamis, fast optical communication, and other physical
phenomena.

The goal of the project is to develop new computational tools for the solution
of RHPs and their extensions. Traditionally, RHPs arise in the context of
singular integral equations and the Wiener-Hopf technique. More recently, RHPs
have been connected to random matrix theory, nonlinear special functions, and
nonlinear wave equations. RHPs may be posed on Riemann surfaces, and nonlinear
jump conditions may be specified. Recent developments involving the
investigators and collaborators have led to the development of accurate and
efficient numerical algorithms for the solution of RHPs, for problems posed on
Riemann surfaces, and for the computation of special functions such as the
Schottky-Klein prime function. However, many open problems remain, particularly
concerning new applications. This project aims to develop new computational
methods to solve these problems, with an emphasis on the development of fast and
efficient algorithms that can deal with complicated geometries, and to deploy
them in applications. The investigators, postdoctoral scholar, and collaborators
bring together a unique combination of expertise in the different areas needed
to successfully carry out the collaborative project.