* 1522206
* Flow Cytometry and Molecular Multi-User Facility at BIOS
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Rachel Parsons, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 174,197.00

In order to fully characterize and understand both regional and global climate,
as well as fundamental ocean processes and functions, scientists are required to
collect a wealth of information. Certain questions, such as how the ocean
responds to global climate change, can only be answered by in-depth analysis of
data collected continuously over a significantly long period of time, also known
as a time-series study. The Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS)
(www.bios.edu), an independent U.S. not-for-profit organization and a Bermuda
Registered Charity, is home to several of the longest running, open-ocean time-
series research programs in the world (Hydrostation 'S', the Bermuda Atlantic
Time Series (BATS) Program and the Ocean Flux Program (OFP)). Bermuda's unique
geographic position in close proximity to the open ocean, combined with BIOS'
oceanographic support infrastructure, provide an ideal venue for research
initiatives that address pressing issues in the ocean sciences. The new Flow
Cytometry and Molecular Multi-User Facility (FCMMF) at BIOS will provide access
to basic molecular instrumentation, in-house flow cytometer (laser-based
technology used in cell counting, cell sorting and biomarker detection) and
devices to vertically sample the ocean. This project will expand the number of
important questions that can be locally addressed, while reducing the cost and
risk associated with shipping samples off-island for all users. The large number
of visiting scientists and ongoing scientific collaborations with external
scientists, many with NSF-supported research programs, means that the equipment
provided by the FCMMF will have a far reaching impact on the research capacity
of the marine sciences community as a whole. Importantly, the FCMMF will assist
BIOS in meeting the increasing student demand for research training in cutting-
edge techniques. The educational goal of BIOS is to immerse students in
experiential learning through research in the ocean sciences. This can be a
seminal change for many students whose institutions lack programs in marine
science or the opportunity to conduct independent research. Education
experiences at BIOS can influence decisions that determine STEM education and
career trajectories, with students leaving better prepared to pursue
professional careers and/or graduate programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new
facility includes field sampling equipment that will provide a mechanism to
collect individuals of the planktonic community (nano to mesoplankton) in a
vertically stratified way. The chosen dry lab equipment platforms are
characterized by their versatility, easy use and low maintenance. The Flow
Cytometer model will allow the analysis of particles from 50 nm to 200 ìm in
diameter, facilitating a wide spectrum of studies, from environmental microbial
ecology to eukaryotic cell biology. The modularity capability of this unit will
allow for future improvement and expansion if desired. The molecular component
of the facility will allow basic analyses and also support sample preparation
for next-generation sequencing. The FCMMF will benefit a wide range of research
programs at BIOS, as well as those of visiting scientists. Paralleling the
benefits to basic research, the FCMMF facility has been explicitly designed for
use with student internships, current BIOS courses and the development of new
courses, particularly a modern biological oceanography course. Since 2010, BIOS
has hosted an average of 105 visiting scientists and over 750 students annually,
most of them from US institutions. The FCMMF allows BIOS to provide scientists
and students with the ability to address numerous and diverse biological
questions. In addition to biological oceanography, this project will benefit a
wide variety of research programs including genome structure and gene expression
in marine invertebrates, larval longevity and gene flow in corals, temporal and
spatial fine-scale characterization of open ocean microbial and eukaryotic
communities, organismal response to ocean acidification, and the biological
processes influencing ocean-atmosphere gas exchange of carbon.