* 1522074
* Collaborative Research: Evolvable Living Computing - Understanding and Quantifying Synthetic Biological Systems' Applicability, Performance, and Limits
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2021
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 11/30/2021
* USD 5,018,858.00

Successful computing systems leverage their underlying technologies to solve
problems humans simply cannot. Electronic systems harness the power of radio
waves and electrons. Mechanical systems use physical force and physical
interactions. Biological systems represent a computing paradigm that can harness
evolution, adaptation, replication, self-repair, chemistry, and living
organisms. Engineered, living biological systems which make decisions, process
"data", record events, adapt to their environment, and communicate to one
another will deliver exciting new solutions in bio-therapeutics, bio-materials,
bio-energy, and bio-remediation. This project will create a quantitative set of
freely available design principles, computational tools, mathematical models,
physical biological artifacts, educational resources, and outreach activities.
Once available, these resources will allow for novel, living biological
solutions to be built more quickly, perform better, be more reliable to
manufacture, and cost less to produce. This project is unique in that these
resources will be explicitly developed to validate key computational concepts to
understand how well these concepts can be applied rigorously and repeatedly to
biology. This project decomposes these concepts into three areas: Computing
Paradigm (digital, analog, memory, and communication), Computing Activity
(specification, design, and verification), and Computing Metric (time, space,
quality, and complexity). Once complete, this project will provide the most
comprehensive, freely available, and computationally relevant set of building
blocks to engineer biological systems to date.

By developing the tools, techniques, and materials outlined in this project,
this research will fundamentally change the way biological systems are
specified, designed, assembled, and tested. Advanced bio-energy, bio-sensing,
bio-therapeutics, and bio-materials all will become increasingly viable
commercial technologies that can be made better, cheaper, faster, and more
safely as a result of this project. The education of an entire new generation of
engineers will occur through workshops, coursework, and community engagement
activities. This new generation will have access to these approaches which will
influence how biological computation is done and how that process is
communicated to the community. This project will bring computational questions
and methods to the forefront of biotechnology via an interdisciplinary research
team focused not on one-off solutions but on foundational computing principles.

Explicitly five unanswered questions will be addressed in this project: (1) What
computational models are available to biology, what are their limits, and how do
they perform? (2) What communication mechanisms are available to biology, what
are their limits, and how do they perform? (3) What are the theoretical and
empirical measures of quality, scale, time, and space in biological computing
systems? (4) How generalizable are the concepts and "design rules" which can be
learned from studying biological systems? (5) How can the results (data and
learnings) from biological specification, design, and verification be
authoritatively disseminated to the community as design principles and grand
challenges? This project addresses these questions with an interdisciplinary
team with expertise in theoretical computer science, electronic design
automation, bio-physics/chemistry, control theory, and molecular cell biology.
For more information visit www.programmingbiology.org.