* 1522478
* Support for U.S.-Taiwan Workshop on Feedbacks and Coupling among Mountain Building, Surface Processes and Climate
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Timothy Byrne, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2016
* USD 89,289.00

The recognition that climatically modulated erosion acts to govern the
development of active mountain ranges is arguably one of the most transformative
conceptual shifts in the geosciences subsequent to the plate tectonic
revolution. Topography in tectonically active regions results from an interplay
among climatic, tectonic, and surface processes. The building of mountains
increases topographic slopes, which directly influences the rate and efficiency
of erosional processes. Rising landmasses can also influence climate by altering
patterns of airflow and heating, influencing the magnitude and pattern of
precipitation. Feed backs between the redistribution of mass by climate-driven
erosion can influence the state of stress, thermal structure, and subsequent
deformation patterns within mountain belts, the very mechanisms that drive the
growth of topography. The strength of these various interactions and coupling,
however, is still contested. Furthermore, these processes have strong impacts on
the well being of humans living in mountainous terrains. This project supports a
U.S.-Taiwan workshop that would assess the current state of research and
identify future interdisciplinary research directions. A key objective of the
workshop is to increase partnerships between the U.S. and Taiwan through the
development of collaborative research projects that benefit from research
expertise in both countries, thereby strengthening research activities within
each country while advancing understanding of the complex linkages among
mountain building, climate, and surface processes. The participation of students
and early-career scientists in the workshop will ensure the development of long-
term collaborations that are mutually beneficial both from the perspective of
the development of the scientific workforce and the exchange of scientific
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the participation of U.S.
based scientists in a U.S. Taiwan workshop, which will be held at the National
Taiwan University in Taipei, Taiwan. The overarching purpose of this workshop is
to promote interdisciplinary research on the linkages and feed backs among
mountain building, climate, and surface processes. The dynamic landscape of
Taiwan, which will be explored during pre- and post-meeting field trips, will
provide the backdrop for the workshop. Rates of surface uplift and erosion in
Taiwan are among the highest in the world as a result of ongoing collision
between the Luzon volcanic arc and Chinese continental margin and frequent
annual typhoons. The island is well known as a prime natural laboratory for
study of the linkages among mountain building, climate, and surface processes.
Specifically, the workshop goals are four-fold: (1) assess the current state of
understanding of the linkages among climate, tectonics, and landscape evolution;
(2) identify research goals that capitalize on interdisciplinary approaches to
advance that understanding at a range of spatial and temporal scales; (3)
discuss and articulate strategies for the implementation of the research goals;
(4) encourage new collaborations between U.S. and Taiwan scientists, and engage
early career researchers. The workshop is organized around two key
themes:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Orogen-scale climate-tectonic coupling. The coupling
between climate and tectonics involves the creation of topography through
tectonic processes and the modification of stresses that govern tectonic
deformation by climatically controlled erosion and sediment unloading. The
strength of the climate-tectonic coupling is determined by the responses of
climate and tectonics to these respective processes.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Climate and
tectonic controls on surface processes. Climate and tectonics are fundamentally
coupled through weathering and erosion by chemical, fluvial, glacial, and mass
wasting processes, and their sensitivity to climatic and tectonic
controls.&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts consist of: (1) planned
workshop participation of scientists from underrepresented groups in STEM; (2)
possible improved well-being of individuals in society through a better
understanding of natural hazards; (3) development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce through engagement of early career scientists, post-
doctoral fellows, and students in the workshop; and (4) increased international
partnerships through fostering of new collaborations between U.S. and Taiwanese
scientists with particular emphasis on building collaborations between early
career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Tectonics Program and the Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics (both in the Earth
Sciences Division, Geosciences Directorate) and NSF's International Science and
Engineering office.