* 1522599
* Fast Algorithms for Solving Big Data PDE Parameter Estimation Problems on Cloud Computing Platforms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Lars Ruthotto, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 179,999.00

Parameter estimation problems arise in many scientific and economic disciplines,
for example, in medical imaging, geophysical explorations, nondestructive
testing, and economic structural estimation. Despite enormous effort put into
designing efficient methods, solving parameter estimation problems is still very
challenging, since the parametrized equations have to be solved repeatedly until
the parameters are estimated with satisfactory accuracy. This research project
aims to develop and implement efficient numerical methods for solving parameter
estimation problems that involve a large number of measurements and partial
differential equations. Reusable, open source software will be developed and
made available to the scientific community. The techniques under development in
the project will be applicable in geophysics to reduce the computational costs
of large surveys that are of high economic impact, for example, in oil and gas
exploration and groundwater surveys. The results from this project will also be
applicable in medical imaging to reduce health care screening costs and improve
diagnosis of certain diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parameter estimation can be
formulated as an optimization problem with constraints that are given by the
parametrized partial differential equations (PDEs). The unknowns are parameters
of the PDEs, which correspond to physical properties of the object to be
measured. The objective is to minimize the misfit between PDE simulations and
measured data plus some regularization term. Cloud computing platforms provide
access to immense computational resources at moderate costs and are thus highly
attractive for solving PDE parameter estimation problems. This holds
particularly for big data problems since the computational costs of the
estimation are dominated by the computational costs for PDE simulations. The
latter, in many cases, grows linearly with the number of data. Straightforward
extensions of the currently most reliable parameter estimation algorithms to
massively parallel platforms, however, lead to huge communication overhead and
memory requirement. This project seeks to design alternative tailored algorithms
that make efficient use of cloud platforms and are able to solve parameter
estimation problem with massive amounts of data in reasonable time. The approach
undertaken in this project is based on three cornerstones. First, two reduced-
order modeling techniques and their combination will be investigated. The PDEs
will be discretized on rather coarse rectangular meshes that are aligned to the
problem domain. On these meshes, reduced order models with adaptive multiscale
bases will be used. Both techniques will dramatically reduce the computational
cost associated with the PDE simulations. Second, stochastic optimization
methods will be designed to exploit redundancy typically present in big data
sets. The goal is to reduce the required number of PDE simulations, derive
parameter selection rules, and quantify uncertainty of the solution. Third, the
above steps will be combined and implemented on massively parallel cloud
computing platforms.