* 1522491
* CAREER:  Social and coevolutionary feedbacks between mating and parental investment: Insights from theory and data
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2014,04/30/2016
* Suzanne Alonzo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* emilia martins
* 04/30/2016
* USD 42,147.00

Understanding why organisms cooperate or are in conflict with one another is one
of the most basic questions within evolutionary biology and animal behavior.
However, despite extensive research on the subject, it remains difficult to
predict a priori whether a particular social interaction will involve
cooperation or conflict among individuals or to know how these social
interactions affect evolutionary patterns. These difficulties demonstrate the
need for a greater connection between theory and data on social interactions in
nature. Some of the most basic yet fascinating social interactions among
organisms occur during reproduction where individuals may compete with one
another, select among potential mates and interact during the provisioning and
care of young. This project uses a combination of mathematical theory and
experiments in the wild to examine how patterns of mating and parental care are
interconnected through social interactions and evolutionary dynamics among males
and females. The predictions of this novel theory will then be tested in the
ocellated wrasse, a fish where interactions during mating and parental care
involve elements of both conflict and cooperation and where existing theory
cannot explain observed patterns. Using experiments that manipulate the social
environment experienced by both males and females, this project will examine
changes in individual behavior, reproduction and social interactions and ask
what determines whether conflict or cooperation arises between males and females
during reproduction. This project will expose high school interns,
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to a range of
research methods including mathematical modeling, genetics and field
experiments. However, these young scientists will also be directly involved in
the teaching and mentorship of other young scientists. This project will
therefore increase our general understanding of social interactions, conflict
and cooperation while training young scientists to be excellent scientists,
teachers and mentors.