* 1522532
* Transforming data access and reseach cyber-infrastructure within a tropical field station network
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Elizabeth Losos, Organization for Tropical Studies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 186,297.00

The role of field research stations is quickly evolving. Stations are morphing
from being facilities that provided infrastructure for field-based research to
proactive entities that actively direct research towards emerging areas of
knowledge, generate baseline data through biophysical monitoring, and compile,
archive, and facilitate synthesis and reuse of data generated in their midst.
This new profile increases the effectiveness of field stations as research
centers, because they: (a) provide basic long-term monitoring of biophysical
data (e.g., through meteorological stations), which allows both researchers to
understand their observed patterns and station staff to document any changes in
their biophysical conditions, (b) focus research efforts in critical areas of
knowledge and reduce duplication of efforts, and (c) act as a data repository to
ensure that long-term data that is collected by the individual efforts of
researchers and research teams are not only secured, but available for further
reuse. This profile responds to two critical drivers: the urgent need to
understand how our world is changing and the need to optimize research
resources. This project provides the technological infrastructure that will
allow three cutting-edge tropical field research stations to update and upgrade
their biophysical monitoring equipment and to establish a Tropical node of
DataONE. The upgraded biophysical monitoring equipment will allow the stations
to more reliably track environmental variables, such as air and soil temperature
and moisture, rainfall, solar intensity, and available water. The Tropical node
of DataONE will allow the Organization for Tropical Studies to become the first
tropical field station network to proactively retrieve and store data collected
over 50 years so that it will be available to the whole scientific community for
analyzing temporal and historical trends, measuring changes in the last half
century, and projecting the fate of tropical forests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the deluge of information that has accumulated
among field stations, these data are not readily available (Borgman et al.
2007). Most historical ecological field data are scattered and inaccessible,
unintelligible (no metadata) or dispersed across platforms and digital formats
hindering their reuse and synthesis (Heidorn 2008). Such dark data are at risk
of being lost forever when scientists retire or die. Also, most field stations
institutionally monitor a suite of biogeophysical variables (such as
meteorological data) as a reference for the research community that they serve,
but often these long-term data series are inconsistently collected and
maintained and hard to access. Changing norms in data sharing and an increased
scientific need for historical data on natural systems impose the responsibility
on field stations to recover and archive dark data from historical field studies
and to standardize, update, and make available past and current biogeophysical
monitoring data. This project enables the Organization for Tropical Studies
(OTS) to establish an Institutional Data Repository for data generated at its
three field stations in Costa Rica for almost 50 years. The data repository will
be part of DataONE network and will archive and make available biogeophysical
monitoring data collected institutionally (e.g., meteorological and hydrological
data, GIS files, and digital biological collections) as well as data collected
by independent researchers who have conducted field research at the stations.
The project also will allow OTS to upgrade, standardize, and automate further
its meteorological stations to collect climatic and hydrological data. Both
components of this project will foster field research that leverages historic
data as a reference for new observations and facilitate secondary e-research on
historic and current trends of terrestrial tropical ecosystems. Such research
will greatly expand the ability of scientists to assess impacts of global change
on tropical systems and to improve the representation of key tropical
terrestrial ecosystem processes in earth system models. This project will set a
new standard for open access of data and expand research opportunities for the
broader scientific community. Furthermore, the data will enhance the
opportunities for new generations of young scientists who conduct research at
the stations (as research assistants, through fellowships, or on site-based REU
programs) or who participate in OTS field-courses centered at the stations
(through OTS graduate and undergraduate programs) or who visit the stations
independently through faculty-led educational experiences. For more information
about the Organization for Tropical Studies, please see http://www.ots.ac.cr/.
When available, data may be accessed through DataONE at
https://www.dataone.org/.