* 1522503
* Modernization of the Humboldt State University Marine Laboratory Seawater System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Brian Tissot, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2017
* USD 374,862.00

Humboldt State University's (HSU) Marine Lab (http://www.humboldt.edu/marinelab/
) has been awarded a grant to modernize aging components of the running seawater
system which will enhance research and training activities at the lab with a
reliable, high-quality system. HSU is the northernmost California State
University campus and has a well-deserved reputation for high quality natural
resources and science programs. The marine lab offers outstanding undergraduate
and graduate instruction and excellent opportunities to carry out research
projects in the lab and provides access to a wide diversity of marine and
coastal habitats. The new seawater system will include two underground water
tanks that provide redundancy, improve temperature regulation, are safer in an
earthquake-prone region, and provide more effective utilization of the lab's
limited footprint by creating space for future expansion. The new system and
future expansion will significantly advance or research and training capacity in
intertidal ecology, invasive species, fisheries biology, chemical, biological
and geological oceanography, and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
seawater facilities will have a positive impact on training at all levels,
including K-12 classes, undergraduate and graduate fishery biology, marine
biology and oceanography majors at Humboldt State University, community college
faculty and students, visiting graduate students, visiting students from
throughout the U.S. and the general public. Public outreach is accomplished
through free public aquaria, open 6-7 days a week year-round, with guided tours,
educational workshops, and high-quality displays; these facilities serve
approximately 20,000-35,000 visitors/year. HSU is an Hispanic-serving
institution and the only university campus along the northern California coast
primarily dedicated to undergraduate education. The area is also home to a large
number of Native American Tribes and Rancherias with tribal members actively
collaborating in marine research and resource management projects with HSU and
other institutions. The lab has a resident Marine Naturalist who leads informal
marine science education efforts at the ML and other venues. In the last five
years the lab has served over 5,000 K-12 students and offered 240 organized
tours of the facility by multiple institutions.