* 1522490
* FSML:  High-resolution acoustic imaging sonar for research and education at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Dennis Allen, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 114,121.00

Advances in technology, such as high-resolution acoustic imaging sonar, are
enabling researchers to visualize and measure animals and habitat features
within estuarine and coastal ecosystems, where waters are typically too cloudy
for standard video cameras. This award is for the acquisition of an acoustic
imaging sonar at the University of South Carolina's Baruch Marine Field
Laboratory (BMFL; www. baruch.sc.edu) for conducting research and enhancing
education at levels ranging from early grade school to lifelong learning
programs. The acoustic imaging sonar, in combination with traditional (e.g.,
nets, environmental sensors) and other advanced (e.g., aerial imaging,
terrestrial laser scanners) field sampling techniques will allow researchers and
educators to probe far beyond what is currently possible in these dynamic and
challenging aquatic habitats. Acoustic imaging sonars transmit sound pulses and
convert the returning echoes into high-resolution digital images, much like a
medical ultrasound sonogram. Thus, acoustic imaging sonars can "see" in zero
visibility conditions, making it possible to track motile organisms and
delineate underwater structures. Unhindered by the turbid waters of estuarine
and coastal environments, acoustic imaging can operate during both day and
night, with minimal or no disturbance to animals or habitats, and at much
reduced labor intensity (e.g., 1 person). Together these attributes provide
unmatched and powerful observational and experimental research opportunities at
the BMFL that will foster new collaborations with both outside and campus-based
investigators.

High-resolution acoustic imaging will be used to address questions about
organism-habitat relationships, physical processes, and animal behavior in these
previously impenetrable estuarine and coastal habitats. It will greatly advance
our understanding of how these ecosystems function. With applications in a broad
range of disciplines using experimental approaches in both the field and
laboratory, high-resolution acoustic imaging sonar will enhance and expand
research capabilities and productivity at the BMFL. Experiments based on
observations from numerous readily available on-site historical databases will
enable scientists to develop and test hypotheses and discover mechanisms
responsible for observed patterns and relationships. Further, because the
coastal and estuarine habitats surrounding the BMFL are protected in perpetuity,
the potential for long-term comparative studies using the North Inlet estuary as
an undisturbed control site is high. With well-equipped facilities at the edge
of the North Inlet estuary, the BMFL has a decades' long history of
interdisciplinary research, data management, and education and outreach.
Accordingly, the BMFL is well positioned to use high-resolution acoustic imaging
to develop novel lines of inquiry through collaborative research, initiate and
maintain long-term project databases, train young scientists, and create
exciting and engaging interactive educational activities for students of all
ages and the general public.