* 1522782
* Theory, Modeling and Computation of Chemical Enhanced Oil Recovery
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Prabir Daripa, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 144,005.00

Chemical Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) is an important energy technology. It
involves injection of complex fluids containing chemicals that help improve oil
recovery, in particular, net oil recovered, sweeping efficiency, net present
value, and so on. Therefore, quantitative evaluation of these performance
measures of any EOR flooding scheme is very important for decision making.
Current practice does not account accurately for some important physical effects
such as elasticity of the complex displacing fluids which can have a significant
bearing on the net oil recovered. This project will enable accurate modeling of
the underlying physical processes as well as contribute to the development of
efficient numerical methods and software to solve the complex mathematical
equations describing these EOR processes. One of the fundamental phenomena,
known as elastic turbulence, a subject of intense current study in the
turbulence area, also has a significant role to play in the EOR processes in
porous media. This is due to the fact that an increase in drag due to elastic
turbulence is undesirable from an economic point of view for EOR. Complex
systems of mathematical equations to be used in our study will advance the field
of computational mathematics, computational fluid dynamics and theoretical fluid
mechanics, in particular, complex fluids and elastic turbulence. Progress in
these areas has been very slow and the proposed work will advance they state-of-
the-art. Research findings will advance the area of fluid mechanics and will
have an impact in many engineering disciplines, applied and computational
mathematics, and computational science, to name a few. The project also has many
educational components.

The PI will study chemical enhanced oil recovery processes theoretically and
numerically by developing appropriate numerical methods and software for this
purpose. In particular, the PI will develop a novel multiphase, multi-component,
viscoelastic, porous media flow model, efficient and high order accurate novel
multi-scale finite element- and method of characteristics-based numerical
methods for highly heterogeneous media, and user-friendly software encapsulating
the numerical methods. The work combines theory, modeling and computation, and
blends knowledge from fluid dynamics, porous media flows, numerical analysis,
partial differential equations and scientific computing to gain insight into
several fundamental problems: How does the elasticity modify development of
linear and fingering instabilities? What is the mechanism behind transition from
elastic instability to elastic turbulence in porous media as the Weissenberg
number is gradually increased? How do different rheological properties affect
the sweeping efficiency of displacement processes and net oil recovered?
Numerical simulations with the software developed will play a significant role
in this direction. The potential benefit of the proposed research lies in its
open-ended nature which can further stimulate basic research and applications
related to numerical methods, complex fluids and their use in EOR. Our research
will contribute to rapidly developing fields of numerical methods and fast
algorithms for EOR using viscoelastic fluid models in porous media, transition
to elastic turbulence in porous media and scientific computing. This project is
part of a broader research program in the PI's group on fluid mechanics,
enhanced oil recovery, interfacial dynamics, multiphase multi-component
continuous and heterogeneous porous media flows, fast high-order algorithms, and
scientific computing.