* 1522565
* Mendocino College Point Arena Field Station Conservation Planning
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Steven Cardimona, Mendocino-Lake Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 24,300.00

Mendocino-Lake Community College District (Mendocino College) will develop a
five-year strategic and infrastructure management plan for the Point Arena Field
Station (http://www.mendocino.edu/coastal-field-station), a 15.2-acre oceanfront
field station with seven buildings, located on the Northern California Coast.
With 70+ years of limited public access, the field station sits within a
relatively undisturbed natural coastal environment. The management plan to be
developed will be used to guide Mendocino College in preserving the pristine
habitats for scientific study and research, as well as increasing access and use
of the Point Arena Field Station, making it more broadly available to
researchers and educators in the region and nationally. This planning proposal
includes a focused educational workshop which will identify educational needs of
students at both Mendocino College and other institutions. It is the intent of
the institution to deliver educational programs to all, including under-
represented groups. In 2013, Mendocino College was identified as a Hispanic
Servicing Institution (HSI). This planning proposal will also address the needs
of the increasing women in STEM disciplines along with evaluating ADA access at
the field station. Another key educational component to be addressed in the
planning proposal is the identification and evaluation of collaborative STEM
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed planning activities include four
specific areas: 1) Determine and develop best practices for management and
operations of a field station by visiting established facilities and talking
with station managers. 2) Identify and develop partnerships with 4 year
universities and non-profit organizations by administering a survey to assess
interest in facility use by appropriate educators and researchers. 3) Conduct
focused planning sessions with educators, scientists, students and community
members to determine general research and teaching goals, as well as best
facility use practices. 4) Develop a comprehensive management plan that will
focus on increasing access to and use of the Point Arena Field Station. The
management plan will allow for the continued development and exploration of
activities and collaborations that will address the needs of educators,
scientists, students, and community members both regionally and nationally.