* 1522736
* Domain Decomposition Methods: Algorithms and Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Olof Widlund, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This research project aims primarily to further develop fast and reliable
methods for large scale computations to support the solution of complicated
engineering problems. Examples are provided by oil platforms, complicated
antenna systems, and flow of oil, gas, and contaminants in porous media.
Successful computer simulations of such problems require careful modeling as
well as efficient methods to obtain timely solutions of the often very large
systems of equations that will arise in any attempt to provide reliable support
for the design and optimization of complicated engineering structures. The need
for such work can be illustrated by the very costly failures that have happened
to oil platforms already installed or in the process of being built. This work
involves the development of accurate mathematical models as well as the design
of fast solvers; the current project will focus on developing such solvers.
Large scale computational models require access to modern computer technology,
in particular to computer systems with many processors. The principal
investigator will continue to work actively with software engineers to develop
improved solvers for a variety of problem classes.

The algorithms developed in this project will all be based on domain
decomposition. Domain decomposition algorithms respect the memory hierarchies of
modern parallel computing systems, and experiments clearly illustrate that they
scale very well up to the full set of processors and billions of degrees of
freedom. Domain decomposition methods provide iterative solvers based on a
conjugate gradient algorithm combined with a preconditioner. A preconditioner
provides an approximate inverse of the stiffness matrix of the partial
differential equation formulated variationally and approximated using a Galerkin
method. Any successful domain decomposition algorithm works with solvers on
often very many subdomains into which the domain of the given partial
differential equation has been subdivided. In addition, to obtain a scalable
algorithm, i.e., an algorithm with a convergence rate that does not deteriorate
when the number of subdomains and processors are increased, a coarse global part
of the preconditioner must be introduced; for large problems a third even
coarser level is also introduced. Firmly rooted in mathematical theory, these
algorithms are now developing rapidly in a way not foreseen just a few years
ago. Powerful ideas are now developing that provide much improved design of the
coarse components at the expense of solving relatively small generalized
eigenvalue problems in the set-up phase of the computation. Recent experiments
show that these devices greatly improve the robustness of the algorithms even of
problems with greatly varying material properties. This project aims to
contribute to these developments.