* 1522651
* Statistical Learning for High-Dimensional Stochastic Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Mauro Maggioni, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 196,236.00

High-dimensional stochastic dynamical systems arise in a wide variety of
scientific fields and applications, including models for the dynamics of
molecules, of multi-agent systems (such as cars or animals), of activity of
neurons, etc. The high-dimensionality of these systems corresponds to the large
number of variables (atoms, agents, neurons, respectively, in the preceding
examples) and typically makes these systems very expensive to simulate and hard
to understand even when simulations are possible. This research project aims to
develop novel ideas and algorithms for the model reduction of such systems. The
investigator will develop automatic learning algorithms that, by collecting a
number of short simulations in parallel, output a much lower-dimensional model
of the original system that yields faster simulations, with provable accuracy,
in a much reduced number of variables. This will make the simulations less
expensive, allowing one to perform more and longer simulations, and make the
extraction of useful information from simulated data easier. He will apply these
constructions to molecular dynamics simulations, expecting to significantly
reduce the computational time needed to simulate small
biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large data sets in high dimensional spaces
appear in a wide variety of scientific fields and applications. The PI focuses
here on data sets that originate from the simulation of high-dimensional
stochastic systems that arise in a wide variety of applications (e.g. molecular
dynamics), with the goal of producing a much lower dimensional stochastic system
with similar statistical properties as the full system, at least at a certain
time scale. This is possible for a wide variety of dynamical systems with
separation of time scales when the structure of the forces acting on the system
and the stochastic perturbations are such that the trajectories of the system
accumulate, in state or phase space, around low-dimensional sets (at the
appropriate time scale and accuracy). The approach only requires access to a
simulator S for the original system that, given initial conditions and the
shortest time scale of interest as inputs, produces as output a (stochastic)
path of the system starting at that initial condition and stops at the specified
time. A call to S is typically expensive, but after a small number of carefully
designed calls that yield a relatively small number of short paths, the
algorithm learns and outputs a low-dimensional representation of the system,
that is, a low-dimensional stochastic system whose trajectories are (in a
suitable statistical sense), at the requested time scale, close to those of the
original system. This construction may be performed in an online setting, as new
regions of state space are explored, and in a multiscale fashion, where the time
scale at which the system is reduced varies. These techniques will be adaptive
to the assumed low intrinsic dimension of the simulated data, the timescale of
interest, and the accuracy, leading to a new generation of results and
algorithms for learning and approximating high-dimensional stochastic systems.
While the techniques to be developed are applicable to a large family of
stochastic systems, the main application considered in this project is Molecular
Dynamics (MD). These techniques are expected to dramatically speed up the
exploration of the state space of these molecules and of MD simulations as a
whole. At the same time, they are general enough that they are applicable to a
wide variety of stochastic systems, and the framework sets the stage for a novel
approach to automatic learning of dynamical systems that is amenable to further
generalizations.