* 1522455
* Nitrogen Gas Measurement Facility at the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Peter Groffman, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 341,670.00

Understanding the nitrogen cycle at landscape, regional and global scales is a
great challenge in environmental science. Humans have more than doubled the
annual global production of "reactive" nitrogen, leading to degradation of air
and water quality and coastal ecosystems in many areas. The most uncertain
component of the nitrogen cycle is the flux of nitrogen gases, nitric oxide
(NO), nitrous oxide (N2O) and dinitrogen (N2) in terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems. These gases are affected by multiple biological, chemical and
physical factors and the fluxes are often highly variables and difficult to
quantify. Addressing the challenge of nitrogen gases requires three key
components; 1) measurement of all three gases (NO, N2O, N2) involved in the
nitrogen cycle, 2) quantification of gas fluxes in and between key components of
the environment; soil, water (including soil water, groundwater, streams,
rivers, etc) and atmosphere and 3) evaluation of fluxes in a watershed/mass
balance context. All of these components can be addressed with an integrated
suite of instruments deployed in the field and laboratory in a coordinated
manor, in context with other measurements. The Cary Institute leads nitrogen gas
research at the Hubbard Brook and Baltimore Long Term Ecological (LTER) research
sites. At these sites, long-term monitoring of nitrogen inputs and hydrologic
outputs provide a strong platform for developing and testing hypotheses about
the importance and controlling factors of gas fluxes. The instruments purchased
with these funds will be used to improve and expand the long-term nitrogen gas
monitoring at these two LTER sites. An additional major focus would be at the
Cary Institute, which has a long-term environmental monitoring program and is an
ideal testbed for comparison and evaluation of new approaches to measuring
nitrogen gas fluxes. The Cary Institute has served as a nexus for nitrogen gas
research and training for nearly 20 years. Numerous Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) participants, graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers from multiple institutions have conducted nitrogen gas studies in
our laboratory. This new instrumentation will allow the institute to continue to
play an important educational and network role in this critical, but highly
specialized area of research.

This project will establish the Cary Institute Nitrogen Gas Measurement Facility
which will consist of an integrated suite of instruments that will allow for
quantification of multiple gases (N2, N2O, NO), in multiple media (soil, water,
atmosphere), in the mass balance context that is necessary for ecosystem,
landscape and regional scale assessments. Key components of this suite include
instruments to directly measure gas fluxes (including N2) from soil and sediment
cores to the atmosphere, sensors for quantifying in situ fluxes of gases from
soil to the atmosphere in both field chamber and eddy flux methods, and a
membrane inlet mass spectrometer to quantify dissolved N2 in water. There is
immediate demand (and funding) for use and maintenance of the instrumentation
for the ongoing long-term research at the Hubbard Brook and Baltimore LTER sites
and the long-term environmental monitoring program at the Cary Institute. The
Cary Institute nitrogen gas major measurement facility will be established under
the supervision of Dr. Peter Groffman. The current lead research support
specialist in Groffman's laboratory has over 10 years of experience in field and
laboratory measurement of N gas fluxes and has trained numerous undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral researchers. There is active collaboration among the
senior research support specialists at the Cary Institute for allocation of
space, training of new users and instrument maintenance and trouble-shooting.
Much of this collaboration is managed by the institute-supported Director of
Laboratory Facilities and Analytical Services, the Safety Officer and the
Manager of the Cary Institute Environmental Monitoring program. For more
information about the Carey Institute, visit http://www.caryinstitute.org/.