* 1522318
* I-Corps:  GreenSoft: A Cloud Based Framework for Green Software Design and Education
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2016
* Qijun Gu, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The ubiquitous use of computers and mobile devices has substantially increased
the energy consumption of Information Technology (IT) systems. The energy
footprint of data centers keeps increasing and the battery life of mobile
devices is now a top concern. To address this critical challenge, green
computing has become increasingly important and made significant strides over
the past decade. This project proposes a cloud based GreenSoft framework that
supports green software design and education. The GreenSoft framework can
drastically simplify the process of obtaining software power information by
seamlessly combining the concepts of Cloud Programming and Power Profiling as a
Service.

The outcomes derived from this proposal will advance the state of the art and
promote green software design practices, potentially resulting in millions of
tons of CO2 emission reduction and a huge amount of energy savings. In addition,
the proposed GreenSoft framework will provide ample opportunities for other
researchers and software developers to further explore techniques that can
reduce software energy consumption. This project will also promote teaching,
learning, and training in sustainable computing by exposing graduate,
undergraduate and K-12 students to energy-efficient software design. The rich
body of minority students at Texas State University, a large Hispanic Serving
Institution, will broaden the participation of underrepresented students in
green software design.