* 1522926
* SusChEM: Geochemical and Mineralogical Constraints on the Genesis of Country Rock-hosted Massive Sulfide Mineralization Associated with Mafic Rock-related Cu-Ni-PGE Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Chusi Li, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2019
* USD 379,979.00

Nickel (Ni), copper (Cu) and platinum-group elements (PGEs: platinum (Pt),
palladium (Pd), rhodium, iridium, ruthenium, and osmium (Os)) are vital to the
economic growth of the United States. Ni and PGEs are found almost exclusively
in igneous rocks that are rich in iron and magnesium. Copper may occur in a
variety of rock types but is also found in association with Ni and PGEs. The ore
elements typically occur bonded to sulfur in sulfide minerals, or in some cases
PGEs may be found bonded to arsenic (As), tellurium (Te) or antimony (Sb).
Although most of these deposits are found within igneous rock bodies, there is a
category of mineralization that is composed of nearly pure sulfide minerals that
is located outside of the igneous rocks and within enclosing sedimentary rocks.
The grade of these occurrences may be high and they represent a poorly
understood resource that will be of national importance as our global need for
raw materials increases and we strive to maintain a sustainable earth. Because
the ore is massive the mineable dimensions are relatively small and hence the
environmental footprint is correspondingly small; any necessary reclamation is
readily accomplished. Nickel is a strategic ferro-alloy which is essential to
the manufacture of stainless steel. Both Pt and Pd are used as active metals
within catalytic converters. The United States has only one actively producing
Ni mine and only two mines that produce Pt and Pd (both within the same igneous
body). The work that will be undertaken as part of this project will increase
our understanding of how massive sulfide occurrences form outside of the
spatially associated igneous rocks. In order for the project to be successful a
collaborative effort between company geologists and scientists at academic
institutions is required. A key broader implication of the research is that
students from the IU Department of Education frequently undertake research
projects in our lab; the experience is beneficial as teachers are prepared to
promote student training in science, mathematics and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although massive sulfide mineralization
associated with igneous can often be explained via gravitational accumulation of
immiscible sulfide liquid in a magmatic system, some occurrences of massive
sulfide mineralization associated with Ni-Cu-PGE deposits are more difficult to
explain by this mechanism. Mineralization such as that found at Voisey's Bay
(Labrador), Eagle (Michigan) and the newly discovered Tamarack deposit
(Minnesota) are associated with magma conduits; massive sulfides may have
accumulated where magma velocity decreased as the conduit widened, and perhaps
flattened. However, discoveries at each of these localities of massive sulfide
hosted by metamorphosed sedimentary country rocks are not easily accounted for
by such a mechanism. Cu-Ni-(PGE) massive sulfide mineralization hosted by
country rocks is also found in association with larger, sheet-like layered
intrusions, including intrusions of the Duluth Complex (Minnesota) and the
Stillwater Complex (Montana). In both of these localities massive sulfides are
found in pelitic rocks of the contact aureoles, with limited or no connectivity
with the igneous rocks. Preliminary geochemical data from the massive sulfide
mineralization in the Virginia Formation near the contact with the Duluth
Complex show strong signatures for partial crustal derivation of S, Os, Cu and
lead (Pb). In many localities the country rock-hosted massive sulfides penetrate
and crosscut disseminated sulfide-bearing igneous rocks. The origin of the
country rock-hosted massive sulfide occurrences is poorly understood; clearly a
better understanding is essential for future development of limited natural
resources. We plan to undertake a detailed study of the physical and textural
form of three such deposits in the Midcontinent region (Eagle, Tamarack, and the
Mesaba (Babbitt) deposit of the Duluth Complex, and at the Stillwater Complex),
along with a determination of key geochemical characteristics (variations of
Ni/Co, S/Se, PGE, Sb and As concentrations and ratios, and Os, Pb, Cu, Ni and S
isotopic compositions), that will shed light on the interpretation of whether
mantle-derived melts, crustal melts, or hydrothermal fluids have controlled
their formation. The well-known Noril'sk Ni-Cu-PGE deposits in Siberia also
contain massive sulfide mineralization that occurs in the sedimentary country
rocks, separated by several meters from sulfide-bearing igneous rocks. Our
Russian colleagues are in the midst of a detailed study of the mineralization at
Noril'sk, including the country rock - hosted type which is of particular
economic significance. Their study parallels our proposed work and provides an
opportunity for comparative evaluation of a poorly understood ore
type.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported in part via the NSF FY15
Sustainable Chemistry, Engineering, and Materials (SusChEM) initiative.