* 1522869
* Analysis of nematic liquid crystal flows, high dimensional phase-transition, conserved geometric motion, and L-infinity variational problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/20/2014,06/30/2017
* Changyou Wang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 147,174.00

The goal of this project is to continue the principal investigator's research on
analytic issues arising from four subareas: (i) the hydrodynamic flow of nematic
liquid crystal materials, (ii) high dimensional phase-transition problem between
two manifolds, (iii) conserved geometric motion of co-dimension two surfaces,
and (iv) L-infinity variational problems. The first part of this project deals
with the Ericksen-Leslie system modeling hydrodynamic flow of nematic liquid
crystals, which is a strongly nonlinear-coupled system between the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equation of the underlying fluid velocity field and
the transported heat flow of harmonic maps for the orientation director field of
the nematic liquid crystal molecules. The objective is to establish existence
and partial regularity for Leray-Hopf type weak solutions in dimension three.
The second project investigates the energy asymptotic of a singularly perturbed
functional in the sense of Gamma-convergence and resolve the Keller-Rubinstein-
Sternberg problem on the dynamics in terms of harmonic map heat flow under new
boundary conditions and mean curvature flow of the sharp interface. The third
project is to establish the local well-posedness of such a conserved mean
curvature flow for generic initial surfaces. The fourth project is to study the
uniqueness of general Aronsson's equations for Hamiltonian functions with
spatial dependence and the regularity of infinity harmonic functions and
Aronsson's equations corresponding to uniformly convex Hamiltonians.

The proposed problems in these areas are not only very challenging
mathematically but also have strong connections and profound applications to
other fields such as biology, chemical engineering, physics, fluid mechanics and
material sciences. Mathematically, the nonlinear partial differential equations
or systems involved in the project either are either highly degenerate elliptic
problems or equations with super-critical nonlinearities whose resolutions will
definitely contribute new ideas and techniques that will be useful in a variety
of contexts. The hydrodynamic flow of nematic liquid crystals is among the most
fundamental equations describing the dynamics of viscoelastic fluids and has its
origination in LCD design and engineering. The conserved geometric motion has
close connection with the Bose condensate physics. The L-infinity variational
problems has found its applications in the optimal control, the image recovery
engineering arise, the determination of optimal radiation treatments in
chemotherapy, and the design of winning strategies for random game theories.
Rigorous analysis of both the existence and the regularity of various solutions
to such a system can predict the formation of singularities, allow researchers
to gain insight into turbulent phenomena, and justify both computational and
experimental studies made by applied scientists and engineers. This project will
result in the publication of monographs and lecture notes from international
summer schools for both researchers and graduate students, involve active
training of advanced PhD students, and include the organization of specific
conferences such as Ohio River Analysis Meetings, AMS and SIAM special sessions,
and AIM or BIRS workshops.