* 1522639
* Windowed Fourier Methods for Overlapping Domain Approximations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Rodrigo Platte, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,001.00

Partial differential equations on surfaces arise in many applications, including
atmospheric research, evolution of coat patterns in animals, finger print
formation, and deformation of elastic solids in fluids, to mention just a few.
This research project aims to develop computationally efficient and accurate
methods for numerical solution of such equations. The project is driven in
particular by problems stemming from atmospheric models and will advance
research on novel numerical schemes that are based on windowed Fourier
approximations. Objectives include the design of algorithms for solving time-
dependent differential equations on spherical geometries and other surfaces, the
development of a rigorous mathematical analysis of convergence and stability for
such algorithms, the implementation of high performance and scalable solvers,
and to make efficient, accurate software available for use by the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Windowed Fourier methods are suitable for
adaptive and parallel implementations and large-scale computations. The proposed
schemes rely on domain decomposition, such as in the cubed sphere, with
computations being carried out using fast Fourier transforms. Approximations are
obtained on overlapping domains and a global solution is obtained by weighted
average. Current high-order and spectral methods used in atmospheric research,
such as spectral elements, are constrained by the well-known CFL condition; that
is, node clustering in the space domain restricts the discretization in the time
domain. Windowed Fourier methods use nearly uniform nodes on each subdomain,
allowing for larger time steps when explicit schemes are used for time
integration. For large-scale simulations, such as those required in climate
prediction for example, each time step incurs significant communication cost at
scale. By leveraging better node distributions, larger time steps and spectral
accuracy, windowed Fourier schemes are expected to be more efficient than
methods currently used in critical applications such as climate and geodynamics.