* 1522560
* Measurement of Thermal conductivity of mantle and core materials and implications for the thermal history of the Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Abby Kavner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 390,000.00

The major goal of this research program is to understand the thermal evolution
of the whole Earth, especially its mantle, which helps govern the heat flow
driving convection and ultimately generates plate tectonics, earthquakes, and
volcanism activity on the Earth's surface. The mineral property of thermal
conductivity helps govern the amount of heat that can escape the core and is
ultimately transferred to the Earth's surface, where it escapes mostly through
volcanism. However, thermal conductivity is not well known for the materials at
the high pressures and temperatures inside the Earth. The goal of this research
program is to measure the thermal conductivity of important Earth materials at
high pressures and temperatures, and then use the measured values to understand
how the Earth cools down throughout geological time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
a diamond anvil cell laser-heating technique, the PI will measure how the
thermal conductivity of oxides, silicates, and iron-based alloys vary with
temperature, pressure, and composition. These measurements will help determine
the thermal conductivity of the inner core and outer core as a function of time,
and help constrain dynamo behavior and the role of the inner core in helping to
determine the magnetic field. The second outcome is a measure of the effect of
chemical change and phase change on the thermal conductivity of oxides,
silicates, and iron alloys at deep Earth conditions. This will help assess
temporal and spatial variations of thermal conductivity of the deep Earth. The
third outcome is a measure of near infrared optical absorption properties of
mantle oxides and silicates directly at the relevant high pressures and
temperatures. This will constrain place bounds on the radiative contribution to
deep Earth thermal conductivity. The outcome of the work proposed here
contributes to the broader goal of a three-dimensional time-dependent portrait
of the thermal properties of the Earth, both temperature and heat flow, from the
surface to the core.