* 1522517
* I-Corps:  BioBright - A platform for real-time tracking of biological experiments
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Shuguang Zhang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The practical impact of automatically tracking the diverse procedural and
contextual variables affecting biological experiments can be far-reaching.
Currently, the majority of research results cannot be replicated, wasting vast
amounts of funding and considerable human effort. Moreover, the difficulty of
reproducing biological protocols, a necessity in biological research -- and the
lack of seamless interfaces for the multitude of devices and data sources around
the lab -- severely limits the broader accessibility and proliferation of
biological research methods and results. This I-Corps team is developing a
platform (BioBright) to facilitate reproducibility in biological
experimentation, by implementing networked hardware and software that
automatically compares what should have happened in an experiment with what
actually happened.

BioBright is creating an "ecosystem" of software and hardware technologies which
enable networked biology. With a platform approach, the goal is to create a line
of products that tie into the ecosystem. To date, the team has a patented
"context-aware" pipette. One of the initial modes of commercialization includes
licensing of this technology to leading pipette and fluid handling
manufacturers. Through continued use of the Business Model Canvas (BMC)
framework, the team expects to uncover commercial applications for the proposed
technology beyond biology and scientific research. The team's preliminary market
research and customer interviews suggest that the first customers may include
commercial research organizations (CRO), laboratory equipment manufacturers and
expand into other markets such as plant biology, in-vitro-fertilization, food
production/commercial baking, and other applications where high precision,
reproducibility, and exacting quality control are critical.