* 1522972
* Collaborative Research:  An examination of human social and cultural adaptation through archaeological and paleoclimate data from the Aleutian Islands
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2024
* Catherine West, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2024
* USD 442,338.00

Archaeologists have expended a lot of research effort trying to determine
whether or not periods of past climate change had a significant effect on human
populations. In the case of coastal Alaska over the past several thousand years,
the available data indicate that for the most part, the answer has been "not
much" - the marine ecosystem seems to have remained relatively stable, even
through periods of climate change such as the Medieval Warm Period and the so-
called "Little Ice Age". The one exception to this generalization is found on
Unalaska Island, in the eastern Aleutians. At about 4000 years ago, ringed
seals, which are an ice-adapted species, made up a significant portion of the
subsistence base. This suggests that temperatures were substantially colder than
they are today. However, many of the species that are common in the area today
(in the absence of significant levels of sea ice) were also an important part of
the subsistence economy 4000 years ago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims
to try to address this apparent contradiction; was it cold and icy? Or was it
generally more temperate, much as it is today? To do so, the scientists will (a)
study the growth patterns and shell chemistry of modern and archaeological
butter clams, which will give us an indication of what the water conditions were
like. They will also (b) conduct a detailed analysis of all of the species
present in the archaeological midden sites, including the age composition of
what was being harvested, as an indication of what the environmental conditions
were like. And, finally, they will (c) conduct a detailed analysis of the
artifacts associated with marine mammal hunting to determine the likelihood that
hunters 4000 years ago developed a specialized toolkit for hunting in the sea
ice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As coastal communities throughout the Arctic face
important decisions regarding the possibility of major climate change, the
research team believes that it will be important to have some "test cases" that
provide information on how various communities have responded to climate change
in the past. The archaeological sites on Unalaska Island provide nearly 4000
years worth of data of adaptation to past climate change; data that are directly
relevant to understanding the challenges of future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the effects of Late
Holocene climate change on animal biodiversity and human foraging activity in
Alaska's Aleutian Islands. This three-year, interdisciplinary study will use
zooarchaeological, paleoenvironmental, biological, and oceanographic data to
test the hypothesis that fluctuations in Late Holocene climate significantly
affected local environments, ecosystems, and human hunting strategy in the
eastern Aleutian Islands. This interdisciplinary project will apply models of
human foraging behavior to research human-animal-environmental interactions in
the context of climate change using three major lines of evidence: 1) growth
patterns and stable oxygen isotopes in archaeological shellfish will be used to
reconstruct the local paleoenvironment; 2) archaeological faunal material from
several taxonomic groups will be used to test whether animal distribution and
behavior have changed through time in response to changes in climate; 3)
artifacts will be analyzed to look for adaptations to the marine mammal hunting
toolkit in response to changes in climate and resource availability. More
specifically, the research team proposes a research program that will use
multiple datasets from Unalaska Island to address whether sea ice and ice-loving
("pagophilic") fauna were present in this region during the Neoglacial phase,
suggesting a dramatic change in prehistoric climate. The interdisciplinary
nature of archaeology makes it uniquely positioned to accomplish two things: 1)
to offer truly long term data about the ecological, climate, and resource
histories for the Gulf of Alaska, data that are vital to understanding both
ancient and contemporary human and environmental interaction in this region and
2) to collaborate with local Native Alaskan communities and students, resource
managers, and cultural resource managers to collect, interpret, and disseminate
the data and findings.