* 1522786
* A Non-Convex Approach for Signal and Image Processing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Yifei Lou, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 208,382.00

As the digital revolution increases the amount of data generated by sensing
methodology such as magnetic resonance imaging and radar, the need to process
the data better, faster, and cheaper has been the focus of much research, most
notably through work with compressive sensing (CS). However, CS is not without
its problems, most of which have emerged as CS has moved from the theoretical to
the practical. The theory was developed with convex problems, but many practical
applications require the ability to process nonconvex problems that are not easy
to solve as quickly as digital sensing systems require. This research project
focuses on a particular nonconvex model along with associated numerical
algorithms, which when completed will advance the field of nonconvex
optimization. Theoretical investigations will be performed to establish
conditions for guaranteed performance, which will help engineers and scientists
devise experiments to acquire data and recover useful information in a more
effective manner. The tools developed will have broad applicability due to the
profound impacts of CS, specifically in the fields of medical imaging and
geospatial information that are addressed in this project. Furthermore, the
investigator will incorporate results of the research into undergraduate and
graduate courses and will develop new interdisciplinary courses with focus on
both the theory and application, including machine learning and medical imaging,
which will serve as a springboard for student recruitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compressive sensing (CS) can exactly recover a sparse
signal (most elements being zero) from incoherent linear systems, in which any
two measurements have as little correlation as possible. Sparsity and
incoherence are two important assumptions in CS, but many practical problems are
coherent, and conventional methods do not work well. To overcome the coherency
barrier, the investigator and collaborators investigate a novel nonconvex model
that has advantages over the state-of-the-art methods in CS. The goal of this
project is to address key challenges regarding both computational and
theoretical aspects of the algorithms, to establish new criteria for exact
recovery, and to demonstrate its applicability in prototypical problems. As
such, this research is organized with three objectives: (1) Developing efficient
algorithms to solve the nonconvex minimization problem, using techniques in
convex optimization and dynamical systems to design algorithms and analyze
convergence; (2) Searching for conditions that can quantify the success of both
convex and nonconvex methods, for example, coherence and minimum separation; (3)
Conducting numerical experiments in two types of real problems, medical image
reconstruction and hyperspectral image classification, to demonstrate the
advantages of the method in terms of accuracy and efficiency. Overall, this
project will advance theoretical understanding and algorithmic developments in
computational mathematics and provide a new perspective to enable CS-based data
recovery in a wide spectrum of applications.