* 1522906
* Collaborative Research:  Observational and Modeling Studies of Overshooting Convection and Stratosphere-Troposphere Exchange
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Kenneth Bowman, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 289,572.00

Deep convection that penetrates (overshoots) the tropopause affects the trace
gas composition of the extratropical upper troposphere and lower stratosphere,
which is important for global atmospheric chemistry and the Earth's radiation
balance. This study will combine more than 10 year data of ground-based radar
observations with numerical model simulations to study the physical and chemical
characteristics of overshooting convection. Data from approximately 100 NEXRAD
radars will be composited onto a three-dimensional regional grid with high
spatial and temporal resolution. Climatology of the physical characteristics of
overshooting convection, such as vertical extent, geographic distribution,
interannual variability, and annual and diurnal cycles will be computed from the
radar observations. Overshooting convection characteristics derived from the
composited radar data will be compared with estimates based on satellite IR
observations. To investigate the mechanisms responsible for cross-tropopause
transport and to make quantitative estimates of stratosphere-troposphere
exchange, numerical model simulations with explicitly resolved convection and
chemistry will be carried out for case studies and for an entire warm season.
The radar data will be used along with in situ trace gas observations from
aircraft to evaluate the performance of the numerical simulations.

Intellectual Merit: It is well known that convection in the extratropics can
penetrate the tropopause and extend into the lower stratosphere, but there is
little quantitative information about its geographic distribution, frequency of
occurrence, or depth of penetration into the stratosphere. The radar analyses in
this study will lead to a new regional climatology of overshooting convection in
the midlatitudes based on direct geometric observations at high spatial and
temporal resolution. The results will be compared with satellite IR estimates of
overshooting, which offer the potential to extend the regional results to a
global domain. High-resolution numerical simulations of overshooting convection
will be used to investigate stratosphere-troposphere exchange mechanisms and to
make quantitative estimates of the transport of important trace species.

Broader Impacts: This research will produce a long-term, public, dataset of
radar reflectivity over a large portion of the contiguous U.S. These data will
be applicable to a wide range of other hydrometeorological problems. Since
convection is not resolved in current global climate models, these studies will
provide guidance for developing parameterizations of stratosphere-troposphere
exchange due to overshooting convection. A better understanding of overshooting
convection will help to reduce uncertainties in future climate projections,
which is an important economic and social problem. In addition, diagnosing
convective behavior and its impact on atmospheric chemistry will lead to an
improved understanding of processes affecting air quality and human health, as
both increases in tropospheric ozone and depletion of stratospheric ozone are
possible in overshooting storms.