* 1522547
* RAPID: Spontaneous Planning, Governance Structure, and a Public Health Emergency: Ebola in Dallas Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2015,05/31/2016
* David McEntire, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 05/31/2016
* USD 38,536.00

The Ebola virus became a part of household conversations in October of 2014. The
United States experienced its first death and witnessed the spread of the
infection to its citizens. The presence of a deadly infection in our urban areas
highlights the importance of coordination among leaders and decision-makers.
Dealing with insufficient expertise in emergencies as complex as an Ebola
outbreak can be dangerous. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) research project
will have a big impact on society by helping to understand the barriers in
decision-making that exist between the fields of governance, emergency
management, and public health. The investment of public funds in this project
will advance the understanding of collaboration among these three professions.
Further, it will support the development of an alternative decision-making model
that can be used in emergencies that will bring far-reaching public value. As we
understand how these three fields created public policy "on-the-fly" or
spontaneously, it will inform public leaders on how to manage and maintain
flexibility in a public health crisis, thus benefiting society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will study how officials overcome
barriers to governance and integrate spontaneous planning in a public health
emergency. Multiple methods including interviews and the administration of a
survey will be used to achieve these objectives. In particular, the team will
interview the principle actors in the Ebola crisis, in the Dallas Fort Worth
(DFW) area, including the Dallas County judge, mayor, city manager, emergency
management coordinator, the lead epidemiologist, hospital leadership,
representatives from the Centers of Disease Control and their local
counterparts. They will determine through these interviews multi-actor response
protocols. At this point, they will evaluate these interviews to identify
themes, through a content analysis process. These themes will then be used to
generate further questions to distribute to other local leaders adjacent to
Dallas County in the DFW area. Finally, they will measure and analyze the
results of the questionnaire using statistical processes.