* 1522485
* WORKSHOP: The 2015 HRI Pioneers Workshop at the 2015 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2015,08/31/2015
* Matthias Scheutz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 31,600.00

This is funding to support a Pioneers Workshop (doctoral consortium) of
approximately 18 graduate students and post-docs from diverse research
communities (e.g., computer science and engineering, psychology, cognitive
science, robotics, human factors, human-computer interaction design, and
communications), along with distinguished research faculty. The event will take
place on Monday, March 2, 2015, immediately preceding the Tenth International
Conference on Human Robot Interaction (HRI 2015), to be held March 2-5 in
Portland, Oregon, and which is jointly sponsored by ACM and IEEE. HRI is a
single-track, highly selective annual international conference that seeks to
showcase the very best inter- and multi-disciplinary research in human-robot
interaction with roots in social psychology, cognitive science, HCI, human
factors, artificial intelligence, robotics, organizational behavior,
anthropology and many more, and invites broad participation. The theme of HRI
2015 is "Broadening HRI: Enabling Technologies, Designs, Methods, and Knowledge"
which seeks contributions from a broad set of perspectives, including technical,
design, methodological, behavioral, and theoretical, that advance fundamental
and applied knowledge and methods in human-robot interaction, with the goal of
enabling human-robot interaction through new technical advances, novel robot
designs, new guidelines for design, and advanced methods for understanding and
evaluating interaction. More information about the conference is available
online at http://humanrobotinteraction.org/2015.

The Pioneers Workshop is designed to complement the conference, by providing a
forum for students and recent graduates in the field of HRI to share their
current research with their peers and a panel of senior researchers in a setting
that is less formal and more interactive than the main conference. During the
workshop, participants will talk about the important upcoming research themes in
the field, encouraging the formation of collaborative relationships across
disciplines and geographic boundaries. To these ends, the workshop format will
encompass a variety of activities including two keynotes, a distinguished panel
session, and breakout sessions. To start the day, all workshop attendees will
briefly introduce themselves and their interests. Following the opening keynote,
approximately half of the participants will present 3-minute overviews of their
work, leading into an interactive poster session. This will enable all
participants to share their research and receive feedback from students and
senior researchers in an informal setting. The workshop organizers will
facilitate the post-presentation discussion and will encourage participants to
ask questions of their peers during the interactive break and poster session.
After lunch, the remaining workshop participants will give their 3-minute
overviews, followed by presentation of their posters during a second interactive
poster session. Senior researchers (in addition to those on the panel) will be
invited to attend the student presentations and poster sessions in order to
provide feedback to participants, and workshop participants will be invited to
present their posters during the main poster session of the HRI conference as
well. The conversations between the panel and participants will continue over
lunch and during dinner.

This workshop will afford a unique opportunity for the best of the next
generation of researchers in human-robot interaction to be exposed to and
discuss current and relevant topics as they are being studied in several
different research communities (including but not limited to computer science
and engineering, psychology, robotics, human factors and ergonomics, and HCI).
This is important for the field, because it has been recognized that
transformative advances in research in this fledgling area can only come through
the melding of cross-disciplinary knowledge and multinational perspectives.
Participants will be encouraged to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development, to form collaborative relationships, and to generate new research
questions to be addressed during the coming years. Participants will also gain
leadership and service experience, as the workshop is largely student organized
and student led. The PI has expressed his strong commitment to recruiting women
and members from under-represented groups. To further ensure diversity the event
organizers will consider an applicant's potential to offer a fresh perspective
and point of view with respect to HRI, will recruit students who are just
beginning their graduate degree programs in addition to students who are further
along in their degrees, and will limit the number of participants accepted from
a particular institution to at most two (in which case, one of the participants
must be female).