* 1522514
* Research and Strategic Planning for the Mount Mansfield Science and Stewardship Center
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Allan Strong, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 24,969.00

Mountain forests and alpine zones of the Northeast are sensitive ecosystems that
provide valuable opportunities for recreation, industry, and natural resource
management. Because of their distinct biological and cultural attributes, they
are important subjects for the study of ecosystem function, effects of natural
and anthropogenic change, and the dynamics of social-ecological systems.
However, the expense and logistical challenges of remote mountain research have
hampered gains in knowledge and integration among academic and professional
disciplines. The problem is especially pronounced in the region's montane
forests, which lack a permanent platform to investigate climate change,
acidification, mercury deposition and other anthropogenic stressors that
disproportionately affect high elevations. The objective of this project is to
produce a five-year strategic plan for the Mount Mansfield Science and
Stewardship Center, a field station currently under consideration by the
University of Vermont and collaborating institutions. The Mansfield Center is
situated on a forested ridge at an elevation of 1,775 m in north-central
Vermont. The surrounding 16,000 ha of wild and managed land have been the
subject of scientific study for many decades, with continuous and coordinated
investigations of mountain air, water, soil, flora, and fauna dating back to
1991. As eastern North America's only montane forest field station, the
Mansfield Center will catalyze interdisciplinary studies of woodland and alpine
ecosystems across the northern Appalachian and Adirondack ecoregions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning process involves engaging scientists,
environmental decision-makers, the Organization of Biological Field Stations
(OBFS) Development Committee, and University of Vermont leadership to develop a
comprehensive strategic plan to promote exchange between science and policy,
while expanding participation in regional and international data cooperatives.
Implementing the strategy will establish a new node in a worldwide network of
mountain observatories that is emerging to investigate climate change and other
global issues. The Northeast Mountain Science Conference will expand
partnerships between academic and research institutions and produce concrete
proposals to guide future work. These partnerships will extend to public and
commercial stakeholders, informing policy and land management across the region.
Once established, the Mansfield Center will offer UVM and visiting
undergraduates access to a vast living laboratory, with varied opportunities for
problem- and place-based learning. Groups that are underrepresented in
environmental science, including urban students, will be recruited for
participation in the education program. The center will support the training of
graduate students and professionals through provision of study sites,
demonstration plots, and exhibit space at the Mansfield Center and in the nearby
Smuggler's Notch Visitor Center. These high-profile venues will reach thousands
of visitors every year and illuminate the interdependence between people and
mountain environments.