* 1522781
* I-Corps:  An Outsourced and Completely Private Social Network: You&Me
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Wei Jiang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Currently, any data posted or stored on the existing social networks are visible
to the social network providers. Once a user posts a message or stores personal
information on a social network, it is no longer in the control of the user how
the data will be used by the social network service providers. In the past few
years, many media organizations have been arguing that certain providers are
probably selling user profile data to third-party advertisers to make profits.
In the wake of such criticisms, users become more concerned about their privacy
leaving them with a serious question as to whether or not any social network
provider can be seriously trusted. Since the user profile data reside on the
servers of a social network provider, there is no way for a user to verify
whether the provider is strictly enforcing the user's privacy policies.

The I-Corps team is currently working on a prototype system of You&Me. It
combines the secure techniques generated from the principal investigator's
previous research project, the existing open source database management systems,
and open source user interface development packages to implement You&Me. So far,
the team has finalized the basic software architecture and components and
started implementing the fundamental features. At the end of this project, the
team expects to have the basic version of the prototype system as a demo. The
prototype system will show potential investors how You&Me can fully protect user
privacy, and at the same time, the users can still enjoy the same or very
similar functionalities as the existing social networks.