* 1522498
* Strategic Planning and Collaboration for Monitoring Changes in Coastal Ecosystems, Gulf of Maine
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Laura Sewall, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 24,952.00

Bates College, in partnership with the Hurricane Island Center for Science and
Leadership, is granted an award to coordinate the research and training efforts
of a network of Gulf of Maine (GOM) field stations. Historically, the GOM was
one of the world's most productive marine ecosystems. However, in August 2014,
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced that the cod
population had plummeted to 3% of what is considered to be a sustainable
population size, indicating the commercial extinction of cod in the GOM. In
addition, the Gulf of Maine Research Institute and others recently reported that
the GOM is warming faster than 99% of the world's oceans, suggesting that the
Gulf could serve as a "living laboratory" for rapidly changing marine
ecosystems. At least 20 field stations collect environmental data in the Gulf of
Maine. Of these, 10-15 operate on a small scale, with limited faculty, staff and
equipment. Most emphasize undergraduate education and some place a high priority
on engagement with diverse coastal communities. Individually, these stations
cover limited geographic ranges; together, they cover the distance from
Nantucket to Nova Scotia. Furthermore, their combined data sets document fine-
scale conditions across a wide range of natural systems, and across decades of
place-based observation and research. The central purpose of this award is to
strategically leverage the research and training capacity of small field
stations as a coordinated network. Its successful implementation will foster
synergies and innovation, with the potential to yield significant findings on
near-shore conditions in the Gulf of Maine, and to contribute to a larger
understanding of environmental change in coastal waters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award allows a network of small GOM field stations to
do the strategic planning necessary to implement shared research and training
goals. Planning activities will include two multi-day meetings for all station
directors, scientists associated with field stations, and three scientific
advisors. Outcomes of this phase will include a summary of knowledge gaps and
research priorities; equipment needs; teaching and training recommendations for
students and citizens; and a data management strategy. During the second phase
of the project, directors from the three lead stations-the Bates College Coastal
Center at Shortridge (http://www.bates.edu/harward/bates-morse-mountain-
shortridge/), the Hurricane Island Center for Science and Leadership
(http://www.hurricaneisland.net/ ) and the Bowdoin Scientific Station at Kent
Island (https://www.bowdoin.edu/kent-island/)-will produce a ten-year strategic
plan for the network, identifying actionable items for implementation based on
prior meetings. A business planning workshop will inform the strategic planning
efforts. A final report will detail priorities, action steps, and the specifics
of shared research and training programs.