* 1522528
* A Reconstructed Boat Landing for California Polytechnic State University's Center for Coastal Marine Sciences Pier Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Dean Wendt, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 344,272.00

California Polytechnic State University will replace a fixed-level vessel
landing at the Cal Poly Pier, the primary field facility of the Center for Coast
Marine Sciences (CCMS). The CCMS coordinates the marine research and teaching at
the University, primarily using the Cal Poly Pier. The Pier extends 1 km into
Port San Luis Bay, and has an extensive flow-through seawater system as well as
facilities for diving operations and the deployment of small boats. However, the
existing boat landing on the pier is an aging, fixed platform that is marginally
safe and usable only during the calmest of sea conditions, conditions that are
rarely present on the California central coast. This project will replace the
current access platforms with a larger fixed platform and calls for the
installation of a camel vessel mooring and fender system to provide a buffer
between the pier and vessels moored against it. The project will also increase
the capacity of the hoist, allowing for easier deployment of vessels. This will
make deployment of vessels and access to the waterline and vessels much safer
and easier, permitting access in a variety of sea conditions and tidal heights.
The new platforms and hoist will allow the CCMS to further increase capacity and
scope for year-round field research and field teaching, all while improving
access and efficiency and greatly increasing safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CCMS, the Pier, and all resources are managed by the College of Science and
Math. These resources are available to any researcher or faculty member in the
College for no cost, aside from consumables (e.g. fuel), providing a significant
in-kind contribution to and lowering the cost of marine science teaching and
research. The CCMS currently operates five research vessels, from a 13 foot
Boston Whaler to a 26 foot Radon, the R/V Tom Richards. In the Pier's current
state, the only boat access to the water is via a fixed landing with upper and
lower elements at approximately 3 and 1 m above mean lower low water (MLLW),
respectively. As such, access to the water is challenging in all but the calmest
sea conditions, which are rarely present along the California central coast. The
main elements of this project include removal of the current lower landing,
expansion of the upper landing to cover an area of 12 x 20 ft., installation of
a camel vessel mooring and fender system to provide a buffer between the pier
and vessels moored against it, and replacement of the current jib crane motor
and hoist mechanism to a 1-ton capacity system. This expansion and improvement
will provide greatly enhanced access to the waterline and to Cal Poly's fleet of
small boats in a range of sea conditions, significantly improving safety and
expanding the educational and scientific opportunities for marine science
students and researchers at Cal Poly.