* 1522464
* An upgraded seawater system for the University of Georgia Marine Institute on Sapelo Island
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Merryl Alber, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2017
* USD 356,201.00

The University of Georgia is awarded a grant to renovate the seawater delivery
system at the University of Georgia Marine Institute on Sapelo Island
(http://ugami.uga.edu/). Running seawater is a vital resource for the UGA Marine
Institute (UGAMI), which is a world-renowned field destination that serves
researchers and educators from throughout the U.S. and beyond. However, the
current system is unreliable and has reached the end of its useful life. The
intake of the seawater system is in an area that is extremely shallow during low
tides, such that the pumps can run dry. Moreover, the advanced age and degraded
condition of the storage and delivery system render them unreliable and
difficult to maintain. The upgrade will involve modifying the present system so
that it only pumps seawater during high tide, and adding larger storage tanks to
be able to provide seawater when the pumps are not running. The new system will
also include pre-filtration, a disinfection unit, and a control and alarm
system, and will be designed with a capacity of 1.5 times that of the current
system in order to support future growth. These upgrades address a critical need
and are necessary for the continued operation of UGAMI as a viable field
station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UGAMI serves as the field site for researchers
from numerous institutions, who are conducting studies of coastal ecosystems to
understand how they function, to track how they change over time, and to predict
how they might be affected in the future. They publish approximately 40
scientific papers per year and also train graduate students at both the master's
and doctoral level. It also hosts upwards of 2000 undergraduate students per
year from universities throughout the country, as well as teacher training and
other workshops. The upgraded seawater system will benefit virtually all of
these users, who require running seawater for everything from rinsing samples to
storing live organisms to conducting long-term experiments. It will also allow
UGAMI to accommodate additional usage from longer-term residential courses,
which are now being planned.