* 1522493
* Planning Grant::  Developing a strategic plan and infrastructure needs for the Laguna Bacalar Field Station, Bacalar Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* J Klump, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2018
* USD 24,896.00

This project will lay plans for development of an international, educational and
research field station and marine laboratory in Bacalar, Mexico, located in the
southern Yucatan Peninsula 30 km north of Belize on the shores of Laguna
Bacalar. Laguna Bacalar lies within a globally unique ecological and
archeological complex and environmentally sensitive corridor that connects
terrestrial, freshwater, estuarine, and marine systems, and that has been
extensively inhabited by humans, dating back to the Mayans, for well over 3000
years. As Mexico's second largest natural lake, this pristine system also lies
at the doorstep of major ecological changes and socio-economic forces driven
largely by tourism that are sweeping the Yucatan Peninsula. The Bacalar corridor
contains highly dynamic and diverse regional groundwater flow regimes, high and
low growth tropical forests, dense freshwater and marine mangrove forests,
active sublacustrine springs and deep cenote sinkholes, estuaries, and unique
fringing reef areas of the 1000 km long Mesoamerican barrier coral reef.
Virtually unknown to the scientific community, the Laguna also contains the
world's largest and most extensive living stromatolite complex, considered by
many as living examples of one of the earliest life forms on earth. This
ecosystem also epitomizes one of the great challenges of our time -
understanding and managing the interactions between human activity and
vulnerable environmental systems. Establishment of an internationally recognized
field station will not only serve the scientific community, but will also
provide the data, information and understanding for sustainable development as
well as the economic benefit of hosting research and researchers from around the
world. Opportunities to enhance the local economy in the areas of technology,
research and education have been rare, but in a broader context such
opportunities are at the heart of the ongoing employment forces affecting Mexico
and the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will initiate and facilitate
planning the establishment of an international education and research field
station located on Laguna Bacalar, Quintana Roo, Mexico. This planning will be a
collaborative effort by the School of Freshwater Sciences at the University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee (SFS); El Colegio de la Frontera Sur (ECOSUR) at Chetumal,
MX; the Institute of Ecology, UNAM; and the Municipio Bacalar, MX. The goal is
to solicit input from a variety of scientists, field station managers,
educators, and Mexican governmental groups (municipal, state, federal leaders
e.g., Comisi√≥n Nacional del Agua (CONAGUA)) to delineate scientific needs and
opportunities, to outline a robust research agenda, to assure the implementation
of the best planning practices for field station development, and to identify
the basic requirements for a broadly available facility for professionals with
diverse backgrounds. The station will serve the scientific communities from an
array of institutions with the common interest of studying local to
international challenges in the field of water and natural resources, including
interface studies of science with policy, economics, and social structure with a
strong educational component e.g., STEM programs, Mexican COBACH high school
programs. The field station planning goals will be achieved by engaging working
groups with targeted outputs: by convening an international symposium to
summarize research previously accomplished, to identify new research frontiers,
and to conduct facilitated planning sessions to develop field station future
directions; by conducting interactive seminars for regional lay persons and the
indigenous Maya; and by soliciting advice and feedback from successful
Biological Field Stations and Marine Laboratories (FSML) directors and managers
on station management, budgeting, and use policies.