* 1522945
* EXP: Promoting Learning through Annotation of Embodiment (PLAE)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ben Loh, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 554,030.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. The Promoting Learning through Annotation of Embodiment (PLAE)
project will research how new motion-tracking technologies and augmented reality
can be adapted to support young children's science learning in the classroom.
Embodied resources - gesture, physical motion, and one's location in space - are
increasingly recognized as important modalities for students to engage and
better understand science and mathematics concepts. However, these embodied
resources need to be connected to other intellectual resources more readily
recognized by school-notation systems, mathematical equations, graphs, and
scientific vocabulary. The project will investigate how the ability to label,
identify, and view key elements of activity within augmented reality learning
environments support student reflection on scientific content in the physical
sciences. Project research will help develop the foundations for the application
of technology systems employing embodied resources combined with annotation to
support children's learning of basic science concepts. Because of the popularity
of motion-tracking interfaces for commercial computer gaming (e.g. the Xbox
Kinect and Wii), the capabilities of less expensive motion-tracking systems are
rapidly advancing to the point where practical classroom applications can be
developed in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research how
annotations of embodied play simulations in an augmented reality environment can
direct student attention towards key scientific concepts while providing them
with opportunities to reflect upon and revise their understanding of those
concepts. After development and pilot testing of the system, students will be
assigned to one of two conditions that involve either: (1) all student-generated
annotations or (2) all teacher- and researcher-created annotations. By
contrasting these two models, the project will be able to explore in detail the
role of annotation in supporting students' reflection within embodied modeling
activities, and to further demonstrate the value that is added by allowing
students to design and negotiate their own annotations. There will be two main
sources of data for each of the experiments: (1) a pre-post content measure to
assess overall growth in student understanding of the particulate nature of
matter, and (2) project coding and analysis of videos of student activity to
analyze the types of learning processes promoted by the technology and
curriculum, with a focus on how the annotation features support reflection about
the underlying rules of the system. The results of this research will inform the
design of future educational technologies which rely upon embodied motion.