* 1522783
* Extreme Gravity Workshop to be held at Montana State University; August 20-22, 2015.
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Bennett Link, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 5,000.00

This award supports a scientific workshop, to take place at Montana State
University (MSU) in August 2015, to plan and prepare for the upcoming era of
extreme gravity astrophysics. The workshop will discuss how to get the most out
of the data we expect to obtain in the next few years from the NICER telescope,
the Event Horizon telescope and the advanced LIGO/Virgo detectors. The format of
the workshop will be relatively informal to encourage a collaborative
atmosphere, in analogy to the one hosted in 2013 at MSU on gravitational wave
tests of General Relativity. The workshop will have four focus sessions on
neutron star observations and the equation of state, black hole shadows,
gravitational wave astrophysics and experimental
relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will take place on August 20 - 22,
2015 at the Alumni Foundation of Montana State University. Each day will be
divided into two subset, each of which will cover a single topic, for a total of
six topics. These will include neutron star astrophysics and observations, the
neutron star equation of state, NICER astrophysics, gravitational wave
astrophysics, the Event Horizon telescope, and experimental relativity with
gravitational waves and with cosmology. The workshop is expected to be small (of
order 50 people) so as to increase the participation of all attendees. A few
overview talks will be planned for each day, where the discussion leader will
summarize the most recent successes in each topic and present questions that
still need to be addressed. The overviews will act as a catalyst for discussions
and exchange of ideas.