* 1522851
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Examining Social Networks And Communties Of Resistance To New Religious Movements
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Lewis Borck, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 7,248.00

Dr. Barbara Mills (University of Arizona) and Lewis Borck (University of Arizona
and Archaeology Southwest) will examine the complex ways that people react to
changing cultural and organizational patterns brought about by the spread, or
diffusion, of a new religious ideology. The researchers will study how objects
of daily and ceremonial life shaped the complicated social and political lives
of past groups of people. Understanding how people in the past reacted to an
expansive ideology provides comparative data to evaluate against modern
expansive religions, including their various sects. This will improve
understanding not only of how ideology spreads, but also of how and why groups
join or resist a new religion. Previous archaeological research on diffusion has
focused on technology rather than ideas or ideology, and such investigations
typically relied on either spatial data or social data. This project will
integrate social network and spatial diffusion models to demonstrate to
researchers in many fields the utility and accuracy of integrating the two
approaches. This project will also share information about archaeological
ethics, ownership of the past, and deep local history with community members
(landowners, community college students, and public school students) in areas
often underserved by academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mills and Mr. Borck will
use archaeological data from across all of Arizona and western New Mexico to
examine how people in the late prehispanic Southwest reacted to changes
associated with the spread of the Salado religious cult during the thirteenth
through fifteenth centuries (A.D. 1200-1450). This project will measure the
probable level of exposure to and the corresponding level (or lack) of
resistance to the spread of Salado by modeling resistance using ceramic
distribution data (where certain kinds of pottery were made and used, and then
found by archaeologists). They will compare these data against a null model that
includes a spatial component that models the flow of material goods, as well as
a social network component that examines how ideas spread through a network over
time. Archaeology as a field is particularly useful for examining difficult,
long-term processes such as the spread of religion, because archaeological data
primarily derive from material objects, rather than textual or ethnographic
records that may incorporate human bias. This research will generate new methods
for studying the spread of ideas across time and space, and these methods will
be useful to diverse researchers examining similar processes in the past and the
present.