* 1522401
* Workshop: Societal Impact, Ethics, and Big-Data-Enabled Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Charles Catlett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 49,870.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support US
participation in the Global Science Forum (GSF) of the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD). GSF provides a venue for mutual
consultation among senior science policy officials of OECD member countries. It
produces findings on high-priority science-policy issues that require
international co-operation, and identifies opportunities for collaboration on
major scientific undertakings. This award will support the participation of two
PIs in planning meetings with GSF experts for an international conference
tentatively entitled "The Ethics of Using New Forms of Data for Social
Research." The conference is to be held in Chicago, and it will bring US
scientists together with OECD experts to develop an international framework for
the ethical use of big data in research. The analysis and application of large
datasets, also known as big data research, is an important area of research
supported by NSF's Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE). The conference will be organized as plenary, breakout and poster
sessions. It will bring together scientists, policy makers, industry, funding
agencies, and public interest groups who have an interest in addressing the
ethical use of big data in the SBE sciences. Big data is growing in importance
for many areas critical to society, including health, finance and science. The
outputs of this conference will help researchers identify the key issues in
research ethics and explore an international framework related to the ethics of
the use of big data in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference being planned will advance the SBE
subfields of Research Ethics and Privacy Protection in Big Data by developing a
forward-looking framework on how to overcome the tradeoff between big data and
research ethics to effectively pursue the potential of big data without
sacrificing privacy rights or violating research ethics. These goals are
particularly challenging because satisfying them will require inherently
interdisciplinary approaches, and they will require anticipatory approaches
(scenario development), which are just starting to be developed. The proposed
activities will serve to improve insights and to provide a framework for
approaching the reuse of new forms of data. They will inform policy making and
scientific practice with regards to data reuse, as well as provide a foundation
for conducting ethical analysis of relevant data use scenarios. The proposed
effort will result in a framework for internationally acceptable guidelines for
the use of big data in SBE research, and it will thereby have profound
implications not only for data-related research but also for data-related
governance and policies.