* 1522767
* Collaborative Research: Computation of instantons in complex nonlinear systems.
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Eric Vanden-Eijnden, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

A wide variety of systems exhibit rare events -- events far from the average
system behavior with low probability of occurring. Rare events can have
significant consequences, and improved understanding of their occurrence can aid
in the design or management of such systems. The characterization of the
likelihood of rare events is essential in all systems in which stochasticity
plays an important role, as it allows us to take advantage of such events if
they are desirable and to avoid them if they present a threat. The outcomes of
this project will contribute to the understanding of rare events in complex
systems, in particular, fluid dynamics and related geophysical systems. Further
applications include the characterization of extreme events in the context of
epidemics, population dynamics, and molecular biology.

The goal of this project is to develop efficient computational methods to
characterize the most likely way rare events occur in complex stochastic systems
and to estimate the tails of their probability distributions. For this purpose,
the investigators will develop efficient algorithms to compute the so-called
"instantons" that are minimizers of the action functional that large deviation
theory associates with the stochastic differential equation describing the
system's evolution. Numerical methods to calculate instantons will first be
developed in the context of turbulence (in particular Burgers equation, magneto-
hydrodynamics (MHD), Navier-Stokes equations, and the surface-quasi-geostrophic
(SQG) equation) driven by diffusive processes. Then the investigators will
extend the methods to stochastic equations that are driven by non-Markovian
noise (fractional Brownian motion) or jump-processes, which play an important
role in physics, biology, and chemistry. Finally, the investigators will
calculate fluctuations around the instantons to get finer estimates of their
probability of occurrence via prefactor calculations.