* 1522631
* Fast Direct Solvers for Boundary Value Problems on Evolving Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Adrianna Gillman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 149,980.00

With the ability to reduce the cost of testing theories and ideas, numerical
simulations will continue to play a growing role in scientific discovery and
device development. Frequently, these simulations involve the solution of
problems that are prescribed by physics. In many cases, the speed and accuracy
with which such problems can be solved is a key limiting factor to what can and
cannot be modeled numerically. Fast direct solvers have recently shown great
promise for solving a large number of problems involving the same geometry by
reusing the most expensive part of the solution technique. This situation
happens often in settings such as product development where each problem
involving the geometry corresponds to a different physical situation. When a
large number of problems are under consideration, the fast direct solvers can
show hundreds of times speed up over other techniques. While this speed up is
great, many engineering situations involve a large number of problems with
slightly different geometries. Each different geometry requires the most
expensive part of the solver to be recomputed. This project will focus on the
development and application of fast direct solvers to problems with evolving
geometries. The new technique will recycle information obtained in the
construction of the fast direct solver for one geometry to build solvers for the
evolved geometries. As a result, the cost of the most expensive step in the fast
direct solution technique will be substantially reduced while retaining the
benefit of being able to solve multiple problems for each geometry quickly. This
work should accelerate many numerical simulations and will have a technological
impact on society through applications such as solar cell design, meta-material
design, sonar, radar and simulations of blood flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
numerical simulations under consideration in the proposed work will involve the
solution of linear boundary value problems. Many linear boundary value problems
can be recast as integral equations. Solution techniques based on integral
equations come with the cost of having to solve a dense linear system upon
discretization. Fast direct solvers invert a dense system by exploiting
structure in the matrix with a cost that grows linearly (or nearly linearly)
with the problem size. The proposed work will adapt the fast linear algebra
framework to create efficient direct solvers for a family of problems with
similar geometries. The new technique will be the first to reuse the structural
information obtained in the construction of a fast direct solver for a single
geometry to build new direct solvers for evolved geometries. This recycling of
structural information reduces the cost of the most expensive step in
constructing fast direct solvers. The new technique should accelerate time-
stepping for evolution equations, Stokes' flow, optimal design algorithms, model
reduction methods and periodic boundary value problem simulations. The solution
technique will be applied to microfluids, inverse scattering, and periodic
scattering.