* 1522577
* Advancements in the Ultraspherical Spectral Method
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Alex Townsend, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 10/31/2016
* USD 144,797.00

The numerical solution of real-world fluid flow and airfoil problems needs an
accurate, flexible, and fully-adaptive spectral element method. The so-called
ultraspherical spectral method, with its sparsity and regularity preserving
discretizations, is promising to overcome many of the traditional computational
barriers. This research project will exploit and investigate the remarkable
properties of the ultraspherical spectral method with the aim of producing a
high quality and industrial-strength spectral element solver for partial
differential equations. One key feature will be its robustness to pinching
boundary features, typical with airfoils, that will alleviate the current
tremendous burden on mesh generation algorithms. The project will radically
alter the perception of spectral methods in the computational mathematics and
engineering communities by extensively demonstrating that, when done carefully,
they can be a flexible, general, and powerful numerical tool.

Today's pseudospectral methods deliver both convenience and spectrally accurate
discretizations for the solution of differential equations. However, they lead
to dense discretizations, numerical instability, and a severe limitation to
simple geometries. The novel ultraspherical spectral method is an alternative
that retains the same accuracy and convenience, but leads to almost banded well-
conditioned discretizations that faithfully preserves the regularity of the
underlying differential operator while also being amenable to specialized fast
linear algebra routines. Based on this new spectral method, the PI will derive a
new mathematically-grounded fully-adaptive spectral element method for meshed
geometries. Key novel computational features will include: (1) A high accuracy
on mesh elements that is independent of the aspect ratio; (2) True hp-adaptivity
that allows for essentially arbitrarily large element degree p and small average
mesh element size h (without concern of ill-conditioning); and (3) The
flexibility to solve a wide range of differential equations with general
boundary constraints; and (4) Local refinement and mesh coarsening for the
resolution of corner singularities. This new spectral element method will be
applied to challenging partial differential equations for the state-of-the-art
numerical simulation of advection-dominated fluid flow problems.