* 1522693
* CPS: Breakthrough: Understanding Sub-Second Instabilities in a Global Cyber-Physical System
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Neil Johnson, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 472,173.00

Cyberphysical (CPS) systems are set to become ever faster, driven by
technological advances that push them toward speed limits set by fundamental
physics. This proposal addresses the need for a theory of the dynamical behavior
of CPS systems in the sub-second regime beyond human intervention times.
Ultrafast instabilities have already been observed in such systems. The theory
will allow for networking at multiple scales, coupling across multiple temporal
and spatial scales, imperfect network communications and sensors, as well as
adaptive reorganization and reconfiguration of the system. Theoretical findings
will be checked against available empirical data, e.g., from the decentralized
network of autonomous market exchanges with its mandated sensor systems. The
project will inform the extent to which instabilities can build up across
timescales, potentially threatening CPS system stability on a global level.

The project goal is a theoretical description of the dynamics in decentralized
networks of semi-autonomous machines in which an ecology of algorithms, sensors
and network links may be operating, adapting and even competing in response to
external inputs. Attention will be paid to the regime of sub-second behavior
where human intervention becomes impossible in real-time. The availability of
data from such a system provides a test-bed for the multi-agent, complex network
analyses to be developed. The project will address how instabilities can be
mitigated and eventually controlled. The results are set to advance
understanding of CPS system dynamics, not only among academics but also
practitioners and regulatory bodies. Application areas that pervade modern life
include market exchange systems, resource-allocation systems and remote sensing
systems. Opportunities exist to integrate research and education concerning CPS
applications across graduate and undergraduate classrooms, outreach through
publications, and participation in K-12 activities.