* 1522957
* Towards a Safer and Greener Indoor Environment: Chemical Liberation from Polyethylene Plumbing Pipes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/16/2014,08/31/2017
* Andrew Whelton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 234,744.00

1228615 (Whelton). Over the past several decades, polymer potable water pipe use
has exponentially increased. This trend is expected to continue because of cost
and life-cycle advantages over metal pipes. Green building initiatives and the
US Green Building Council (USGBC) are driving increased installation of high-
density polyethylene (HDPE) and crosslinked polyethylene (PEX) potable water
pipe into buildings to reduce PVC material use. Despite continued HDPE and PEX
pipe installation, little is known about how US polyethylene based pipes affect
drinking water quality, and data from Europe cannot be directly translated
because of differences between pipe formulations and manufacturing practices. At
present, little data are available on the conditions that result in worst-case
contaminant release from US polyethylene potable water pipe. Moreover, little is
known about which chemical and polymer properties best predict contaminant
release potential, practically nothing about long-term drinking water quality
impacts, and no US data are available from actual plumbing systems. This study
will identify which contaminants, polymer properties, and environmental
conditions influence contaminant release from new, laboratory aged, and actual
pipes installed in building plumbing systems. The project will obtain the
information necessary for building designers, owners, regulators, public health
officials, and product manufacturers to understand the leaching aspects of HDPE
and PEX piping. Results will outline key material factors so manufacturers can
develop lower-leaching products, thereby improving building indoor environmental
quality. A lab/field education module will be delivered to the USGBC Alabama and
National Offices, AWWA, and US EPA. This module will also be provided to
National and International Green Building Standard Organizations (IAMPO, ASPE).