* 1522785
* PSE2015/ESCAPE25
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Mario Eden, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 02/29/2016
* USD 36,000.00

1522785-Eden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding is for the 12th Process Systems
Engineering (PSE) and 25th European Symposium on Computer-Aided Process
Engineering (ESCAPE) Joint Event to be held in Copenhagen, Denmark May 31 - June
4, 2015. This will be the 727th event of the European Federation of Chemical
Engineering (EFCE). The primary goal of PSE2015/ESCAPE25 is to create an
academic and industrial dialogue, a critical assessment of existing enabling
technologies, a discussion on research, education, industrial needs, and a forum
for new directions, challenges and opportunities in product and process design.
The PSE2015/ESCAPE25 conference will feature three plenary lectures, around 40
lectures by world-renowned experts, as well as other paper and poster sessions.
The conference aims at attracting 500-600 participants and over 450 contributed
papers. A particular emphasis will be placed on increasing the participation of
graduate students and postdoctoral associates. Funds are to provide partial
support for US graduate students, postdoctoral associates and academic junior
faculty speakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;1.
PSE2015/ESCAPE25 will bring together and foster interaction among world-renowned
experts from academia and industry, researchers and practitioners from
government laboratories and several industries, graduate students, and post-
doctoral associates.&lt;br/&gt;2. PSE2015/ESCAPE25 will create a technical and
scientific forum for the topics of: Modelling, numerical analysis and
simulation; Mathematical programming (optimization); Cyber-infrastructure,
informatics and intelligent systems; Process and product synthesis/design;
Process dynamics, control and monitoring; Abnormal events management and process
safety; Plant operations, integration, planning/scheduling and supply chain;
Enterprise-wide management and technology-driven policy making; and Domain
applications (molecular, biological, pharmaceutical, food, energy, and
environmental systems engineering).&lt;br/&gt;3. PSE2015/ESCAPE25 will foster
the definition of new problems and challenges in the area of process systems
engineering that will be motivated by changing industrial needs and feedstock
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;1.
PSE2015/ESCAPE25 is expected to attract the new generation of researchers in the
process systems engineering area that is reflected in the graduate students and
postdoctoral associates.&lt;br/&gt;2. The conference will serve as a vehicle for
dissemination of the state of the art in process systems engineering through its
fully indexed and citable proceedings that will include the plenary and
contributed papers, its website, and more importantly through the informal
discussions on research, education, training and industrial needs.&lt;br/&gt;3.
The chemical, petrochemical, pharmaceutical, manufacturing, and
services/software industries will benefit by the introduction of new approaches,
problems and technologies for discovery through computer-aided product and
process design. Such technologies will lead to better products, faster response
to the demands and more efficient utilization of the product and processing
facilities, which has a direct benefit to the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;4. The
conference and conference products may serve to encourage a new generation of
young people to consider research and practice in process systems engineering.