* 1522471
* Cluster-Robust Estimates for Galerkin and Petrov-Galerkin Discretizations of Elliptic Eigenvalue Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Ovall, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,936.00

Eigenvalue problems for differential operators naturally arise in the study of
vibrations in membranes and solids, fluid-solid interactions, and photonic
crystals, and they also often play an important role in the practical analysis
of many other time-dependent phenomena, such as acoustic or electromagnetic
scattering. For many problems of interest, it is necessary to have provably
efficient and robust means of estimating the error in computed approximations,
as well as algorithms that can use this information to intelligently improve the
approximations. This project concerns theoretical and algorithmic development of
eigenvalue error estimates and self-adaptive methods for three computational
approaches that promise to broaden the scope of available tools for addressing
these challenging problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI considers eigenvalue
problems arising from second-order, linear, differential operators that are not
necessarily self-adjoint, and which may have continuous components in their
spectrum. The proposed work includes the development of a posteriori
eigenvalue/eigenspace error estimates that are robust in the presence of
repeated or tightly-clustered discrete eigenvalues---even if they are near
components of the essential spectrum. Three broad classes of discretizations
will be considered: penalty-based Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods,
Discontinuous Petrov-Galerkin (DPG) methods, and so-called Implicit Element
methods, which include variations on Virtual Element (VEM) methods and Boundary-
Element-Based Finite Element (BEM-FEM) methods. In each case, the project will
provide a posteriori error estimates that are cluster-robust in the sense that
are insensitive to distances between true eigenvalues within the cluster that
one is approximating, but instead depend on the relative distance between this
cluster and the rest of the spectrum. In the case of DG methods, the PI expects
to produce at least one provably-convergent, high-order adaptive method. In the
case of implicit elements, he will first produce a high-order source-problem
solver that is competitive with VEM and BEM-FEM, develop corresponding a
posteriori error estimates, and then extend the approach to eigenvalue problems.
In the case of DPG methods, he plans to exploit the fact that, with these
techniques, indefinite source problems can be treated in a computational way
that only involves self-adjoint and positive definite systems, and use this to
derive a FEAST-like algorithm for computing large spectral clusters and/or
clusters higher in the spectrum.