* 1522662
* Collaborative Research: Randomized and Structure-Based Algorithms in Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Sonja Petrovic, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 229,577.00

Systems of multivariate polynomial equations are ubiquitous in optimization,
statistics, biology, and other fields of science and engineering. Solving such
systems is a cornerstone of computational algebra today and the main focus of
this project. The project addresses fundamental problems in symbolic computation
with multivariate polynomials, with particular interest in very large systems
that appear, for example, in biological data modeling and data mining. Such
systems are so large that they cannot be completely read into the computer's
memory. This project proposes the use of probabilistic and statistical analysis
to cleverly select and sample smaller subsystems that lead to the desired
solution. The problems attacked are fundamental questions of practical
relevance. The project will also have educational and training activities in the
development of human resources. In addition to many students working with the
investigators, the project includes a Summer School on the foundational
mathematical concepts from the areas relevant to this interdisciplinary research
project. The target audience is graduate students; the School will foster a
sense of community among the students and enhance further interdisciplinary
collaboration.

This research project approaches the problem of solving systems of polynomial
equations, and of finding generators for polynomial ideals using a probabilistic
method -- focusing on providing low expected runtime and the use of random
choices -- for computational algebra problems that have high worst case
complexity. The project uses the underlying combinatorial structure of certain
families of problems (e.g. polynomial system feasibility) for significant speed-
up. The resulting algorithms and software will be of use in commutative algebra,
statistics, optimization, graph theory, and other fields where large-scale
systems of polynomial equations arise naturally. The project adapts to the
problem under study a sampling technique that has been used in computational
geometry and optimization. The theoretically expected running time will be
linear in the number of input polynomials. There are several applications
including statistics and optimization, where key applied methods rely on
algorithms to compute such ideal generators. Furthermore, the research will
increase the use of combinatorial structures in polynomial computational
problems, in particular, for the calculation of Nullstellensatz infeasibility
certificates and syzygies. Applications have been found in graph theory, and
further applications are expected in combinatorics, coding theory, and systems
biology.