* 1522537
* Collaborative Research: A New Three-Dimensional Parallel Immersed Boundary Method with Application to Hemodialysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Suchuan Dong, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 90,000.00

Fluid-structure interaction problems involving thin-walled structures are
ubiquitous in biological and engineering applications. However, to date an
efficient and effective technique, and a computational capability, for modeling
and simulating the interactions between fluids and thin-walled structures are
still sorely lacking. The investigators aim to design a new three-dimensional
parallel immersed boundary method for computational simulation of fluid-thin-
walled-structure interactions in a generic setting and apply it to blood flow
past patient-specific distal anastomosis of arteriovenous grafts (AVG), which
are essential to blood access of hemodialysis for numerous patients with end-
stage renal disease. The new method, which will significantly broaden the
applicability of immersed boundary methods, will be particularly valuable to the
mathematical biology community for computational studies of vascular diseases
such as vascular intimal hyperplasia, aneurysm, and atherosclerosis. Compared to
existing models, the proposed computational model is more physiologically
realistic: the simulation accommodates deformation of the vein/graft with the
pulsatile blood flow, and it incorporates the small yet finite thickness of the
vein/graft walls into the model. New computational results will clarify existing
contradictory results in the literature regarding the force/flow characteristics
near the distal AVG anastomosis and thus lead to a greater understanding of AVG-
associated vascular intimal hyperplasia. The new method under development in
this project will be generic and applicable to numerous significant problems in
engineering, including parachute opening and novel design for street/highway
signs. The studies will also enhance the understanding of vascular intimal
hyperplasia due to dialysis, which may inspire the creation and development of
novel vascular devices to prolong the patency rate of AVGs. This will not only
improve quality of life for patients, but also offer savings in dialysis-related
healthcare costs. The associated research and education activities will provide
multidisciplinary training and research opportunities in mathematics, biology,
scientific computing, fluid/solid mechanics, blood flows, and vascular disease
for graduate students and undergraduates. The open source implementation of the
new method will enable the fluid-structure-interaction community to dramatically
increase their research productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will develop numerical methods to improve computational capability for fluid-
thin-walled-structure interaction in three dimensions. They approach this type
of problem by integrating several components: a structural component based on
the high-order spectral/hp element technique, a fluid component based on the
lattice Boltzmann method, and the coupling of the fluid and structure through
the framework of the immersed boundary method. The goal of this project is
three-fold: 1) Develop a three-dimensional IB-based method for fluid and thin-
walled structure interactions in a general setting. The method will account for
Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids, material nonlinearity, and geometric
nonlinearity. 2)Design, develop, and implement novel parallel algorithms for the
new 3D method on hybrid CPU-GPU linux clusters. 3) Apply the new parallel method
to model and simulate blood flow past the distal anastomosis of arteriovenous
graft for hemodialysis using patient-specific data. The investigators' outreach
activities will inspire high school students to consider careers in mathematical
and computational sciences and raise public awareness for the dire consequences
of end-stage renal disease, its associated healthcare costs, and the important
roles mathematics and scientific computing play in studying disease and
promoting health.