* 1522574
* Large Eddy Simulations in Magnetohydrodynamics Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Catalin Trenchea, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 182,977.00

Magnetohydrodynamics describes the behavior of an electrically conducting fluid
flow in the presence of magnetic fields. Electrically conducting fluids arise in
applications including astrophysics, geophysics, plasma confinement, controlled
thermonuclear fusion, liquid-metal cooling of nuclear reactors, electromagnetic
casting of metals, ion thrusters for low orbiting satellites,
magnetohydrodynamic drive for ships and submarines, microfluidic devices, and
molecular biology. The fluid motion of the Earth's core maintains the
terrestrial magnetic field, the solar magnetic field generates sunspots and
solar flares, and the galactic magnetic field influences the formation of stars
from interstellar clouds. These applications require substantially better
modeling and simulation capabilities than presently exist. Problems without a
clear scale separation, such as turbulence, are still at the frontier of
multiscale modeling and simulation. When the fluid is electrically conducting,
the turbulent fluid motions are accompanied by magnetic fluctuations. For
Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence, numerical simulations play a greater role
than they play for hydrodynamic turbulence, since laboratory experiments are
practically impossible and astrophysical systems (solar-wind turbulence, the
most important system of high-Reynolds-number MHD accessible to in situ
measurements) are too complex to be comparable with theoretical results. This
research project will develop improved computational methods for these important
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project studies mathematically
rigorous and computationally efficient methods to analyze direct and inverse
problems constrained by MHD models. This includes the numerical analysis of
computational algorithms, implicit explicit time-stepping schemes using the
Elsasser variables, post processing via time-filters, spatial linear and
nonlinear filters, spectral filtering, development of spatial filters specific
to MHD turbulence, optimal control, and parameter estimation. Another objective
of this project is to investigate the mathematical properties of several models
for the simulation of the large eddies in turbulent viscous, incompressible,
electrically conducting flows and new numerical models that permit long-time
simulations, by time-splitting. The project has a broad impact for training
undergraduate and graduate students in analytical and numerical aspects of
magnetohydrodynamics, turbulence, and inverse problems.