* 1522990
* EXP: Understanding Computational Thinking Process and Practices in Open-Ended Programming Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Marie Bienkowski, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 608,024.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. This project brings together two approaches to help K-12 students
learn programming and computer science: open-ended learning environments, and
computer-based learning analytics, to help create a setting where youth can get
help and scaffolding tailored to what they know about programming without having
to take tests or participate in rigid textbook exercises for the system to know
what they know. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to use techniques
from educational data mining and learning analytics to process student data in
the Alice programming environment. Building on the assessment design model of
Evidence-Centered Design, student log data will be used to construct a model of
individual students' computational thinking practices, aligned with emerging
standards including NGSS and research on assessment of computational thinking.
Initially, the system will be developed based on an existing corpus of pair-
programming log data from approximately 600 students, triangulating with
manually-coded performance assessments of programming through game design
exercises. In the second phase of the work, curricula and professional
development will be created to allow the system to be tested with
underrepresented girls at Stanford's CS summer workshops and with students from
diverse high schools implementing the Exploring Computer Science curriculum.
Direct observation and interviews will be used to improve the model. Research
will address how learners enact computational thinking practices in building
computational artifacts, what patters of behavior serve as evidence of learning
CT practices, and how to better design constructionist programming environments
so that personalized learner scaffolding can be provided. By aligning with a
popular programming environment (Alice) and a widely-used computer science
curriculum (Exploring Computer Science), the project can have broad impact on
computer science education; software developed will be released under a BSD-
style license so others can build on it.