* 1522830
* Continued Operation of COSMIC GPS Radio Occultation Constellation in Support of Research Applications in Atmospheric Sciences
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Zhen Zeng, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2021
* USD 10,850,000.00

Launched in 2006, the Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere
and Climate (COSMIC) is a constellation of six polar-orbiting satellites in Low
Earth Orbit. The primary payload of each satellite is a Global Positioning
System (GPS) receiver (developed at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory) which
receives positioning signals from the GPS transmitter satellites as they rise
and set relative to the COSMIC satellite. The GPS signals are refracted by the
atmosphere as they travel from the transmitter to the receiver, to an extent
which depends on the temperature and water vapor content of the lower atmosphere
and the density of electric charge in the ionosphere. The refraction causes a
delay in the phase of the transmitted signal which can be inverted to retrieve
profiles of electron density (in the ionosphere), dry atmospheric temperature,
and water vapor (although water vapor requires additional information). Because
the profiles are retrieved from the rising and setting, or occultation, of the
GPS transmitters, the technology is referred to as GPS Radio Occultation
(GPSRO), or more generally as GNSSRO, where GNSS is the Global Navigation
Satellite System. GNSSRO has proven to be a highly effective observing method as
the measurements can be made under all weather conditions, are unaffected by
clouds and aerosols, and are absolutely calibrated (SI traceable) through the
clock system that supports the GPS transmitters.

Funds under this award support COSMIC-related work in four categories: 1)
processing, serving, and archiving COSMIC data for use by the research
community; 2) conducting research to improve GNSSRO inversion science and
techniques; 3) conducting research in support of scientific applications of
GNSSRO data; and 4) education and outreach activities to promote the use of
GNSSRO data and its application to atmospheric research. Item 1 is the bread-
and-butter activity of this award and its predecessors, and support is also
provided here for improving the quality of the profiles and generating
additional data products such as monthly mean climatologies for both lower- and
upper-atmospheric variables. In addition to the COSMIC satellites, a small
number of GNSSRO "missions of opportunity" are also supported. These are
research satellites to which a GNSS receiver has been added as a secondary
payload (GRACE-B for example). Activities under item 2 continue the PIs'
leadership role in the development of new GNSS processing techniques, for
example by developing methods to correct errors caused by diffraction in
sporadic E layers in the ionosphere. Research under item 3 develops new
assimilation techniques such as the use of 2D ray-tracing methods to account for
horizontal refractivity gradients. Another task is to develop long-term climate-
quality datasets in which profiles from different satellites are optimally
combined to account for differences in their error characteristics. GNSSRO data
are well-suited for generating long-term multi-mission datasets given their SI
traceability. Work under item 4 addresses a gap between the availability of
GPSRO data and its adoption by the research community. Activities include
hosting academic visitors, conducting meetings and workshops, and holding summer
colloquia and tutorials.

The work has intellectual merit due to the great value of the COSMIC
observations for weather, climate and ionospheric research. The work has
scientific broader impacts through the PIs' education and outreach efforts to
promote the adoption and use of the data by scientists from several research
communities. In addition, the PIs provide the COSMIC data to operational weather
forecasting centers worldwide, and the data has been shown to be quite useful
for improving the skill of weather forecasts.

This award supercedes AGS-1033112, the previous cooperative agreement under
which NSF provided funds to COSMIC. While NSF is no longer providing funds via
the earlier CA, that award will remain active as it contains funds from other
agencies to support the development of the follow-on COSMIC-2 mission. This
award does not provide funds for COSMIC-2.