* 1522751
* Fast and Scalable Multigrid Methods for Hypergraph Partitioning Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Ilya Safro, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 180,000.00

The advancement of science requires the development of new mathematical methods
that can rapidly and reliably solve large-scale scientific computing problems.
Any modern scientific computing tool and supercomputer must have the ability to
effectively (and one hopes optimally) manipulate both the data and parallel
computational processes to manage: (a) the load-balancing in parallel
computation; (b) data migration between components in a supercomputer; (c)
performance optimization; (d) task scheduling; and (e) storage/memory reduction
and data compression. These and many other problems (such as electronic chip
design and community detection in social networks) can be tackled using a family
of mathematical optimization problems called partitioning that are formulated on
mathematical models called hypergraphs. However, partitioning of hypergraphs is
extremely hard in theory and practice. To tackle it, this research project will
develop and investigate efficient and effective methods that are inspired by
multigrid, which is one of the most successful classes of numerical methods for
solving large-scale scientific computing problems. The technical goal of this
project is to carry out computational and theoretical investigations in
algebraic and nonlinear multigrid methods for hypergraph partitioning motivated
by various problems in the areas of computational mathematics and scientific
computing. These investigations aim to provide breakthroughs in practical
computational capabilities, modeling matrix-matrix (vector) multiplication,
matrix partitioning, and general load-balancing for scientific computing
applications. The results of the project will also deepen understanding of
theory of multigrid methods applied to computational discrete optimization. In
recent decades, multigrid-inspired methods for graphs (also known as multilevel)
led to important breakthroughs in a variety of computational problems. However,
in contrast to the multigrid-inspired methods for graph cut-based problems (such
as graph partitioning and linear arrangement), multigrid-inspired methods for
hypergraphs are relatively unexplored. This project aims to develop theory
related to multigrid-inspired methods for discrete optimization problems on
graphs and hypergraphs, of great practical importance in computational
mathematics.