* 1522865
* EAGER:  RUI: Functional Characterization of Micro RNAs and their Role in the Cellular Stress Response of Polar Fish
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Sean Place, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,972.00

The central dogma of molecular biology states that the genetic code is housed in
DNA (DeoxyriboNucleic Acid), from which RNA (RiboNucleic Acid) transcripts are
produced that are then translated into proteins that ultimately affect the
function of an organism. Within the last decade, the role of RNA has
dramatically expanded beyond that of an intermediary molecule, and small RNA
(including microRNA, or miRNA) research has rapidly expanded, shedding light on
the role non-coding RNAs play in many aspects of biology, including development
and disease progression. The goal of this project is to better understand the
roles of miRNAs in non-model systems, specifically fishes from the Southern
Ocean, which will, at the same time, generate insight into the capacity of these
fishes that are only found in Antarctica to respond to cellular stress. In
addition to concerns about changing oceans (higher temperatures, lower pH,
changing salinities), fishing within the Southern Ocean has increased
significantly. Thus, a more clear understanding of the susceptibility of polar
fish populations will lead to a greater understanding of how to better approach
management of these unique marine ecosystems. This project will also provide
cutting edge research opportunities for students at a Primarily Undergraduate
Institution (PUI), helping the students build the tools necessary to succeed in
an increasingly technical research field.

This project will integrate several molecular approaches to functionally
characterize microRNAs (miRNAs) and the role they play in regulating the
cellular stress response in notothenioid fish. Previous research efforts have
provided evidence to support the loss of regulatory control for a portion of the
cellular stress response in these fish. The team will undertake a transcriptome
wide analysis of the expression of miRNAs in these fish and correlate those
expression patterns with changes in mRNA (messenger RNA) abundance of stress
response genes under elevated temperatures. Furthermore, the PI?s lab will
perform functional characterization of the putative miRNAs by over-expression of
these short, non-coding RNAs in cultured fish cells. These functional analyses
will help determine if the miRNA displays regulatory control over the abundance
of RNA transcripts for a key set of molecular chaperones that assist with
protein folding. Ultimately, these studies will shed new light on the possible
interruption of the classical heat shock response in these fish and provide
critical insight into their capacity to adapt to the expected changes in the
Southern Ocean. Although high risk in nature, (this work has rarely been
performed in non-model species) this project will provide an unprecedented
window into the regulatory mechanisms that link changes in gene expression and a
suite of physiological changes, measured from the whole organism to the cell, in
an individual, non-model fish.