* 1522430
* FSML: ESTABLISHING A MODERN MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTICS FACILITY TO SUPPORT MICROBIOLOGY RESEARCH IN THE SIERRA NEVADA ECOREGION
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Daniel Dawson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2016
* USD 99,403.00

Molecular diagnostics methods such as quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) are
increasingly important in environmental biology, including for the detection of
pathogens and water quality assessment. Application of these methods is often
hindered by access to the necessary equipment and instrumentation, especially in
remote areas. California's Sierra Nevada is one of the best protected mountain
ranges in the world, but nonetheless is affected by a host of environmental
challenges, including impaired water quality. Although molecular diagnostics
would greatly facilitate research on these problems and enable their
remediation, no such facility exists in the area. This project will develop a
molecular diagnostics facility at the University of California's Sierra Nevada
Aquatic Research Laboratory (SNARL), located in the central Sierra Nevada. This
facility will substantially enhance the research capabilities of SNARL. It will
also have broader positive effects, including benefitting several land and
resource management agencies with jurisdiction over the Sierra Nevada (National
Park Service, California Department of Fish and Wildlife, California State Water
Resources Control Board) whose need for molecular diagnostics has increased
markedly in recent years. The facility will also expand teaching and training
opportunities provided by existing undergraduate courses that use SNARL and
facilitate the development of new courses, including those that increase
engagement of students from the large populations of underrepresented groups
that reside both locally and in southern California. The proposed facility also
provides an opportunity to develop 'citizen science' projects aimed at high
school students, college students, and the general public, including projects
investigating water quality issues that directly impact local communities.

The goal of this project is to add a molecular diagnostics facility to the
existing microbiology laboratory at SNARL. This will include a qPCR system,
large-capacity autoclave, biological safety cabinet, high-throughput tissue
homogenizer, and micro-centrifuge. The proposed facility will be housed in the
main laboratory building that was completely renovated and modernized in
2010-2011. The need for the proposed facility derived from a careful
consideration of current and anticipated future research directions, an analysis
of potential SNARL improvements and the projects they would benefit, and
thorough consultation with SNARL users and the University of California
management team. This new facility will dramatically expand the research
capabilities of SNARL, including of the existing microbiology laboratory that is
currently used primarily for bacterial culturing, and make available key
research-related equipment that is either difficult to access or unavailable in
the eastern Sierra Nevada. Sierra Nevada Aquatic Research Laboratory web site:
http://vesr.nrs.ucsb.edu/