* 1522921
* EXP: Advancing Early STEM Learning through Haptic Feedback Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Anne Marie Piper, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 547,881.00

Improving Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education is a
national priority. Children in the U.S. have continued to fall behind their
international peers in math and science scores on international assessments. Not
only are students behind in STEM concepts, but they also show less interest in
STEM learning. While much of the focus on STEM learning has occurred in grades
K-12, an important area of STEM education involves improving math and science
literacies at the pre-kindergarten (pre-K) level. Young children have the
natural capacity to explore and understand STEM concepts in everyday life, and
learning these early skills affects later development. In parallel, another
trend in early learning involves the growing use of tablet computers in both
formal and informal educational settings. However, little is known about how
tablets support learning, particularly in STEM. Understanding the conditions
under which digital tools may promote early STEM learning is an important topic
of study given the pervasiveness of tablet technology and that tablet-based
content can potentially increase learner engagement. One argument against purely
digital content on a tablet computer, however, is that tactile cues and sensory
experiences important for STEM learning are now lost. This project examines
whether the emerging technology of haptic -- or tactile feedback -- touch-screen
displays can improve preschoolers' learning of science concepts. The results
will contribute to theories of how young children learn with electronic media as
well as offer design guidance for the creation of developmentally appropriate
content using novel haptic feedback displays. This research will lay the
foundation that will enable other researchers to examine learning outcomes
associated with this new media as it grows in commercial
availability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research on child development emphasizes the
need for children to have multiple modes to engage in science learning, and
haptic displays may be one way to add an additional mode of interaction to
traditional touchscreens and create a more immersive, embodied learning
experience. The PIs will conduct human-centered design of new haptic science
learning applications, which will involve preschool STEM education experts in
the creation of these novel materials and two large-scale laboratory experiments
that will assess the effectiveness of haptic feedback in tablet-based learning.
Results will contribute new knowledge of (1) how to design educational media
leveraging surface haptic displays and (2) the conditions under which this
technology effectively promotes learning and engagement among young children.
The PIs will make the developed applications openly available for use by other
researchers and disseminate our results through interdisciplinary venues in
children's media and development, human-computer interaction, and engineering of
haptic technology. Project web site
(http://preschoolhaptics.soc.northwestern.edu/) will provide information on the
project and access to privacy-protected experimental data and software
artifacts.