* 1522553
* Collaborative Proposal: Ecophysiological Instruments for Measuring Biotic Climate Impacts Across Western Field Stations
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Paul Flikkema, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 345,800.00

Climate change has widespread regional impacts on diverse biotic systems but
most field stations are not yet instrumented with automated data collection
systems that would allow integrated measurements of ecophysiology of plants and
vertebrates at micro-climate scales needed for detailed studies of physiology,
ecology, behavior, evolution and ecosystems, both locally and across large
regions. The central hypothesis motivating this instrument investment is that
the risk of extinction of organisms due to climate change arises from: a) the
direct effects of climate, acting via evolved physiological adaptations that
exacerbate extinction risk, and b) the cascading effects of climate change
impacts on plant diversity and habitats. These data, together with research that
uses them, will allow us to forecast future climate impacts on biotic systems,
and to eventually assess historical impacts of climate in and around each of the
field stations. The Institute for the Study of the Ecological and Evolutionary
Climate Impacts (ISEECI) organizes diverse scientists across the UC System and
are integrating these studies with the scientists using Northern Arizona
University's Southwest Experimental Garden Array (SEGA). This array of
ecophysiological plant and animal sensors will ensure cross-site consistency and
comparability at a sufficiently large spatial scale to address regional impacts
of climate on coastal, central valley, montane and desert ecosystems of the
Southwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new sensor network will instrument 12
sites in the California and 8 sites in Northern Arizona with data loggers and
sensors designed to measure environmental parameters relevant to a wide range of
animal and plant species. Selected conifers and coastal redwoods will be
monitored for sap flow and soil temperature and moisture, and more open
grassland/forb and shrub communities with soil temperature and moisture sensors
as well as surface temperature at biologically salient heights to complement the
existing system of upgraded weather stations already present at NRS and SEGA
sites. Temperature sensors will collect similar data on environmental
temperatures of endothermic and ectothermic animal taxa, and install phenocams
to record phenological changes in trees driven by climate change. The system can
be upgraded with new sensors, is expandable with respect to the kinds of data we
gather and biotic systems we can instrument, and will be very adaptable for
future research. The instruments will capture salient measurements of
temperature and drought impacts on terrestrial systems that will allow a unified
analysis of ecosystem functioning in the face of changing climate, adding
scientific value to each individual field station with a more in-depth biotic
record of historical change, and also across the system of field stations
enhancing collaboration across the west coast and southwest region of the US.
Sensor data will be available immediately online to all ISEECI and SEGA
scientists groups, and once fully operational to other researchers. Integration
with education and public outreach will give hundreds of students critical
messages about climate change and using science to help mitigate its impacts.
NAU and the UC system provide graduate and undergraduate students with many
experiential learning opportunities in environmental sciences, and detailed,
long-term data will supplement and contextualize classwork and research
projects. UC and NAU actively work to enhance student diversity: NAU has
particular expertise in reaching Native American students, while the Hispanic
representation at universities in both states is increasing and being actively
incorporated into campus programs and labs.