* 1522550
* Collaborative Research:  PoLS Student Research Network
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2022
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,971,920.00

This collaborative research project, consisting of four institutions (Rice,
Yale, UIUC and Princeton) aims to continue the Physics of Living Systems Student
Research Network (PoLS SRN). This network has been in existence for four years
and has had a dramatic impact on many graduate students, both in the US and
abroad, working on the application of physical science techniques to living
systems. These students now can participate in a global community that can help
deal with the many complex issues involved in conducting research in such a new
and inherently multidisciplinary field. These issues range from proper training,
to gaining a broad perspective, to accessing technical expertise that may not be
available at their home institution. In addition to the obvious broader impacts
related to training of a research workforce, there are other broad impacts of
this plan. Via the interaction of one of the PoLS nodes (Rice) with the
biomedical community in Houston, students and faculty will be exposed to
possible avenues whereby physics can contribute to human health issues. Funds to
attract students from under-represented groups to network meetings will be
available through the new funds administered by the newly proposed network
coordinator. Also deas vetted by the PoLS SRN will be adapted to create student
networks in other areas of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
is by now little disagreement with the general notion that concepts and methods
from physics have been a critical contributor to the increased understanding of
the living world, and that its importance will be growing as the scientific
world moves toward an ever more quantitative and predictive form of biology.
Thus, the physics community clearly needs to train a new generation of
scientists who can lead this effort, scientists who have the right mix of
physics/mathematics rigor and broad knowledge of living systems from molecular
scales on up. The PoLS SRN aims at creating a community of graduate students who
can collectively help themselves and their mentors accelerate and enhance this
training process. This is being done by a mix of in-person and virtual modes of
communication, and this proposal is a plan to continue and expand these efforts;
it will reach more students, improve the social networking portals, and make use
of the complementary research agendas of the different network nodes to provide
broad technical expertise. Doing all of this, will boost the intellectual level
of the entire research field and convince the best students that the Physics of
Living Systems is truly the most exciting research frontier in 21st century
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics, the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, the
Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of Chemistry, and the
Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.