* 1522462
* Cultivating the Growth of Capitol Reef Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Michael Stevens, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 24,992.00

Utah Valley University (UVU) is awarded a grant to conduct comprehensive
planning for Capitol Reef Field Station (CRFS) to better support the facility's
mission of research, education, and conservation (www.uvu.edu/crfs/). CRFS is
located within Capitol Reef National Park, an area preserved because of its
exposed geologic strata and associated variety of habitats that are home to a
rich diversity of living organisms. Established in 2008 under a cooperative
agreement between UVU and the National Park Service, CRFS embodies a unique
partnership between a university and a national park. A strategic plan for CRFS
will enhance the utilization of this station for undergraduates who are learning
and conducting faculty-mentored research in a variety of STEM disciplines. The
majority of students who visit CRFS are from UVU, an open-enrollment institution
committed to inclusivity and access. The university serves a dual mission as
both a regional, comprehensive university and as a community college. UVU is in
the uncommon position of having the field station resources of a comprehensive
university while serving a high proportion of community-college-going students
who are underrepresented at field stations across the nation. Over 40% of UVU
students are either first-generation college students or ethnic minorities.
Strategic planning will enhance this field station's ability to provide
meaningful experiences to a diverse group of individuals. Further, in addition
to benefiting UVU undergraduates, the proposed planning process will lead to a
better understanding of field stations, like CRFS, that are located in U.S.
national parks and run through university partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
part of the planning effort, UVU will conduct a survey among other similar field
stations to determine how they maximize opportunities and minimize challenges
associated with university-national park partnerships. Selected survey
participants will be invited to a conference at CRFS to meet with UVU faculty
and Capitol Reef National Park personnel. CRFS staff will then visit the field
stations of key conference participants, some of whom will be hired as
consultants. The consultants will assist in the development of CRFS's strategic
plan. The products of the strategic planning process will include: 1) a written
5-year plan for research, education, and conservation activities at the station;
2) a document detailing what additional facilities and infrastructure are needed
and a 5-year plan for seeking funding for these needs; 3) a data-informed
presentation on field stations in U.S. national parks with university
partnerships at the Organization of Biological Field Stations meeting; and 4) a
peer-reviewed manuscript submitted for publication.