* 1522209
* Collaborative Research:  Planning For the Future: Developing a Five Year Plan for Wildsumaco Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Jeffrey Steinmetz, Francis Marion University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 21,452.00

Wildsumaco Biological Station's (WBS) primary mission is scientific research and
education (www.wildsumacobio.org). WBS itself is a collaboration between Francis
Marion University (FMU), the University of North Carolina Wilmington, Pontificia
Universidad Cat√≥lica del Ecuador and Wildsumaco Wildlife Sanctuary (WWS).
Although the station only opened in 2012, it is quickly becoming a hub for high
quality teaching and research in the Sumaco region. WBS has hosted numerous
undergraduate courses and produced a number of scientific papers and
presentations. This grant allows for the development of a comprehensive five
year plan to facilitate WBS's development into a world class ecological research
station, with a number of societal benefits. First, because WBS is located in
one of the world's premier biodiversity hotspots, improving research at the
station will increase our understanding of tropical biodiversity. In particular,
developing partnerships with other field stations along the east slope of the
Andes will allow for coordinated monitoring of biodiversity changes from lowland
tropical rainforest to high elevation cloud forests. Second, developing the
station will enhance educational opportunities for underrepresented groups. Most
students at FMU come from poor, rural areas of South Carolina, with a very high
proportion of minority students. The opportunity to conduct ecological research
in one of the world's biodiversity hotspots is a unique opportunity for many of
these underrepresented groups, and one that not only engages them in science,
but also global culture. Third, the enhanced research and education occurring at
the station will have practical management consequences. The research being done
at the Wildsumaco Wildlife Sanctuary and within Sumaco National Park itself are
helping to better educate park staff on local biodiversity, as well as inform
management decisions and improve the potential to develop ecotourism as a viable
alternative to the destructive timber practices that threaten the surrounding
forest.

Key partners in this activity include the University of North Carolina
Wilmington and the Pontifical Catholic University of Ecuador. WBS's location in
the Tropical Andes biodiversity hotspot, at the confluence of lowland Amazonian
and highland Andean biotas, render it a site of global ecological and
conservation significance. In addition to high potential for new species
discovery, WBS is an ideal site in which to monitor distributional changes of
species driven by global climate change and associated shifting climate
envelopes in this megadiverse region. This planning process will produce a five
year action plan for management of the station, identify infrastructure needs
for current and future students and researchers, and establish and enhance
scientific collaboration and educational outreach. This will be accomplished in
part through three planning workshops. The first, in the USA, will seek advice
and strategies from invited staff of established field stations. The second, in
Ecuador, will seek input and solidify commitments from WBS managers,
stakeholders, and the local community, and will include visits to three similar
research stations to learn from their experience. The third and final workshop
in the USA will distill and collate information from the previous workshops, and
seek guidance from scientists and business faculty to draft the final five year
plan of action. The plan will identify the most efficient strategy to maintain
and enhance WBS's scientific and educational programs, the dissemination of
research findings to the scientific community and general public, and
recruitment of research groups and students (particularly minority students) to
the station. The WBS website is located at http://www.wildsumacobio.org.