* 1522791
* Workshop: US-China Collaborative Research on Microbial Extracellular Electron Transfer
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Haluk Beyenal, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The global cycling of organic matter and elements is driven to a great extent by
microorganisms with the ability to exchange electrons with extracellular
substrates. Such abilities can be harnessed for the bioremediation of toxic
metals and for bioenergy applications. Fe(III) and Mn(III, IV) oxides are among
the most environmentally relevant substrates that microorganisms use as electron
acceptors or donors. Due to insoluble nature of these minerals, microorganisms
must establish an extracellular electron transfer (EET) mechanism to access
either the reducing or oxidizing power. EET also provides cells with a mechanism
that prevents the permeation and reduction of toxic metals inside the cell.
Therefore, EET mechanisms serve the double functions of supporting respiration
and preventing the accumulation of the reduced water-insoluble products inside
microbial cells. Despite its importance, EET mechanisms have been understudied
in the past and deserve attention from scientists from diverse background.

In this proposal, funding is requested to promote US-China collaborative
research on Microbial Extracellular Electron Transfer by organizing a joint
workshop between US and China, which will be held in Beijing, China, in March
2015. The proposed workshop will focus on research programs that can make the
best use of the strengths and opportunities in both US and China, such as unique
resources, infrastructures and scientific expertise. The objectives of the
workshop are to promote interdisciplinary research on Microbial Extracellular
Electron Transfer and to create new opportunities for successful research
collaborations between US and Chinese scientists by conducting joint research
projects and sharing resources, databases and cyber-infrastructure.
Extracellular electron transfer is an essential component in many sub-fields of
Geobiology and Low Temperature Geochemistry, such as mineral-microbe
interaction, biomineralization, and microbial geochemistry. The PIs will involve
young scientists, post-doc researchers, and students in the workshop. A web site
will be created to post the workshop announcement, faculty and student exchange
opportunities, and workshop report. Efforts will be made to reach social media
as well.