* 1522595
* University of Georgia/R/V Savannah Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* James Sanders, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2017
* USD 66,781.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation for the Research Vessel
Savannah, a 92 foot coastal research vessel, owned and operated by Skidaway
Institute of Oceanography as part of the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since being put
into service in the fall of 2001, this coastal/local class research vessel has
proven to be a capable and cost-effective platform for a range of research and
education projects. The primary working area for the vessel has been the
continental shelf, coastal and estuarine environments of the Southeastern United
States. The ship has also conducted cruises that have crossed the Gulf Stream
into the western Sargasso Sea and as far as Curacao in the SE Caribbean. The R/V
Savannah has been specifically designed with a large science berthing capacity
to provide learning opportunities in ocean and estuarine environments and to
demonstrate oceanographic research methodologies to diverse and often under-
served student populations. These educational experiences continued in 2014,
with the vessel hosting 80 graduate and undergraduate students and 16 high
school and middle school teachers on 8 of its cruises. In 2014, the R/V Savannah
completed 165 days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 92 days (56%) of
the total sailing schedule. In 2015, the vessel currently has 157 days
scheduled, of which 59 days (38%) are for NSF. With this proposal, Skidaway
provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the
following Oceanographic Instrumentation: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Network
Upgrades $6,532 &lt;br/&gt;2) CTD Upgrade $47,978 &lt;br/&gt;3) Water Samplers
$5,409 &lt;br/&gt;4) Upgrade DGPS $6,862 &lt;br/&gt; $66,781 &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.