* 1522454
* Advances in Multilevel Methods for Saddle Point Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Constantin Bacuta, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

In spite of the fast increase in computational power of today's computers, the
development of faster algorithms for equational models is paramount for the
simulation of phenomena investigated nowadays in practical applications in
science and engineering. For a large spectrum of situations in the scientific
world, a computer simulation has to replace experimental simulation and data
collection. For a computer simulation, in order to obtain accurate approximation
of the physical quantities of interest, a powerful computational system has to
be combined with a fast and reliable algorithm to test and to confirm the
designed models. The project will contribute to the construction and
implementation of new and efficient algorithms for solving numerically
challenging problems. In particular, the proposed research will focus on
constructing fast and robust algorithms for solving computational fluid dynamics
and electromagnetic problems. The breakthrough approach of the project is based
on recent results in numerical analysis, on new algorithm designing and
implementation, and on scientific testing and validation of the new
computational tools. The methodology from this project for the time-harmonic
Maxwell's equations has a broad range of applications in nano-optics and analog
signal packages. The work for solving variational problems has scientific and
technical applications in optimization of electrical networks and image
restoration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will study and develop reliable
and efficient numerical algorithms for solving partial differential equations
that can be described as variational saddle point systems or mixed variational
formulations. The goal of the project is to build robust algorithms for solving
such equations in the presence of low regularity of solutions due to
discontinuities in data or coefficients. The research will produce a rigorous
and systematic analysis of a large class of saddle point problems, focusing on
efficient algorithm development and testing. The methods will be based on finite
element discretization algorithms in the context of a multilevel and adaptive
choice of approximation spaces. The PI's approach uses a new saddle point least-
squares type of discretization for systems of PDEs, that takes full advantage of
the regularity of the solution and involves an efficient level change criterion
that minimizes the running time of the global iterative process. This study will
lead to more reliable methods for a variety of applications of the finite
element method to science and engineering communities, such as those interested
in elasticity, electromagnetism, friction, and computational fluid dynamics. The
research findings will be shared within the field and with a more general
audience including mathematics and science high-school teachers.