* 1522562
* James and Oasis de los Osos FSML Planning Grant
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Emma Aronson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 24,999.00

The James and Oasis de los Osos Reserves encompass an elevation gradient that
extends from mixed conifer woodlands at 5400 ft and to the Coachella Valley in
the northwestern corner of the Colorado Desert at 200 ft above sea level. A
component of intellectual merit derives from the longevity of prior research.
Without preserving historic baseline data and continuing to monitor these sites,
the long term effects of climate change and disturbed environment cannot be
understood. Faculty, graduate students, STEM teachers, governmental agencies and
Idyllwild community leaders, collaborate to provide classroom instruction and
communication with nonscientists and the public. The goal is to share with the
general public an increased understanding of ecological science, including its
findings, applications and pursuit of new discoveries. The proposed strategic
plan will guide integration of research, teaching and outreach while preserving
the unique natural resources and scientific legacy of the James and Oasis de los
Osos. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This planning activity will develop a 5 year plan
for the James San Jacinto Mountains and Oasis de los Osos Reserves, two of 39
Reserves in the University of California Natural Reserve system. The strategic
plan will devise steps to increase research, training and educational outreach
activities while minimizing the impact of those activities on the Reserves. The
overarching goal is to maximize understanding and stewardship of the unique
desert-to-mountain ecotone through scientific research and education of
teachers, students and the general public. Recent improvements in reserve
facilities and changes in personnel and use patterns at the James and Oasis de
los Osos Reserves require new vision and strategic plan on order to address the
needs of current and future stakeholders. These circumstances have created a
need to seek external expertise to help identify additional infrastructural
improvements necessary to support the increased overnight capacity; suggest
programmatic directions that will take advantage of the new facilities and will
complement and enhance existing academic programs and databases; and define
appropriate development of Oasis de los Osos to allow increased use without
compromising the environment.