* 1522191
* Collaborative Research: Variational Structure Preserving Methods for Incompressible Flows: Discretization, Analysis, and Parallel Solvers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Leo Rebholz, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 234,780.00

The goal of this project is to develop improved models and numerical methods
that advance the state of the art for incompressible fluid flow simulation. The
key ideas are the better enforcement of geometric and physical laws in the
computer algorithms, building a solid mathematical framework for the models and
methods developed, and the devising of algorithms that will allow for efficient
implementation on supercomputers. Although the simulation of fluid flow is a
critical subtask in a wide spectrum of engineering applications, current tools
and techniques are often unreliable and it is not uncommon for state of the art
methods to take weeks or months (or possibly never finish with an accurate
solution), even with thousands of processors, to perform simulations of flows
around a car, through a nuclear reactor, or around part of an airplane. The
project aims to develop mathematical prediction models and numerical methods
that will provide more accurate solutions in a more efficient manner than state-
of-the-art methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will construct efficient
methods for incompressible flow simulation by constructing models and methods
that better adhere to geometric structure and physical conservation laws than
modern methods. The key components are to i) construct novel methods that are
efficient and can correctly account for vorticity dynamics, and energy,
helicity, and mass conservation -- this will require development of efficient
boundary conditions and significant analysis to build a solid mathematical
framework; ii) develop more efficient algebraic solvers for these methods that
can be used on thousands of processors; iii) large scale testing on benchmark
problems as well as on application problems with collaborators. Broader impacts
include i) developing efficient methods for simulating high speed incompressible
flows, which will improve the design process for a wide spectrum of applications
in environmental engineering, in cardiovascular simulations, and in atmosphere
and ocean sciences; ii) training graduate and undergraduate students through
research involvement; and iii) developing large scale, parallel codes to be made
publicly available as part of the deal.II library.