* 1522236
* WORKSHOP: Recruitment and Retention of Women of Color in Political Science to Improve Scholarship and Teaching, San Francisco, CA, September 2015
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2015,12/31/2015
* Jessica Lavariega Monforti, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 12/31/2015
* USD 49,905.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research demonstrates that women of color
face barriers such as lack of mentorship, financial resources, and significant
familial responsibilities in their pursuit of higher education and subsequent
careers in political science. Political science is one of the most male and
Anglo dominated fields of study in the social sciences. Descriptive
representation within the academic profession is important to perceptions of
legitimacy, service to students, and development of knowledge. The goal of the
conference is to provide attendees the necessary skills and networks to enter
the academy, successfully achieve tenure and sustain their careers thereafter.
This workshop brings together scholars from different universities, at different
stages in their careers, to deepen intellectual engagement and to build
coalitions that support excellence in diversifying the political science
profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Descriptive representation within the academic
profession is important to perceptions of legitimacy, service to students, and
development of knowledge. The goal of the conference is to provide attendees the
necessary skills and networks to enter the academy, successfully achieve tenure
and sustain their careers thereafter. This workshop brings together scholars
from different universities, at different stages in their careers, to deepen
intellectual engagement and to build coalitions that support excellence in
diversifying the political science profession. The workshop includes an opening
plenary session that focuses on the development of intersectionality work in the
discipline and a discussion of the discipline and the role of women of color
therein. It also includes a series of breakout sessions that focus on various
aspects of academic development. The workshop will facilitate deep mentoring by
pairing graduate students, junior, and mid-career participants by interest, with
structured one-on-one mentoring time embedded into the schedule.