* 1522555
* Point and state constrained optimal control parabolic problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Dmitriy Leykekhman, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,999.00

The PI will investigate a class of optimal control problems with pointwise
controls. These problems are classical and have a wide range of applications,
for instance in water waste treatment, river pollution, calcium waves in a heart
cell, and noise control. The finite element method is the most popular method to
solve such problems numerically, but there are very few results in this area on
a priori error estimates. The difficulty lies in the roughness of the solutions
of the underlying equations. The aim is to understand how well such rough
solutions can be approximated numerically and to obtain sharp a priori error
estimates. This area of research requires many tools from classical and modern
analysis, partial differential equations, finite element methods, and
optimization, and offers a wide variety of exciting problems well suited for
research and educational purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study
problems with pointwise controls and/or state constraints. These problems are
usually modeled by Dirac delta functions in the source term, and control and
state variables are in some nontrivial admissible sets. Analysis of such
problems is challenging due to low regularity of solutions of the state
equations. In the presence of state constraints, the Lagrange multipliers are
merely measures and solutions of the adjoint equation have very low regularity
as well. To show optimal error estimates one has to establish sharp best
approximation properties of the finite element solution in non-standard norms,
such as pointwise in space and global in time. Such error estimates are not
available in the finite element literature and need to be developed. The key
idea in obtaining these sharp error estimates in such non-standard norms is
first to show discrete maximum regularity results for a class of fully discrete
discontinuous Galerkin methods. These new results will provide a deeper insight
into numerical methods commonly used to solve such problems and may also be
useful for other problems where anisotropic spaces are used. Presently, there
are very few results on finite element error estimates on anisotropic spaces and
those sharp, best approximation type results will advance the current finite
element knowledge.