* 1522489
* Acquisition of Unmanned Surface Vehicle for High-Resolution Mapping of the Shallow Seabed and Water Column
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2016
* Jeffrey Buckel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2016
* USD 349,700.00

This project uses a state-of-the-art Unmanned Surface Vehicle (USV) for high
resolution mapping in the shallow seabed (e.g. oyster and sea grass beds) and
water column (e.g. temperature and contaminant levels). Seabed and water column
mapping are fundamental to improving our understanding of various marine
processes, including ecosystem dynamics, contaminant transport, and shoreline
stability. Detailed knowledge of the near-shore environment is needed to assess
the impacts of various activities and policies on aquatic habitats and water
quality, understand coastal change in the wake of rising sea-level and changing
climate patterns, and reconstruct paleo-environments through the sedimentary
record. The ability to simultaneously track tagged species and collect data on
habitat and ocean conditions will open important new research avenues in
fisheries ecology. The interdisciplinary toolkit provided by this USV will be
unique within the U.S. academic community. The USV expands significantly the
research and teaching resources of NC State University's Center for Marine
Sciences and Technology (CMAST), as well as the broader marine science and
education enterprise in the central NC coast (e.g., UNC-Chapel Hill, Duke
University, NOAA, and the NC Department of Marine Fisheries). Graduate students
are able to use the USV in their research. Undergraduate students join research
teams using the instrument through the CMAST Summer Fellows Program, the Merial
Summer Research Scholars Program, The Science House at CMAST, and programs
supported by the NCSU Office of Undergraduate Research. &lt;br/&gt;The main goal
of the USV instrument and program is to advance multi-disciplinary research and
education within estuarine and coastal systems. The USV can easily be
transported nationally and internationally to be used as a shallow-water survey
platform. The USV is outfitted with an extensive suite of state-of-the-art
scientific instrumentation, including bathymetric and side-scanning sonars, a
high-frequency sub-bottom profiler, an acoustic Doppler current meter, and
multi-parameter water quality sensors. Mission specific sensors include off-the-
shelf hardware such as acoustic receivers for tracking sonically tagged, mobile
species. The USV and its sensor suite are used both as an experiential-based
teaching tool and to conduct basic and applied research in estuarine and costal
environments. The USV is made broadly available to the marine and aquatic
science research communities by conducting investigator-driven sampling as a
fee-for-service facility.