* 1522840
* Collaborative Research:   Climate Change Impacts on Regional Wind Climates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2014,02/29/2016
* Sara Pryor, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2016
* USD 39,784.00

The impact of global climate change will be manifest at the local scale and thus
quantification of risks, vulnerability, opportunities and identification of
appropriate adaptation measures require spatially disaggregated descriptions of
the climate system derived using downscaling tools. Variability and change in
near-surface wind speeds have particular importance for climate change impacts
on society via their impact on, for example, the feasibility of harnessing
renewable energy resources and risks to critical infrastructure. Using products
from the North American Regional Climate Change Assessment Project and state-of-
the-art global climate model simulations, Professors Sara Pryor from the
Atmospheric Science Program at Indiana University and Justin Schoof from the
Geography Department at Southern Illinois University at Carbondale will identify
and quantify sources of wind climate variability on time scales from months to
decades, and generate uniquely detailed projections of wind climates across the
contiguous US under global climate change scenarios using both dynamical and
empirical downscaling tools. This research will contribute to improved
understanding of spatio-temporal variability in wind speeds, dynamic causes of
variability in wind climates, mechanisms responsible for extreme wind speeds,
and evaluation of the latest generation of Global and Regional Climate Model
simulations. Given the key importance of proper assessment of sources of
uncertainty and sensitivity in climate change projections, the relative
sensitivity of wind climate projections (defined as spread in projections
developed from different scenarios) to key sources of uncertainty will also be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is motivated by the need for climate
change mitigation and adaptation actions in key economic sectors including
renewable energy and critical infrastructure. For example, changing wind
climates may have implications for the national goal of obtaining 20% of US
electricity supply from wind turbines by 2030. The project will generate better
understanding of natural/internal variability of regional wind climates and
possible influences of global climate change on regional wind climates and
operation of existing wind power plants (to 2035) and quantification of possible
longer-term shifts in wind climates, including extreme conditions, over the
entire 21st century.