* 1522939
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Chilean Coastal Orographic Precipitation Experiment pilot project (CCOPE-2015)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Justin Minder, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 10/31/2017
* USD 84,075.00

Abstract A team of investigators, working with colleagues in Chile, will
undertake a multi-month (May-August, 2015) deployment to the Nahuelbuta
Mountains of Southern Chile to measure orographic induced precipitation during
the southern hemisphere wet season. This geographic location will allow the
investigators to test the generality of existing theories of coastal orographic
precipitation in comparison with similar mountains along the Coastal Range of
California. This research will lead to potential new discoveries of coastal
precipitation patterns along the southern South America coastline.

Intellectual Merit The geographic location of the Nahuelbuta Mountains of
southern Chile provides a unique location to study the role of aerosols and
small-scale motions in orographic precipitation. Details of precipitation
processes have not been examined for coastal South America. As such, data
collected during this field experiment will serve as a critical test of existing
theories or coastal orographic precipitation and compared with well-studied
areas such as the coastal mountain ranges of California. Simultaneous vertical
measurements of thermodynamic properties, aerosol distributions, rainfall size
distributions, and radar profiles will aid in the characterization of
relationships between precipitation, aerosol loading, and small scale convective
motions.

Broader Impacts Two graduate students will gain invaluable experience in field
measurements of precipitation. Additionally, this team will work with Chilean
researchers and will educate local secondary school children from Chile on the
outcomes of these experiments. This research will result in observational
datasets from an area of the world largely under-served by modern
instrumentation. These data will be used in the evaluation of numerical models
and testing of quantitative precipitation estimation algorithms based on remote
sensing.