* 1522339
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Proximity Algorithms for Optimization Problems Arising from Image/Signal Processing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Charles Micchelli, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 136,593.00

Restoring images or signals from limited available data is required in variety
of applications, including parallel magnetic resonance imaging in medical
applications and fingerprint and face recognition in security identification.
Such image or signal reconstruction problems are often modeled as large-scale
optimization problems. This research project aims to develop more efficient
computational algorithms for solving these optimization problems. Results of
this project are anticipated to have an impact in practical applications. In
particular, the numerical schemes under development are expected to support
medical imaging research and assist in improving the accuracy of clinical
decisions. Senior undergraduate and graduate students are trained in the course
of this project.

This research project aims to develop multiscale proximity algorithms for
optimization problems arising in image or signal processing. Signal processing
problems of practical importance, such as incomplete data recovery, compressive
sensing, and matrix completion, are modeled as optimization problems that have
non-differentiable objective functions. A signal of interest naturally has a
hierarchical structure or allows itself to be sparsely represented in a
multiscale analysis. Multiscale analysis, as a convenient tool for computation,
however, is mainly used to sparsify the underlying signal in formulating
optimization problems; it is not fully exploited in development of efficient
algorithms for optimization problems. In this project, to make systematic use of
the hierarchical structure that exists in optimization problems of interest, the
investigators will synthesize and combine multiscale analysis and proximity
algorithms to solve the problems in an accurate and computationally efficient
way.