* 1522383
* Theory and Algorithms of Transformed L1 Minimization with Applications in Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Jack Xin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,890.00

This research project studies computational methods to recover signals (images)
from partial observations, a technique known as compressed sensing. The project
addresses an outstanding issue in compressed sensing, in which redundancies or
restrictions preclude the successful use of established techniques. The research
investigates a class of functions that promote sparsity under robust conditions
and can be minimized with efficient or fast algorithms. The computational tools
studied in the project will enhance sensing capabilities in applications such as
imaging in astronomy and radar, medical imaging, threat detection, and
recommender systems. The project provides systematic training of graduate
students towards advanced degrees in computational mathematics. The
computational methods developed in the project will serve as a valuable tool for
information technology and data sciences, benefitting the country and the
general public in the digital age.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The widely used convex
function for sparse signal recovery is L1, which is known to introduce bias.
This project studies a family of unbiased non-convex sparsity promoting
functions called the transformed L1 (TL1). The TL1 minimization under a linear
constraint can be solved by iterative thresholding methods with closed-form
thresholding functions. The goal is to improve on L1 under robust sensing
conditions when the constraint is ill-conditioned or the theoretical guarantees
for successful application of the L1 method are not satisfied.