* 1522202
* Collaborative Research: The Initial Peopling and Settlement of Eastern Newfoundland
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2016
* Christopher Wolff, SUNY College at Plattsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2016
* USD 243,539.00

This project is an archaeological examination of the cultural and ecological
factors that contributed to the colonization and settlement of Newfoundland by
Maritime Archaic peoples. The Maritime Archaic peoples (ca. 6,000 B.C.-1,000
B.C.) were the first to colonize the Eastern Subarctic and Arctic of North
America. They created a way of life that allowed them to successfully occupy the
entire coast and near interior of Newfoundland and Labrador for thousands of
years, and maintain relationships with contemporaneous cultures that stretched
throughout much of northeastern North America. However, we still know very
little about their initial settlement of the region, their early social
organization, and the ways these processes were affected by ecological factors.
The aim of this research is to examine the initial settlement of Newfoundland
within the larger context of the peopling of northeastern North America and the
roles that historical processes, both cultural and environmental, played in that
broader framework. This will include new archaeological excavations at early
Maritime Archaic sites in Newfoundland, as well as investigation and analysis of
existing Maritime Archaic artifact collections from throughout the region. It
will also examine ecological data, such as plant and animal remains, to assess
the wider role of environmental change in the initial occupation of the eastern
Subarctic and how early cultural adaptations developed within northern coastal
and island ecosystems.

This project is an international collaboration of professional archaeologists,
graduate students, and undergraduates. The training and education of
undergraduate students is a critical component of this project. Moreover,
project members will continue to collaborate with local communities to develop
economic and preservation initiatives related to the archaeological sites and
cultural heritage associated with this research and to create educational
opportunities for students and community members in the region.

This research will have extensive implications for our understanding of how and
when people first settled the easternmost region of North America, and northern
coasts and islands more generally. The earliest human migration onto any
landscape is a complex, interactive, and dynamic historical process. In North
America, the colonization process is often generalized within an evolutionary
perspective that envisions humans simply reacting to ecological opportunities
offered by newly available landscapes and resources at the end of the last Ice
Age. It is also often framed as solely a Paleoindian process that did not extend
far into the Holocene, despite the fact that large portions of northern North
America were not colonized until the Middle Holocene. New archaeological
fieldwork and collections analysis concerning the Archaic expansion onto and
around the island of Newfoundland will inform larger models of human
colonization within the region, as well as in other Arctic and Subarctic coastal
zones. This includes the initial peopling of North America on the other side of
the continent and the role that northern coasts and islands played in that
process. It will also help us better understand the interaction between Archaic
people and their environment and the adaptation strategies they employed in
unknown coastal and island landscapes, as well as the relative impact they had
on those environments.

To address these issues the research team will survey and date extant
collections to fine-tune the chronological resolution of the initial
colonization processes of Newfoundland. They will also conduct new excavations
at the Stock Cove and Stock Cove West sites in eastern Newfoundland where
Maritime Archaic deposits have been found that appear to stratigraphically
correlate to their earliest occupations of the region and that have the first
evidence of architecture by Archaic peoples on the island. This will be assessed
with a suite of new dates and analyses of material remains recovered from those
excavations. Additionally, new geophysical surveys employing ground penetrating
radar and magnetometry will be conducted to locate new Archaic deposits to help
focus the excavations and noninvasively assess other archaeological deposits
that could address the earliest settlement of Newfoundland. Finally, ecological
data (e.g. insects, faunal remains, macrobotanicals) will be collected and
analyzed to help reconstruct environmental patterns that may have impacted and
influenced the peopling and settlement process by the Maritime Archaic.

This project will have broader impacts that include: 1) the first excavation and
analysis of a Maritime Archaic structure on the island of Newfoundland; 2) the
contribution of important data to our understanding of Archaic social
organization and settlement in the eastern Subarctic/Arctic; 3) obtaining key
environmental data that will assist with the assessment of environmental change
throughout the Holocene and may inform the development of modern policies
regarding the mitigation of environmental change and economic impacts (e.g., sea
mammal hunting, fishing quotas, wildlife conservation, sea ice extent, coastal
erosion); 4) the training of undergraduate students in archaeological field and
laboratory methods; 5) international dissemination of our results to both
academic and public audiences, and; 6) increased interaction with local
communities, regional museums, and other interested parties within Newfoundland
and Labrador concerning their heritage and cultural resources, including public
lectures and the development of educational tools (e.g., social media,
historical markers, pamphlets, booklets) for those communities.