* 1522337
* New Developments in Geometric and Multiscale Numerical Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Thomas Yu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 230,000.00

This research project will study representation and approximation of complex
data structures involving geometrical configurations and shapes. The methods
developed in this project will shed light on questions such as: Why do human red
blood cells have a bi-concave donut shape instead of, say, a peanut shape? It is
known that the lipid bilayer is the most elementary and indispensable structural
component of biological membranes that form the boundary of all cells. To
understand the amazing variety of different shapes they exhibit, biophysicists
strive to find an accurate mathematical model for such bio-membranes. With the
mathematical and computational techniques under development in this project, the
solution of such models can be obtained accurately and efficiently. Similar
mathematical techniques can also be applied to unravel white matter structure
from diffusion tensor magnetic resonance images (DT-MRI) of the brain and to
predict, in real-time, a life-threatening phenomenon called aerodynamic flutter
in air transportation. These will help diagnose psychiatric disorders and save
lives of pilots and passengers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies multi-
scale representation and approximation of manifold-valued data, reduced order
modeling, as well as design of numerical algorithms that respect the geometric
or topological characteristics of the underlying problem. In particular, this
research addresses the following: I. Approximation of manifold-valued data
(scattered manifold-valued data and reduced order modeling, and theory of
nonlinear subdivision algorithms); II. New multi-scale geometric modeling tools
(numerical simulation of lipid bilayers, subdivision differential forms for
genus 0 topology, and 3-D subdivision methods). The research will combine
techniques from mathematical analysis, geometry, numerical analysis,
optimization theory, and computing to advance the understanding of applied
geometry problems.