* 1522882
* III: Student Travel Fellowships for Special Interest Group of Management of Data (SIGMOD) 2015
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Mohamed Mokbel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 04/30/2016
* USD 24,990.00

The goal of this project is to provide a unique opportunity for database
students to present their research results, learn cutting edge research, and
interact with internationally recognized researchers from both academia and
industry at the ACM SIGMOD 2015 Database Conference. As one of the most
prestigious conferences in data management research, ACM SIGMOD/PODS has
contributed significantly to the advance of all aspects of data management
technologies and applications since 1975. Today, ACM SIGMOD is a dynamic and
comprehensive program for publication, education, and interaction; and it is a
leading international forum for database researchers, practitioners, developers,
and users to explore cutting-edge ideas and results and to exchange techniques,
tools, and experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide partial
support for students from U.S. institutions, especially female and minority
students, to attend and present their research work at ACM SIGMOD 2015 in
Melbourne, Australia. Besides meeting with researchers from academia and
industry during regular program sessions, in SIGMOD 2015 students will be able
to participate in the following interactive activities as partially supported by
this project: a new researcher symposium, an undergraduate research poster
competition, face-to-face meetings with leading researchers, and a student
mentoring workshop. These opportunities will have a long lasting impact on the
future career of the participants. The broader impact is to train the future
generation of leaders and workforce in the critical field of data
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information concerning this award may
be found at the SIGMOD Travel Fellowship web site:
http://www.sigmod2015.org/grants3.shtml