* 1522847
* EDU: Developing a Software Artifact Repository for Software Assurance Education
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Dianxiang Xu, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop a software assurance education artifact repository,
designed for use across numerous computer science programs and institutions. The
repository will help students to obtain a firm understanding of the software
assurance process and necessary skills to develop highly assured software. The
team will also create instructional materials for effective software artifact
use.

The project transitions recent software assurance research to education domain
including highly effective techniques for finding security defects. Artifacts
will represent typical interdependent software assurance activity results in
areas such as security requirements analysis, access control policy analysis,
threat modeling and verification, and security testing and assessment.
Specifically, the proposed repository will include seven types of software
artifacts for several carefully selected and widely used open source security-
critical software applications: security requirement specifications, security
policies, threat models, security test models, security test cases,
vulnerability models, and security mutants.

The proposed efforts will help with a critical shortage of software assurance
workforce and will also raise software security awareness among a broad audience
by introducing the topic to high school computer teachers. This will be done in
collaboration with an NSF CS10K project preparing 30-40 high school teachers to
teach Computer Science Principles courses at regional high schools. The project
will collaborate with Florida A&M, Monmouth University and Gannon University.
The project will develop a web application enabling public access to artifacts
and instructional materials.