* 1522492
* Collaborative Research: Extreme Rainfall in Urban Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* James Smith, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 283,121.00

In this study, the impacts of urbanization on extreme rainfall and flooding will
be examined through a combination of intercomparison studies of rainfall and
flooding from a diverse sample of urban watersheds in the US and through
modeling studies of extreme rainfall and flooding. The principal question that
will be addressed in this study is: How does urbanization alter the regional
hydroclimatology of extreme rainfall and flooding? Research will be organized
around questions that address urbanization impacts on the climatology of extreme
rainfall and questions that address urbanization impacts on flood response in
urban watersheds. Questions that focus on urbanization and extreme rainfall are
the following: How does urbanization alter the spatial and temporal distribution
of rainfall from flood-producing storm systems? What are the characteristic life
cycles of storm systems that produce flash floods in urban regions? How do land
- water boundaries and complex terrain interact with the urban environment to
control the regional distribution of extreme rainfall? Questions that focus on
urbanization and extreme flooding are the following: How does urbanization alter
the population of storm systems that are responsible for extreme flooding? How
does the pattern of urban development, along with the space-time structure of
rainfall, determine the scale-dependent flood response of urban
watersheds?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The research is
designed to provide a predictive understanding of the impacts of urbanization on
extreme rainfall and flooding. Urban environments represent an especially
interesting and important setting for examining spatial heterogeneities in
hydrometeorological processes. Urban environments also present a challenging
setting for characterizing regional climate change and the research will
contribute to a broader understanding of nonstationarities in extreme rainfall
and flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project,
which is a collaborative effort of research groups from Princeton and Purdue,
will train graduate students and provide the resources and infrastructure for
undergraduate students to carry out independent research projects (through
Senior Thesis, Junior Independent Project and summer internships). Furthermore,
the research elements of the project will be integrated throughout the
undergraduate curriculum in Civil and Environmental Engineering at Princeton and
at Environmental Science and Engineering as well as Meteorology and Applied
Climate/Climate Change curriculum at Purdue, building on initiatives in the area
of the "urban environment". Results obtained from this research will be of
significant and immediate interest, not only to hydrologists, climate scientists
and atmospheric scientists but also to a wide range of end users, including
emergency management offices, urban planning programs and flood forecasting
offices. The research will be translated into training material, which will be
targeted for developing the education and workforce needs of sustainable science
researchers and educators. Work with the Indiana State Climate Service Team and
Purdue's Land Use Team to develop and disseminate training and outreach material
will be carried out.