* 1522572
* OCE-PRF Track 1 (Broadening Participation): What drives population connectivity in the open sea?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* NONE NONE, Iacchei                 Matthew        J
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 174,000.00

As earth's climate changes, populations of both terrestrial and marine species
are responding in one of three major ways: by adapting to new environments, by
moving to a more favorable environment, or by perishing. While evaluating these
responses to climate change has been ongoing for terrestrial species and some
coastal marine species for at least a decade, the data on open ocean zooplankton
has been limited. This gap in knowledge is significant, as zooplankton form the
base of the open ocean food chain, and zooplankton are hypothesized to be some
of the most sensitive marine species to environmental change. This project
focuses on the copepod Pleuromamma xiphias, a dominant migratory zooplankton in
tropical and subtropical waters worldwide, and how populations of P. xiphias are
affected by environmental change. Results will be important for understanding
how open ocean food webs and nutrient cycles are changing with time, and how
this in turn may affect the abundance and distribution of species higher in the
food chain that are vital to our food resources. In conjunction with this work,
the fellow will mentor traditionally underrepresented groups of students in
Hawai'i at three critical educational levels: when they are initially becoming
excited about science and learning about the role of science in society (K-12),
when they are deciding whether or not to pursue science as a career
(undergraduate students), and when they require strong mentorship to succeed in
their scientific pursuits (graduate students). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In marine
systems, planktonic species have been proposed as sensitive indicators of
environmental change. With short generation times, populations of these pelagic
organisms often show tight coupling between physical forcing and biological
response. However, the question remains whether plankton have the capacity to
adaptively evolve with respect to rapidly changing ocean regimes, whether they
will decrease in population abundance and geographic extent, or whether they
will alter their primary habitat preferences. To understand the adaptive
capacity of plankton populations, we first need to understand the spatiotemporal
scale of gene exchange for the species of interest, and identify the factors
that determine the boundaries of those scales. The proposed project will use
genome-wide data from a pelagic copepod (Pleuromamma xiphias), coupled with
multiple environmental variables collected across a spatio-temporal gradient, to
assess what determines the scale of population connectivity in the open sea, and
infer how these factors influence the response of Atlantic Ocean P. xiphias
populations to climate change. Specifically, the fellow will examine the
following hypotheses: 1) Biological and physical environment are selective
forces shaping population structure in P. xiphias; 2) Migration rate is high
among sites within the North and South Atlantic gyres, but low at the poleward
edges of each gyre and across the equator; 3) P. xiphias populations will be
increasing in abundance and expanding toward the poleward range of their
distribution, while sites at the equatorial edges will be undergoing
bottlenecks. This work will be conducted under the mentorship of Erica Goetze,
PhD in the School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST) at the
University of Hawai'i at Manoa. Each of the comparisons (genes, sites, time
points, environmental variables) will contribute incremental insights into the
genetic structuring of pelagic zooplankton. Combined, they have the potential to
transform the way we think about population connectivity in the open ocean, and
shed new light on the potential adaptive capacity of pelagic copepods in a
changing climate.