* 1522479
* Improving Infrastructure for Data Access, Storage and Recovery, and Network Communication at Stroud Water Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* David Arscott, Stroud Water Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2016
* USD 54,745.00

A significant challenge for independent biological field stations, such as
Stroud Water Research Center (SWRC; http://www.stroudcenter.org/), is
maintaining advanced facilities equivalent to the unique, innovative work those
facilities support. This NSF-funded project allows SWRC to address a crucial
aspect of maintaining this high level of support through a comprehensive upgrade
of its network infrastructure. The improvements will dramatically increase
SWRC's data storage capacity, data backup and recovery equipment, and improve
the wireless network system. These upgrades will not only improve the current
computing environment, but also allow for future expansion to accommodate
additional users and data volume. Many recent projects at SWRC, including NSF-
funded projects, reflect a larger commitment to environmental monitoring and
data gathering. This generates huge datasets that tax the capacity of SWRC's
data and network-computing environment. Unfortunately, the infrastructure needed
to support these new areas of environmental research is generally not included
in externally funded projects. Specific to SWRC, this project will enhance
SWRC's decades ­long commitment to maintain data access and quality, while
growing SWRC's historic,"foundational" datasets which are vital to other
freshwater research organizations, and inform stream ecology education,
environmental public policy and watershed restoration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to transition SWRC's current digital
data storage away from an ad hoc and reactive solution to a proactive approach
that includes creating a 12 terabyte (TB) Storage Area Network (SAN) array that
is easily expandable to 60 TB. The second part of the project is an upgrade of
the existing tape backup system (single tape drive, 800 GB individual tape
capacity, manual intervention to switch tapes) to a system that has much greater
capacity (multiple tape drive; 2.5 TB individual tape capacity) and is
automated. The third leg of the project includes an upgrade of the wireless
communication network that currently cannot meet increasing user demands. This
upgrade involves a new controller that will double the number of wireless access
points, will allow for increased connection speeds, and will greatly enhance the
ability of both staff and guests to wirelessly connect to internal and/or
external networks. The wireless upgrade also includes an outdoor­compatible
access point to allow wireless coverage well beyond indoor facilities and into
the SWRC experimental watershed. Outdoor wireless connections are critical to
support the increasing number of outdoor education and outreach events held at
SWRC and the rapidly expanding use of wireless environmental sensor arrays that
SWRC is deploying throughout the experimental watershed.