* 1522768
* Novel Ideas and Analysis for Interface and Fluid-Structure Interaction Problems and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Zhilin Li, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Studying interface and fluid-structure interaction problems, such as those
involving oil and water mixtures, gas bubbles, ice and water interfaces, tumor
growth, or cell deformation, has many practical applications. It is often costly
to carry out experiments on such systems, and computational simulation provides
an alternative for study of these challenging problems. The objectives of this
research project are to model such systems and to design efficient and practical
computational algorithms to simulate, solve, and control those problems. Newly
developed augmented immersed interface methods will be applied to several
important applications in multi-phase flows and fluid-structure interactions.
The investigator will develop and disseminate software packages implementing
these methods. Graduate students will be involved in the research.

This project concerns the development and analysis of some new ideas for
interface and fluid-structure interaction problems based on structured meshes.
The methods under development will be supported by rigorous mathematical
analysis and numerical experiments. Applications include optimal control of
interface problems, fluid-structure interactions in modeling tissue mechanics
coupled with cell biology, and tip propagation of a crack. The methods are based
on structured meshes such as Cartesian meshes that are not necessarily aligned
with the interface in two and three dimensions. The projects include: (1) new
augmented methods for a fluid structure interaction between a fluid flow modeled
by Stokes or Navier-Stokes equations and a porous medium modeled by the Darcy's
law; (2) a new computational framework for accurate gradient computation on a
boundary or interface with accurate solution globally; (3) a new second-order
symmetric, consistent, and parameter-free immersed finite element method; (4) a
new SVD-free augmented IFE method for elliptic interface problems with non-
homogeneous jump conditions; (5) applications of the new methods for cell
deformation in different layers (porous media, Stokes flow, Navier-Stokes flow)
and scales; and (6)numerical simulations of crack propagation based on the
Mumford-Shah minimizer. This project will have positive effect on education by
attracting graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to conduct research in
this area. Some components of the project will be designed as undergraduate
projects. The project will produce software useful to computational science
involving discontinuities and singularities, free-boundary/moving interfaces,
multi-phase and multi-physics, and irregular domain problems.