* 1522841
* CAREER:  Inertial Two-Phase Gas-Liquid Droplet Microflows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Carlos Hidrovo Chavez, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 188,483.00

1151091&lt;br/&gt;Hidrovo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
fundamentally understand the governing physics behind inertial two-phase gas-
liquid droplet microflows, with the objective of developing novel microfluidic
systems capable of microsecond processing times and tens of mL/min throughputs,
simultaneously. The transformative aspect of the project resides in providing
new insights into the emerging field of high speed inertial microfluidics and
droplet microflows in specific. This understanding will lead to the development
of next generation Lab-on-a-Chip (LOC) and micro-Total Analysis Systems (mTAS)
with processing speed and throughput capabilities not seen
before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to address (1) the role and
interplay between inertial, viscous and surface tension forces in the droplet
detachment mechanism, (2) mapping of the different flow regimes and transitions
that can lead to droplet generation, and (3) the dynamics of inertial droplet
collision mixing in a confined microchannel environment. Towards these goals,
research efforts will be put forward that focus on the experimental study of the
fast droplet dynamics and interactions through the use of novel optical
diagnostics techniques. In specific, a microfluidic droplet generation platform
that allows control and monitoring of the liquid and gas flows conditions will
be coupled to a high speed microscopy system to study the liquid droplet
entrainment dynamics. Similarly, a microfluidic droplet pair collision platform
will be coupled to a high speed epi-fluorescence microscopy system, where
differential dual fluorescence measurements and mPIV will be used as tools to
unravel the fast dynamics associated with inertial collision mixing. The
experimental work will be complemented by first order modeling and global force
analysis of the different phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the project includes elucidating the role of inertial effects in the
detachment, entrainment and collision mixing of liquid droplets in confined gas
carrier microflows. The test structures and experiments to be carried out in
this study will provide unique insight into the effects that different flow and
boundary conditions have on droplet formation and collision coalescence. The
microfluidic test samples to be used are designed and fabricated so that the
geometry and flow conditions under which the droplets interact can be carefully
controlled, allowing for a clearer understanding of the effects that different
microscopic geometrical parameters have on the entrainment and collision
coalescence processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research endeavors and outcomes
from this work will be integrated into educational and outreach activities that
will introduce the field of microscale flow and transport to underrepresented
undergraduate engineering and high school students early in their career.
Innovative multilayer, self-sustainable programs geared towards development of
teaching content while providing research training, will be introduced. Research
training of individual students will take place through summer internship
programs aimed at developing microfluidic and optical diagnostics lab modules
and demonstrations. These will in turn be deployed and introduced in an
undergraduate experimental class and several outreach programs, respectively.