* 1522924
* Workshop on Computational Modeling for Individual and Organizational Science
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Jeffrey Vancouver, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 04/30/2016
* USD 49,929.00

Nontechnical Description of the Significance and Importance

Mathematics is the language of science, yet in the social sciences computational
representations of the processes hypothesized to explain phenomena are rare. A
primary reason for this is a lack of understanding of the value of formal,
computational approaches and a lack of training in computational modeling
strategies. This lack of appreciation and training is particularly true at the
intersection of psychology and organizational science, which includes the
disciplines of industrial-organizational psychology and organizational behavior.
The workshop at the Ohio University brings together an international group of
scholars from several sub-disciplines of psychology and organizational science
to highlight the value and training a new set of scholars in computational
modeling methodology.

Technical Description

The intellectual merit of the project arises from a series of presentations by
computational modelers of difference types that will focus on the value of
computational modeling for addressing specific phenomena and for facilitating
the construction of a cumulative science focused on understanding human behavior
at work. That is, computational modeling provides researchers with the means to
explore dynamic psychological and contextual concepts mathematically and with
simulations, including information regarding what study designs can be used to
investigate the causal theories properly. Moreover, quantitative modeling
techniques provide a vehicle for integrating levels of theory ranging from
neurological to macro processes (e.g., economic activity). The broader impact of
this project will be achieved via training of a cadre of new computational
modelers and the publication of an edited collection of the papers presented by
the established modelers and newly trained modelers. That is, as part of the
training element of the workshop the trainees will develop and evaluate new
computational models of specific phenomena. The best of these models will be
submitted to journals for special issue consideration on computational modeling.