* 1523453
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Analyzing Extreme Risks in Insurance and Finance
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Henry Lam, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 89,750.00

Recent rare events with disastrous economic and social consequences, so-called
Black-Swan events, have made today?s world far different from just decades ago.
Examples of these events range from earthquakes and nuclear crises to the
collapse of financial market from sub-prime mortgages. All of these intensify
the need for risk management among the insurance and financial industry, and in
particular, the invention of new tools to model, analyze, predict, and manage
extreme risks. The investigators will undertake the fundamental challenges posed
by the study of rare events: they, by nature, are short of data, their
likelihood is difficult to compute, and that they are difficult to reflect via
accurate models. As such, the investigators will take an integrated approach
that combines statistical methods, probabilistic analysis, optimization, and
efficient computer simulation to assess their risks. The research has potential
for high societal impact, given the wide range of applications of the models and
methods documented in the project for handling the important implications of
extreme events. The investigators plan to train several Ph.D. students and will
also involve them in K12 education as guest lecturers via Harlem Schools
Partnership with Columbia University. The investigators will attempt to recruit
high-quality personnel from under-represented groups. They will also disseminate
the scientific output of this project via open access
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual strength of the project rests on
the fact that it includes algorithmic, computational, statistical, and
theoretical components. The goal is to establish a robust and systematic
approach for modeling and analyzing extreme risks in insurance and finance. The
investigators systematically combine: a) the theory of extreme value statistics,
b) asymptotic analysis in probability, c) stochastic optimization, and d) highly
efficient Monte Carlo techniques. Specific objectives include: 1) establishing a
robust asymptotic theory to account for tail events uniformly over a wide range
of settings, 2) taking advantage of the asymptotic large deviations theory to
build provably efficient Monte Carlo estimators for rare events, and 3)
investigation of a robust optimization approach that accounts for model
misspecification. The investigators' approach is both innovative and necessary
because the nature of rare events exposes deficiencies in each of these areas:
i) The theory of extreme value statistics assumes a large number of data points
to provide accurate estimators but the nature of rare events precludes this
assumption. ii) Asymptotic analysis techniques allow to obtain formulas that are
easily evaluated and thus amenable to sensitivity analysis under a wide range of
model parameters. So, asymptotics may help mitigate some of the statistical
error issue, but unfortunately, they carry an unmeasurable error and often lose
important information. iii) Efficient Monte Carlo has a controlled error by
sampling, but it still assumes a model in place and could lead to incorrect
conclusions in case the model is incorrect. iv) Optimization techniques might
help mitigate the problem of model uncertainty by computing bounds for the
probabilities of interest, optimizing over the selection of models that cover
the truth with high confidence. However, these might be too loose to be
practical or the optimization problem could be too complex, thus the need from
1) to 3). Overall, the investigators will establish a comprehensive approach
that resolves the deficiencies exposed by each of the aforementioned segregated
methods.