* 1523010
* Transformative Robotics Experience for Elementary Students (TREES)
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2018
* Ji Shen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 04/30/2018
* USD 299,737.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, Transformative Robotics Experience
for Elementary Students (TREES), aims to build elementary age students' content
knowledge in robotics and computer science more broadly by fostering their
disciplinary engagement and participation within a humanoid robots-programming
environment. Fourth and fifth grade students from a collaborating school will
participate in a semester long course with a final project that involves
bringing the robot to classrooms of first and second grade students to
demonstrate the robot's capabilities and promote their disciplinary engagement
with robotics and computer science. Over the 2-year period, this project will
involve a total of 50 elementary students, the majority of whom are from low
socio-economic groups in Broward County, where there is a great need for
building technological capabilities. This project will be conducted in an
inclusive classroom setting where some participants will be high functioning
students with autism and some English language learners (ELLs), allowing the
project to reach a diverse population that has historically been
underrepresented in STEM fields. Using a design-based approach, this exploratory
EAGER project is pushing the boundary of a new and complex technology into
elementary grades. Results will advance our understanding of how to create
learning opportunities for diverse elementary students in robotics and computer
science that would increase their content knowledge by fostering disciplinary
engagement in order to prepare them for future learning in robotics, computer
science, and STEM fields.