* 1523101
* SaTC:EDU: Capacity Building in Security, Privacy and Trust for Geospatial Applications
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Dan Simovici, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 237,783.00

Many mobile devices with GPS-positioning capabilities allow users to retrieve
and share their geographical coordinates and such geospatial data is critical in
many areas including traffic optimization, emergency response, disaster rescue
missions or military intelligence. At the same time, there are serious concerns
related to the security, privacy and trustworthiness (SPT) of the data since
users disclose their coordinates and an adversary could derive sensitive
information violating users' privacy, or could change the data leading, for
example, to wrong conclusions in a crime investigation. SPT for geospatial data
has been a subject of intensive research and its results have been gradually
transferred into market products. However, there has been no transition to
education and this project intends to build capacity for geospatial SPT
education by developing six course modules. They will cover geospatial SPT from
several different perspectives, with focus on data management, networking, data
mining, and social issues. The modules can be integrated into upper-level high-
school, community college, or university courses.

The dissemination plan includes workshops, seminars and other outreach
activities at high schools, community colleges and universities to increase
awareness on geospatial SPT issues and to disseminate project's resources to a
broad audience. It is expected that the proposed course modules will be also
used in other fields such as law, economics, sociology and other disciplines
where mobile technology introduces new opportunities but also considerable
challenges. The project intends to reach students from underrepresented groups
through collaboration with institutions in the Pathways to Prosperity network.