* 1523631
* Connectivity in Geomorphology: The 47th Annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Francis Magilligan, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2017
* USD 42,000.00

Nontechnical description of the project that explains the significance and
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of connectivity - how matter,
energy, and organisms themselves are transferred among different parts of the
Earth-surface system- is an emerging topic in the field of geomorphology. Yet
the means by which these different processes occur over the landscape has not
been well documented. This award supports the 47th annual Binghamton
Geomorphology Symposium, entitled "Connectivity in Geomorphology." The symposium
will bring together a strong and diverse group of leading experts and emerging
scientists actively engaged in a variety of research into processes at the
Earth's surface. Six themes have been selected to explore how different aspects
of the Earth are connected, such as rivers, hillslopes, and landscapes, and the
contributors have been asked to discuss the importance of connectivity to the
study of the critical zone, the area where most life on Earth exists. The
broader implications of the symposium include the promotion and enhancement of
the education of future science professionals, the fostering of diversity within
the discipline, and the discussion of topics having relevance to society, such
as landslides and river restoration. The symposium will involve the
participation of numerous students whose education will be correspondingly
advanced.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 47th annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium,
entitled "Connectivity in Geomorphology" will bring together a strong and
diverse group of leading experts and emerging scientists actively engaged in
connectivity within the critical zone. Six themes have been selected to
represent different approaches to studying connectivity. The invited presenters
have been asked to coordinate their presentations and papers so that the
symposium and collection of papers will provide a comprehensive overview of the
current understanding of connectivity by natural scientists. Connectivity themes
to be emphasized during the meeting are: sediment; hydrologic; geochemical;
riverine; landscape; and modeling of connectivity.The symposium provides a
prominent forum for scientists to present, exchange, and disseminate methods,
techniques, and results from geomorphic research to the global community.
Because of its size and focus, the symposium offers an unrivalled opportunity to
engage actively in discussion with a broad range of scientists linked not
necessarily by a research focus but by a conceptual framework that emphasizes
the importance of connectivity among different components of the critical zone.
All invited oral and poster presentations will be published in the
internationally-recognized journal Geomorphology, which ensures the effective
transfer of technology to the global community.