* 1523620
* Hampton-Brandeis Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Seth Fraden, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,255,433.00

****Non-technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The Hampton Partnership for Research
&amp; Education in Materials (PREM) is a collaboration between Hampton
University and the Brandeis University Materials Research Science &amp;
Engineering Center (MRSEC) that includes collaborative research, education,
training and outreach activities. Hampton is a primarily undergraduate HBCU with
a large representation of women and African-American students. There is a
persistent disparity in the rate at which HBCU alumni receive doctorates in STEM
compared to their African-American counterparts who obtain their undergraduate
degrees at research intensive institutions. The Hampton PREM is committed to
further enhancing the quality of undergraduate materials science education and
research at Hampton and other HBCUs as a means to reduce the PhD-attainment
disparity and ultimately broaden African-American and women participation in the
nation's STEM workforce. We will develop and implement evidence-based innovative
models and approaches to improve the preparation and success of HBCU
undergraduates so they pursue materials science-related graduate programs and/or
careers. The Hampton PREM will increase the number of Hampton undergraduates who
annually pursue doctorates from the 1997-2006 rate of less than 2 doctorates per
100 bachelors to the level of 4.2 doctorates per 100 bachelors over the next 10
years. The proposed research will directly engage trainees from high school
students to post-doctoral fellows in cutting-edge materials research and result
in these trainees being co-authors on publications and presenters at research
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The
research component of the Hampton-Brandeis PREM includes three primary research
projects which serve as the central unifying activities for the education,
training and outreach components. The three research projects are: (1)
examination of the dynamics of polyelectrolytes at the surface and within
nanoscale polymer thin films fabricated using layer-by-layer technique and the
create novel hybrid colloidal rod-polyelectrolyte multilayer drug delivery
systems, (2) the fabrication of drug-delivery micelle containing light-sensitive
amphiphilic block copolymers , and (3) a research project to be added via a PREM
Pilot Project Program which will provided an exciting opportunity to nurture and
cultivate new materials science research faculty at Hampton University.
Particular emphasis will be placed on the recruitment of underrepresented
minority and/or women early career faculty at Hampton University. Each research
project requires substantial collaboration between the Hampton PREM research
teams and the Brandeis MRSEC, specifically leveraging its strengths in
microfluidics and high-resolution single-molecule fluorescence (SMF) microscopy.
The experiments associated with each project will be undertaken by a PREM
Research Unit, which is a team of materials science researchers that spans the
education and training continuum (High School, undergraduate student, graduate
student and Path-to-Professorship post-doctoral fellow and PREM Faculty).