* 1523634
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Rachael Bay, Bay                     Rachael        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Rachael Bay is
"Elucidating population history and migration patterns of yellow warblers
through DNA analysis." The host institution for this fellowship is the
University of California Los Angeles, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Thomas
Smith. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship research uses cutting-edge DNA
sequencing technology to elucidate migration patterns of the yellow warbler and
measure changes in population size and structure over time. Understanding the
distribution of genetic diversity across space and time helps explain animal
movement and evolutionary capacity, both important considerations in species
conservation. The research capitalizes on the wealth of information available
through genomic sequencing and the depth provided by extensive biological
collections. The yellow warbler has experienced population declines, likely due
to habitat fragmentation and destruction. Using DNA extracted from an extensive
feather collection housed at the Center for Tropical Research at UCLA permits
measurement of migratory connectivity which, although important for predicting
the broader impacts of local disturbance, is difficult to measure using
traditional non-genetic methods. In addition, using museum specimens from the
Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County and the Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology at the University of California at Berkeley, changes in population
structure and genetic diversity over time are being measured, allowing direct
measurement of the evolutionary consequences of habitat destruction and
development and informaing conservation decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training
goals include gaining new skills in emerging genomic techniques and the use of
collections samples to add a temporal depth not available through sampling
existing populations. Educational outreach involves training for undergraduate
researchers as well public outreach through the Audubon Society and similar
groups. Finally, the project itself has far-reaching conservation implications.
Understanding the distribution of genetic diversity and how it has changed along
with habitat loss and fragmentation helps inform management plans, for example
by conserving habitat for evolutionarily important lineages or preserving
wildlife corridors between isolated populations.