* 1523695
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Benjamin Freeman, Freeman                 Benjamin       G
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Benjamin Freeman is
"Understanding tropical montane biodiversity: Is interspecific competition
important?" The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
British Columbia, and the sponsoring scientist is Dolph Schluter.

Tropical mountains are the most biodiverse terrestrial ecosystems on Earth. This
"megadiversity" arises largely because species occupy narrow elevational
distributions. Elevational specialization is due to both abiotic and biotic
factors, but the influence of interactions between species has been largely
ignored. Interspecific competition is an important biotic interaction that can
influence how species' traits evolve and where species live on both regional and
local spatial scales. Typically, interspecific competition is mediated by
functional traits; therefore, species that have similar traits, e.g., similar
beak size and shape, compete for resources more intensely than species with very
different functional traits. The fellowship research uses museum collections
including the American Museum of Natural History to generate a large, freely
available database of functional traits in songbirds. Using this database,
hypotheses about interspecific competition mediated by functional traits can be
examined as an important mechanism that explains why tropical mountains harbor
such diverse avifaunas. Specifically, the hypotheses are 1) Functional traits
explain what species of tropical birds can occur at the same elevations along
elevational gradients, 2) Interspecific competition shapes the geographic
distributions of tropical montane birds, and 3) Interspecific competition drives
phenotypic evolution in tropical montane birds. Results promise to explain why
tropical montane regions are biodiversity hotspots and test the validity of
current "abiotic-only" models.

Training goals are to gain expertise in data analysis and acquire quantitative
skills relevant to biodiversity science, such as species distribution modeling
and macroecological analyses. Educational outreach involves mentoring and
providing research experiences for undergraduate biology students. Public
outreach includes lectures and continuing to publish articles in the Living
Bird, a quarterly magazine with a circulation of more than 60,000.