* 1523469
* Workshop: 2015 International Microwave Symposium Educational Initiatives, in Phoenix, AZ, May 18-21, 2015.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Stephen Goodnick, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/29/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The proposed project will support student participation in the 2015
International Microwave Symposium (IMS) Educational Initiatives: Workshop
Support, which will be held in Phoenix, Arizona, May 18-21, 2015. Support will
be provided in conjunction with a new educational program called IMS Connect
which was initiated in the 2014 IMS Symposium and will be expanded in this
year's event. The proposed work will focus on STEM education and has as
objective to increase the participation of students from underrepresented
minorities. The participating students will share their experience with others
through video diaries, helping to increase awareness of the opportunity for
other students in future years. IMS will address research areas in RF/microwave
engineering and is the largest conference in the world in this field. IMS has
played a key role in identifying new directions for research and development. It
is one of the few conferences where participation from both the industry and
academia is extremely strong. The participating students will share their
experience with others through video diaries, helping to increase awareness of
the opportunity for other students in future years. The program will also be
described in professional magazines with the potential to encourage other
conferences to adopt a similar type of program.