* 1523306
* Symposium: Participant Travel Support for the 89th ACS Colloid and Surface Science Symposium, June 15-17, 2015, Pittsburgh, PA
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Stephen Garoff, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

CBET-1523306 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Schneider, James &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will support the participation of US scientists and engineers in the 89th
American Chemical Society Colloid and Surface Science Symposium, which will be
held on the campus of Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh, PA from June
15-17, 2015. The symposium will address a broad range of topics in colloidal and
surface science that are broadly relevant to many processes of technological and
biological interest. The symposium will provide a way for leading research
groups to interact with researchers across academic and scientific disciplines,
and it will help junior researchers, including young faculty members and
graduate students, to interact with leaders in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium, which will consist of a variety of keynote
lectures, technical and poster sessions, will cover a variety of timely and
innovative themes that are central to recent advances in colloidal and surface
science. The topics of planned sessions include self- and directed-assembly of
nanomaterials, dynamics of suspensions, nanoscale imaging and spectroscopy of
interfaces, the behavior of polymers under confinement, electrokinetics and
microfluidics, and the role of colloidal principles in environmental systems and
in nanomedicine.