* 1523943
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Christopher Emerling, Emerling                Christopher    A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2018
* USD 141,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Christopher A. Emerling is "The genetics of extreme adaptations in
anteaters, armadillos, sloths and other mammals". The host institution for this
fellowship is University of California, Berkeley, and the sponsoring scientist
is Dr. Michael W. Nachman.

Anteaters, armadillos and sloths (xenarthrans) represent a group of mammals that
evolved from a common ancestor 65 million years ago in South America. The group
as a whole is characterized by a variety of extreme features, including a major
reduction in dentition, an inability to discern colors and see in bright light,
and an incredibly low metabolism. Individually the three subgroups have bizarre
adaptations as well, such as strict ant- and termite-eating in anteaters and
upside-down locomotion in tree sloths. While together these and other traits
demonstrate the strangeness of xenarthrans, many of these features have
independently evolved in various groups of mammals. The presence of such extreme
traits in different mammals provides the opportunity to test for the genetic
basis of the evolution of anatomical and physiological features. This research
involves sequencing the genomes of eight xenarthrans and making comparisons with
published genome sequences from mammals with similar adaptations. In addition to
their value in studies of evolution, armadillos have been valuable in the study
of leprosy and Chagas disease in humans. The xenarthrans as a group may also
serve as model organisms for other health conditions such as those that affect
the teeth (e.g., amelogenesis imperfecta) and vision (e.g., congenital
achromatopsia). This research promises to identify candidate mutations that
illuminate the evolutionary history but may also be used for diagnosis and/or
treatment of these conditions. Training goals include how to sequence and
assemble genomes with cutting edge technology and other career advancement
activities. To broaden participation of groups under-represented in biology, the
Fellow is mentoring students in the UC Berkeley Biology Scholars Program,
particularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds; providing science career
outreach at K-12 schools and community colleges with high enrollment of
underrepresented minorities and low income students; and providing evolution
outreach to the public through blogging
(https://evolutionforskeptics.wordpress.com) and oral presentations.