* 1523406
* Collaborative Research:  Sources of Black Carbon, Methane Sulfonic Acid, and Other Particulate Constituents over 45 Years in the Arctic
* GEO,AGS
* 01/03/2015,03/31/2015
* Liaquat Husain, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 03/31/2015
* USD 43,292.00

Particles are important in the global climate and black carbon (BC) particles
are disproportionately important because they absorb sunlight directly warming
the atmosphere. Deposition of BC on ice/snow surfaces changes its albedo and
enhances melting. The Arctic receives its BC from much of the northern
hemisphere. Regional BC emissions have dramatically changed over these 45 years.
Therefore, to develop strategies to limit BC and other PM transported to the
Arctic, it is essential to determine the regional particulate mass (PM)
contributions. The changing climate also affects the production of biogenic
sulfate particles that increases the negative radiative forcing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between Clarkson University and
SUNY Albany/ Health &lt;br/&gt;Research, Inc/ NYS Health Department with the
cooperation of the Finnish Meteorological Institute will develop the world's
longest record (45 year time series) of PM compositions of Arctic Haze at a
single location by analyzing archived samples collected at Kevo, Finland. This
work will: (1) determine the concentrations of BC, SO4 (sulfate), methane
sulfonic acid (MSA), and other selected ions, cations and trace elements at Kevo
for 45 continuous years; (2) investigate seasonal effects; (3) use state-of-the-
art statistical methods, and air parcel back trajectories to determine the
contributions of various emission regions and source types to the Arctic region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the following broader impacts. The
resulting long term record of Arctic PM composition variation and its analyses
will improve our understanding of Arctic change over nearly a half century.
Insights into atmospheric transport and chemical transformation can be gleaned
from these data, and identify trends that may extend into the future. The
thoroughly analyzed and quality assured data set will be available to the
scientific community for comparison of long-term BC and sulfate trends in the
Arctic for model evaluations. The other species and data analysis will identify
the PM sources over these 45 years. The relative concentrations of absorbing and
scattering particles will be determined in this critical geographical area.