* 1523880
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015 (PRFB)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Laura Lagomarsino, Lagomarsino             Laura          P
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2018
* USD 230,696.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Laura Lagomarsino is
"Disentangling the abiotic and biotic drivers of rapid plant evolution in the
Andean biodiversity hotspot." The host institutions for this fellowship are the
University of Missouri, St. Louis and the University of Gothenburg (Sweden), and
the sponsoring scientists are Nathan Muchhala and Alexandre Antonelli. This
fellowship is funded jointly with the Office of International Science and
Engineering. Forming international collaborations is not only beneficial to the
young scientist who conducts research at the foreign location, but is also in
the U.S. national interest because that experience in a world-class research
organization exposes the next generation of science leaders to the best the host
country has to offer in terms of state-of-the-art research and the promises of
continuing collaborations that will continue to strengthen U.S. science in the
future.

The Andean mountain chains of South America are home to exceptionally high
levels of biodiversity, including one-sixth of all plant species. The 550
species of Neotropical bellflowers in the genera Centropogon, Burmeistera, and
Siphocampylus represent just a small fraction of this diversity, but are one of
the single largest Andean radiations. Hummingbirds and bats pollinate these
species, which comprise a colorful and conspicuous element of the cloud forest
flora. The herbarium collections at the Missouri Botanical Garden and the
University of Gothenburg are being used to disentangle the relative roles that
recent, dramatic mountain building and shifts between bat and bird pollinators
have played in generating the outstanding diversity of Neotropical bellflowers.
First it is necessary to infer a robust phylogeny, or pattern of evolutionary
relationships. The specific method utilized (Hyb-Seq) is effective even when DNA
quality and concentration are low, allowing herbarium specimens to be the
primary source of genetic information. The extent to which geology has impacted
diversification in the Neotropical bellflowers is then being investigated using
models of Andean uplift, ecological niche modeling, and phylogenetic dating
methods; these results are validated by fossil pollen core data. Finally, macro-
and microevolutionary implications of pollinator shifts are being investigated
using methods from comparative phylogenetics, pollination ecology, and
population genetics. The microevolutionary component of the study couples
extensive diurnal and nocturnal pollination observations with the quantification
of gene flow in a putative case of sympatric speciation mediated by a shift from
bat to hummingbird pollination.

As the research is broadly interdisciplinary, training goals are to integrate
techniques and viewpoints from phylogenetics, geology, pollination ecology, and
population genetics. The Fellow is developing an educational module on
vertebrate pollination suitable for K-12 students to be implemented as part of
Missouri Botanical Garden's summer programming geared toward families.
Additionally, the Fellow is developing and maintaining a website that makes
high-resolution digital images of living and herbarium specimens of Neotropical
bellflowers available to both the general public and researchers with specific
interest in the group; this will be in addition to maintaining the Campanulaceae
Working Group website. This Fellowship involves collaboration of researchers
based in the US, Europe, and Latin America.