* 1523356
* 2D Crystal Semiconductors: Electron Transport and Device Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Debdeep Jena, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 07/31/2016
* USD 129,316.00

The objective of this program is to unravel the science, and realize the
technological potential of 2D crystal semiconductors focused on future
generations of electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
is in the development of the science of controlled crystal growth of a range of
new atomically thin 2D crystals and in the understanding of their physical
properties. The electronic transport properties in 2D crystal semiconductors are
currently not well understood. Yet, coupled with electrostatics, it is the key
to device applications. Thus, this project aims directly at developing a
thorough understanding of the transport properties of electrons in 2D crystal
semiconductors through a combined experimental and modeling approach. The
demonstration of their usage in large area, light, flexible and transparent
high-performance electronic switches will be a transformative
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are through an outreach
program that effectively exploits the excitement and exceptional promise of the
fledgling field, one where newcomers can make significant and lasting
contributions. The proposed project involves several students. The theoretically
oriented students will be involved in the project at the level of simulations of
energy band diagrams and device structures. The experimentally inclined students
will be involved in measurements of 2D crystal semiconductor properties and
analysis. They will work directly with the PostDoctoral scholars, and the PIs by
attending meetings and presenting their work. The project will result in the
training of graduate students in a fascinating problem and its many fundamental
consequences for electronic and optical devices. In additional to expanding the
existing outreach programs that the PIs are orchestrating, two new activities
are proposed with a special focus on the underrepresented groups: 1)
experimental demonstration of nanoscale scanning probe techniques at the
Expanding Your Horizon workshops where young school girls gather for their early
exposure to how science and technology are employed in various careers, and 2)
research projects designed for the women undergraduate students under the Dual
Degree Program at the St. Mary?s College. The dissemination of research results
by publications and presentations at conferences, and its inclusion in courses
taught by the investigators will ensure the outreach of the research proposed to
the widest possible audience.