* 1523316
* CAP: Doctoral Consortium for the 2015 Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2017
* Stephanie Teasley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 03/31/2017
* USD 18,280.00

Using data analytics has revolutionized many academic disciplines, such as
Astrophysics and Biology. In addition, it has changed the commercial world and
critical services like healthcare. The field of education research is also
beginning this change. The Society for Learning Analytics Research (SoLAR) is a
key player in effecting this change. This project will support a Doctoral
Consortium at the SoLAR 2015 conference - the 5th Annual International Learning
Analytics and Knowledge (LAK) Conference, to be held in Poughkeepsie, NY in
March 2015. Participating in the consortium will prepare current doctoral
students from the diverse research backgrounds that make up the
interdisciplinary field of Learning Analytics (LA), including computer science,
information science, psychology, communication, education, artificial
intelligence, and cognitive science. It will also allow them to network with
each other and with professors and practitioners who are currently engaged in
learning analytics research and related work to ensure the continued development
of this community. These activities are critical and timely. The upcoming
generation of LA researchers will play a vital role in realizing the potential
of using data to improve outcomes for elementary, secondary, and post-secondary
students in learning, motivation, and
perseverance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning Analytics is an interdisciplinary
field whose goal is to advance and apply knowledge about learning sciences and
education to improve all aspects of learning. LA methods include data
visualization, data mining, data science, and mixed methods approaches combining
qualitative and quantitative methods (e.g., interviews and back-end, clickstream
data analysis). Capacity building is a central concern within the LA community.
SoLAR has historically addressed these needs, in part, through specialized
workshops held in conjunction with the Society's major conference. The Doctoral
Consortium workshops host PhD students who are grappling with their dissertation
research. This grant provides travel support to US scholars selected through a
competitive application process to participate in this event. They present their
work for feedback both in the context of workshop, where they receive advice
from a panel of expert mentors, and in a poster session in which they interact
with the full conference audience. In addition, their work is published in the
proceedings of the conference.