* 1523577
* UTRGV-UMN PARTNERSHIP FOR FOSTERING INNOVATION by BRIDGING EXCELLENCE in RESEARCH and STUDENT SUCCESS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2023
* Timothy Lodge, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,733,631.00

****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas Rio Grande
Valley (UTRGV) is a new institution resulting from the merger of the University
of Texas Pan American (UTPA) and UT Brownsville (UTB). UTRGV will open its doors
in September 2015 as an emerging research institution with a new medical school.
UTRGV will open with over 30,000 students being 89% Hispanic. The proposed
UTRGV-UMN PREM partnership will provide opportunities to develop research and
education infrastructure. This PREM will directly impact over 140 students (20
M.S. and 120 B.S.) most of whom will be first generation college students from
underrepresented groups. The state of the art proposed research, combined with
the PIs experience in leading successful scholarly enterprises presents an
opportunity to further develop basic knowledge and technology in materials
science while strengthening the STEM workforce by equipping students with the
necessary knowledge, skills and abilities to thrive. The PIs have a strong track
record of working with UG students, and will mentor junior faculty to further
improve student success through research projects. The PREM team will
disseminate acquired knowledge in peer-reviewed journal articles, conference
presentations, and multiple outreach activities to K-12 students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical Summary****&lt;br/&gt;The PREM team will
combine efforts from seven different departments within UTRGV and three from UMN
to promote fundamental understanding and development of technology.
Specifically, the selected subprojects are: (1) Magnetoelectric Effects in
Perovskite Complex Metal Oxides; (2) Nonflammable, Ionic Liquid-Based
Electrolytes for Safer Lithium-ion Batteries; (3) Synthesis of Conjugated
Polymers for Photovoltaics and Electrolyte Gated Transistors; (4) Homeostasis of
Cultured Mammalian Cells in a Nanofiber Environment Development of NFs for bio-
related applications; and (5) Cellular Imaging Using Persistent Luminescent
Spinel Nanoparticles. These projects will: (a) aim in the development of
students with strong analytical skills, creativity/innovation, teamwork,
leadership, and work ethics to become visionaries and entrepreneurs in the
materials science workforce; (b) promote an exchange of faculty and students
between UMN/UTRGV; (c) raise STEM awareness in K-12 students while increasing
awareness of innovation and creative thinking among K-12 teachers; and (d)
improve UTRGV's research, academic, and community infrastructure, to promote
long term growth and sustainability.