* 1523558
* CSR: Small: Scalable Transactional Replication: Theory, Protocols, and Middleware Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Binoy Ravindran, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

With the exponentially increasing popularity of web-based networked
applications, their back-end IT systems must process an ever growing volume of
data and service requests. Obtaining high scalability is challenging when
application workloads generate concurrent accesses on shared data that is
replicated to ensure data survival and service availability in the presence of
failures. The classical transactional technology for solving this problem --
State Machine Replication -- does not scale: regulating the commits of
distributed transactions requires solving consensus, whose leader is a
significant scalability bottleneck. Leaderless consensus protocols unfruitfully
pay the cost of large quorums for providing fast decisions only whenever
possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome these limitations, the project is
developing two complimentary techniques for building scalable consensus
protocols for transactional systems. In the first technique, called the Caesar
approach, consensus decisions are always made in two communication delays, i.e.,
fast decisions, using a scheme based on proposed positions: a transaction
activated on a node, i.e., the transaction's coordinator, is executed on all
nodes at a position proposed by the transaction's coordinator, and after the
execution of any other conflicting transaction that was chosen at a lesser
position. To achieve that, the transaction's coordinator only needs to know that
the proposed position is not rejected by a fast quorum of nodes. However, by
exploiting network delays and clock drift estimates, the positions are adjusted
in a way such that they are never rejected. Thus, the cost of using fast quorums
larger than the ones necessary to solve consensus in order to exploit a fast
decision is amortized by the ability of always deciding in that way. In the
second technique, called the M^2Paxos approach, the order of transactions is
generally decided in only two communication delays by relying on the classical
quorum size that is strictly necessary to solve consensus, i.e., a majority of
nodes. This is achieved by exploiting application's data access locality. In
particular, in case of low contention, M^2Paxos inspects the data to be accessed
by a submitted transaction and determines the node responsible for ordering the
transaction. This allows all transactions accessing the same data to be
implicitly ordered by the same node.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
transitioning Caesar and M^2Paxos into the experimental, open-source HyFlow
transactional middleware system, which enables adoption of the techniques by the
research community at large. Additionally, the project is transitioning the
techniques into Red Hat/JBoss's production transactional middleware, Infinispan,
which enables adoption of the techniques by J2EE developers at large.