* 1523895
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Russell Ligon, Ligon                   Russell        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Russell Ligon is
"The evolution of extremes: A novel use of biodiversity media collections to
evaluate signal diversification in the birds of paradise." The host institution
for this fellowship is Cornell University, and the sponsoring scientists are
Mike Webster and Irby Lovette.

Animals use diverse signals to communicate with one another and many species
rely on multiple, simultaneously displayed signals to convey information during
social interactions. To date, most studies investigating the use of multiple
signals have focused on the current function of different signal types, yet a
comprehensive understanding of the evolution of multiple signals and the
influence of such signals on speciation is largely lacking. The fellowship
research uses an integrative approach relying on a combination of biodiversity
media collections and traditional museum specimens to investigate the selective
pressures favoring multiple signals, how static and plastic signals interact
with one another across evolutionary time-scales, and the evolutionary interplay
among different signal types. Specifically, it investigates the evolution of
color and behavioral signals in birds of paradise (Aves: Paradisaeidae), an
avian group that exhibits extreme diversity in both color-based and behavioral
signals used during courtship displays. In addition to detailed ethological data
collected from biodiversity media located in Cornell University's Macaulay
Library, some data on plumage ornamentation are being collected from museum
specimens located at the American Museum of Natural History. The combination of
data collected from different types of museum specimens informs ancestral-state
reconstructions and provides new insights into the evolution of signal design
and complexity.

Training goals include gaining expertise in photographic and computational
analyses, cutting-edge phylogenetic approaches, ethological quantification
methods, and collections-based research. Educational and public outreach are
being conducted including open-source educational modules for local outreach
groups and available to educators worldwide.