* 1523224
* Collaborative Research: Three Dimensional Landscape Reconstruction For Long Term Land Use Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Wirt Wills, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 170,590.00

Dr. W. H. Wills of the University of New Mexico will lead a collaborative team
of interdisciplinary researchers from several institutions in a two-year study
of the agricultural foundations of the prehistoric complex society that
developed in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, between ca. AD 500 and 1300. Chacoan
society flourished especially during from AD 900 to 1100 when residents of the
high elevation, arid canyon built massive stone buildings (great houses) that
formed the social and ritual center for a network that extended over vast
distances and included trade relations with societies nearly 1500 miles to the
south in Central America. Despite more than a century of inquiry at Chaco, the
economic processes which allowed this development are poorly understood,
particularly the role of food production in supporting labor and construction of
public architecture in an environment that is not currently suitable for
intensive agriculture. Understanding how ancient farmers created and sustained
costly social institutions in marginal environments may offer real insights for
modern efforts to efficiently manage competing demands for limited water or
resources in many parts of the United States and other parts of the world. The
integration of multiple remote sensing methods draws on scientific and
engineering breakthroughs to improve our knowledge about historical changes in
the past.

The project will employ a range of remote sensing technologies for acquiring
highly accurate geospatial data about canyon geomorphology and archaeological
site locations as the basis for reconstructing changing land surfaces through
time. Like most stream systems in desert environments, Chaco has deep deposits
of alluvium that have accumulated over time in response to changes in climate
and other factors. The canyon residents adjusted to these changes by altering
the location of fields and houses, many of which are deeply buried and visible
only in eroded areas or through non-destructive remote sensing technologies such
as ground penetrating radar, airborne LiDAR and 3-D photography. These data will
be coupled with conventional geoarchaeological information obtained by
researchers in the field. The project will use the reconstructed land surfaces
as geospatial platforms for evaluating agricultural productivity models,
settlement patterns, and human modifications (such as water canals) that may
have affected hydrology. The team will identity historical factors that may have
provided stimuli for rapid population growth and social innovation, as well as
conditions that may have fostered problems that could not be solved and led to
the depopulation of the canyon by the 14th century AD.