* 1523661
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jonathan Koch, Koch                    Jonathan       B
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow, and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Jonathan B. Koch is "Invasion biology, population genomics, and
adaptive evolution of spotted wing Drosophila (Drosophila suzukii)." The host
institution is the University of Hawaii at Hilo (UHH), and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Donald Price. The Fellow will also collaborate on his research
and training plan with Dr. Peter Follett of the USDA-ARS Daniel K. Inouye U.S.
Pacific Basin Agricultural Research Center.

Biological invaders are a global problem when they become agricultural pests
with both enormous economic as well as ecological impacts. Within a few
generations of establishment some non-native species have been found to persist
and adapt to novel environments, exhibit increased growth rates, and acquire
behavioral traits that promote their invasion success. Drosophila suzukii (SWD)
is such an invader. It is a world-wide agricultural pest and has also emerged as
a model species to study the evolution of invasiveness. The fellowship research
identifies the evolutionary mechanisms that have enabled SWD to invade and adapt
to the mosaic of ecosystems found in Hawaii. Activities include a survey of SWD
populations throughout the major Hawaiian Islands and genome sequencing.
Elucidating the mechanisms that drive a biological invasion increases
fundamental understanding of the genetic processes that promote the persistence
of immigrant species and may promise approaches to mitigate the invasion.

Training goals include gaining experise in evolutionary biology, population
genomics, and bioinformatics as well as career advancement activities.
Educational outreach includes serving as a role model and mentor to graduate and
undergraduate students and developing a K-6 curriculum addressing basic concepts
in ecology, evolution, and conservation. The curriculum is intended for local
Hawaii schools and freely available through the UHH NSF PRISM website. Public
outreach includes producing a short documentary on the SWD invasion in Hawaii
with GoPro technology, to be available on social media.