* 1523261
* A Max-Planck/Princeton Research Center for Plasma Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Stewart Prager, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

Over 99% of the visible matter in the Universe is a plasma, that is a dilute gas
of ions, electrons, and neutral particles. Despite their ubiquity, many
fundamental and important physical processes which control the dynamics of
plasmas remain poorly understood. In turn, this limits our ability to intepret
diverse phenomena in space such as accretion onto black holes at the centers of
galaxies or the interaction of the solar wind with the upper layers of the
Earth?s atmosphere, and it also impacts our ability to engineer and operate
experiments on Earth such as magnetically confined fusion devices. The Max-
Panck/Princeton Center for Plasma Physics (MPPC) was established as a joint
venture of the Max Planck Society (MPS) in Germany and Princeton University in
order to forge new collaborations between Universities, the national plasma
labs, and international partners in order to tackle some of the most pressing
problems in plasma dynamics. The center fosters interdisciplinary collaboration
between the plasma and astrophysics communities, as well as international
collaboration between these communities in the US, Germany, and elsewhere. It
serves to train the next generation of plasma scientists in experimental
science, computation, and theory, and its international scope provides unique
training for early career scientists, particularly valuable as plasma and fusion
science become increasingly international. Finally, the center provides
opportunities for the public, as well as students and teachers at public
schools, local, and regional institutions to engage in scientific inquiry in
ways that enhance their understanding of science concepts and scientific ways of
thinking through a well established outreach program at the Princeton Plasma
Physics Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MPPC focuses its effort studying four key
topics: magnetic reconnection, acceleration and propagation of non-thermal
particles, the properties of plasma turbulence, and magnetohydrodynamic
processes in astrophysical plasmas such as the magneto-rotational instability.
Uniquely, it leverages international expertise and resources such as
experimental facilities and computational methods to lead new studies in
theoretical, experimental, and computational plasma physics. The US program
concentrates strongly on postdoctoral researchers, who work with senior
researchers supported by existing funds. While the postdoc program is the engine
that drives research in the center, there are a number of ways in which each
participating organization has fused together as a center, for example (1) joint
mentoring of postdocs, (2) exchange visits of senior members, (3) joint
experiments, (4) joint code development and validation, (5) fostering
collaborations across the entire US and German plasma and astrophysics
communities, and (6) annual meetings of the center as a whole, and more frequent
topical workshops for the community. For example, the MPPC will host a summer
school in computational plasma physics at Princeton University within the
current period of funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by NSF's Divisions of Physics and Astronomy (Mathematical &amp; Physicsal
Sciences Directorate), and the Office of International Science and Engineering.