* 1523680
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Ciera Martinez, Martinez                Ciera          C
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Ciera Martinez is "Using comparative genomics to reveal how non-
coding enhancer sequences evolve and maintain function in directing gene
activity." The host institution for this fellowship is the&lt;br/&gt;University
of California, Berkeley and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Michael
Eisen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As it becomes cheaper and quicker to sequence the
genomes of organisms and more sophisticated informatics tools make analysis more
meaningful, some of the more intractable questions about the intricacies of
regulation of genetic mechanisms can be posed and answered. While it is
relatively straight forward to recognize some areas of the genomes as genes with
their easily recognizable syntax of coding for amino acids, the patterning of
non-coding regulatory regions, such as enhancer sequences, is still very much a
mystery. There is much to be learned about evolution of an organism through a
better understanding of these enhancer sequences. Drosophila (fruit flies) are
the model organism of choice for molecular genetic studies such as this. The
fellowship research involves sequencing or retrieving genomes of a hundred
closely related Drosophila species to compare how enhancer sequences are
modified during speciation by studying sequence functionality in early
Drosophila embryo development. With identification of how enhancers change
through time, better annotation of enhancer regions in unexplored genomic
regions can be achieved. Since most genomes are made primarily of non-coding
regions, distinguishing enhancer regions allows better utilization of the ever-
accumulating genomic sequence data from all
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals include acquiring expertise in
bioinformatics and attending several training courses on statistical analysis,
computational science, and population genetics. Educational outreach is focused
on a three-day course on introductory programming and genomics at community
colleges that have over 50 percent minority populations. The course material is
being made freely available online for other instructors and interested
individuals.