* 1523702
* Conference:  Grant Proposal to Support Participation of US Researchers at the Intensification of Resource Recovery Forum 2015
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Robert Sharp, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/29/2016
* USD 30,000.00

1523702&lt;br/&gt;Sharp&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grant Proposal to Support
Participation of US Researchers at the Intensification of Resource Recovery
Forum 2015&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are numerous challenges associated with
the sustainable production of safe water, energy and food and to address these
challenges the water industry has identified wastewater as a viable and
sustainable source for not only quality water, but recoverable energy and
nutrient resources. Recently, it has been understood that wastewater contains
valuable resources such as carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus. Carbon in wastewater
can be recovered to generate energy, while nitrogen and phosphorus recovery can
supplement nutrient demand for agriculture. This conference will establish
actionable roadmaps for the further development, demonstration, and
implementation of technologies that intensify resource recovery at wastewater
treatment plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Conference includes realizing the
full potential of resource recovery at wastewater treatment plants through
active participation of all stakeholders in the development, testing, and
implementation of intensifying technologies. The original paradigm of wastewater
treatment to protect public health and improve environmental quality has begun
to shift, and now includes sustainable energy production and resource recovery.
To support this paradigm shift, the water industry must actively develop,
demonstrate and implement new resource recovery technologies to maximize
benefit, and reduce the cost and unintended environmental consequences of
traditional wastewater treatment technologies. This conference program includes
both a "technology pull" and a "technology push" strategy. Drivers for resource
recovery and energy neutrality include decreased energy demand and carbon
emissions, marketable commodities, and improved efficiency at reduced cost. This
conference will actively engage researchers in the development and demonstration
of technologies aimed at intensifying resource recovery, allowing them to lead
the paradigm shift and create new opportunities for sustainable resource
recovery.