* 1523810
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Theorizing Rural Land Disputes
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2016,09/30/2020
* James Ferguson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 17,420.00

In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, rising food prices prompted key
players in the agribusiness industry to invest in land across the Global South.
Large-scale land investments are often touted for providing local communities
with access to capital, employment opportunities, and higher crop yields.
Research suggests, however, that these investments are often accompanied by
forced evictions, loss of livelihoods, and food insecurity. The link between
large-scale land investments, food security, and peace remains poorly
understood. Understanding this link has the potential to inform U.S. efforts to
promote development and political stability in regions where food security and
broader notions of security are intimately tied. This project contributes toward
such an understanding by examining the local impact of large-scale land
investments in northern Sudan, where Saudi, Egyptian and Emirati investors have
recently acquired large tracts of land to grow food for export. In particular,
it explores the social transformations set in motion by these land deals in
Sudan's agricultural Gezira region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
carried out by Stanford University anthropology doctoral student, Nisrin Elamin
Abdelrahman, under the supervision of Dr. James Ferguson. Through a 12-month
ethnographic study in two Gezira communities, the researcher will closely
examine the role local leaders play in mediating community efforts to reclaim
access to lands leased to foreign investors. She will observe dispute mediations
in and outside of court settings. She will also participate in the day-to-day
activities of small farmers and landless agricultural workers who are
negotiating the opportunities and losses produced by recent changes in land
ownership. Finally, she will trace the development of a campaign led by civil
society organizations aimed at building national awareness around land rights.
Data will be collected using participant observation, interviews, life
histories, dispute mediation observations, and archival research. The findings
can inform policy efforts to better address the context-specific impact of
large-scale land investments on local people's lives. By highlighting how local
leadership is mobilized to prevent conflicts over land and to broaden access to
it, this research will help advance both the study and practice of peace-
building in the wider region. Funding this research also supports the training
of a graduate student.