* 1523842
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Kathryn Turner, Turner                  Kathryn        G
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Kathryn G. Turner is
"Rewinding the blue mustard invasion using herbarium genomics." The host
institution for this fellowship is Colorado State University, and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. John McKay and Ruth Hufbauer.

Biological invasions of non-native plant species present compelling motivation
to understand how human-induced changes in the environment and species
distributions influence ecological and evolutionary processes. Their documented
geographic spread across time makes them ideal for study using historic
collections, allowing better insight to evolutionary change over short time
scales. Applying advanced genomic approaches to historic samples is key to
understanding the processes that allow plants to rapidly establish and adapt to
new environments. Theory predicts that dramatic ecological and evolutionary
changes affect invasive species soon upon arrival in a new habitat. Yet current
research relies on sampling contemporary populations, and therefore reveals
little about the initial stages of invasion. The fellowship research is a study
of the history of an invasive weed by exploiting an untapped historical resource
to observe "snapshots" of the initial stages of invasion and the genetic changes
that occur as a plant species spreads. It involves sampling genetic material
from dried plant specimens collected throughout the course of an invasion, from
herbarium collections across North America, including the New York Botanical
Garden, the University of Kansas, the California Academy of Sciences, the
University of British Columbia, Colorado State University, and perhaps others.
Techniques for ancient DNA originally developed to study long extinct organisms
such as mammoths are being used to study evolution over the course of the 100
year invasion of North America by blue mustard (Chorispora tenella,
Brassicaceae), a widespread and governmentally listed noxious invasive weed.

Training goals include gaining mastery of molecular and genomic techniques and
bioinformatic analyses. Techniques for ancient DNA studies are being learned
through a visit to the lab of Dr. Hernán Burbano at the Max Planck Institute.
Public outreach is to established invasive species communities in North America
as well as a public website to promote communication and increase awareness of
the impact of invasive species and a citizen-science project to collect
occurrence data. Results promise to contribute to a predictive framework for
invasion biology broadly, and the understudied blue mustard invasion
specifically. Predicting the circumstances and starting conditions that make
invasion possible can help target prevention and mitigation efforts.