* 1523287
* Collaborative Research: Risk Management and Control of Dynamic Rate Queues for Healthcare and Transportation Services
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Robert Hampshire, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 219,999.00

This collaborative research project addresses two critical national challenges:
(1) cost reduction in healthcare. and (2) sustainable transportation. Both of
these problems are addressed by leveraging the common modeling framework of
waiting lines or queues that are sensitive to time of day, day of week,
seasonal, or annual effects. In the healthcare domain, a solution to the nursing
home bed planning problem can be developed. This is an important issue due to
the aging baby boomer demographic. Also hospital bed cleaning costs can be
lowered by finding the most effective time to have cleaning staff available.
Drivers looking for parking generate a large amount of pollution and congestion.
Methods, motivated by sustainable transportation and enabled by large data sets,
to reduce the amount of pollution and congestion caused by parking can be
developed. This research also includes the training of graduate students and the
inclusion of underrepresented minorities. The Conference for African American
Researchers in the Mathematical Sciences (CAARMS) came into existence in 1995 to
nurture and promote African American researchers in the mathematical sciences.
Both PIs have given lectures and tutorials at CAARMS to share with the community
of African-American mathematicians and aspiring students some of their latest
research work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops dynamic performance
models and dynamic optimization solution techniques based on a rich class of
time dependent stochastic network models called Markovian service networks. This
modeling and optimization framework captures the stochastic dynamics of the
system that cannot be found in the static, long term, steady state behavior.
Using this framework, solutions to critical challenges in both healthcare and
sustainable transportation can be developed. These solutions address problems
such as emergency room cost stabilization to handle the payments from the costs
of unforeseen medical emergencies. The aging baby boomer demographic is the
impetus for this work on nursing home bed planning. Hospital bed cleaning costs
can be minimized by finding the most effective time to have cleaning staff
available. On the average, 30 percent of the drivers in central business
districts are searching for a parking space. This leads to a dramatic increase
in air pollution and congestion. Using a big data set from a large scale parking
pricing experiment, parking prices can be set to minimize pollution. This
queueing analysis can also be used for a dynamic priority policy for electric
car charging stations.