* 1523719
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jennifer Walsh, Walsh                   Jennifer       L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Jennifer Walsh is
"Combining museum and contemporary data to understand mechanisms of speciation
between two tidal marsh birds." The host institution for this fellowship is
Cornell University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Irby J. Lovette.

Natural hybrid zones offer the opportunity to investigate evolution in action
and the future of biodiversity, while providing insight into the mechanisms
driving reproductive isolation between two interacting species. Comparison of
temporally replicated data, in particular, provides valuable insight into how a
hybrid zone is shifting or expanding in time and space. The fellowship research
uses a temporally replicated approach to evaluate patterns in a hybrid zone
between two tidal marsh endemics, the Saltmarsh and Nelson's sparrow. This
hybrid zone has expanded approximately 160 km in less than a century; however,
pure species boundaries appear to be maintained. Temporal comparisons provide
new insight into the maintenance of genetically and morphologically pure
populations in the face of rapid hybrid zone expansion and is of utmost
importance in the northeastern U.S. to local and regional governmental and non-
governmental groups concerned with conservation, as Saltmarsh and Nelson's
sparrows are both high priority species in this area; the Saltmarsh Sparrow, in
particular, is considered globally vulnerable to extinction. The approach
combines the use of valuable archived biological collections and cutting edge
genomic analyses of extant populations to document the dynamics between Nelson's
and Saltmarsh sparrows over the past 125 years. Specimens come from several
collections, including Cornell University, Delaware Museum of Natural History,
Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology, the University of Connecticut, the
University of Maine, and the Canadian Museum of Nature. Given the vulnerability
of Nelson's and Saltmarsh sparrows to habitat loss and degradation, a better
understanding of temporal dynamics promises to aid the projection of future
outcomes in this area as well as general understanding of hybrid zones.

Training goals inchude gaining expertise in population genomics and in newly
developed approaches to sequencing partial genomes from archived biological
specimens. Educational and public outreach include sharing results of Saltmarsh
and Nelson's sparrow interactions with the Saltmarsh Habitat and Avian Research
Program, a regional, collaborative tidal-marsh bird monitoring and conservation
initiative concerned with management plans for the species, and the very popular
interactive websites of the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, e.g., All About Birds
and All About Bird Biology.