* 1523097
* Aeronomy: The Relationship Between Mass, Luminosity and Radar Scattering Cross-section for Small-mass Meteors and their Effects on the Mesosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Robert Michell, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 03/31/2020
* USD 248,291.00

The scientific objective of the study is to estimate the input of meteoric
material into Earth's upper atmosphere, which is an important process that
affects the ionosphere, thermosphere, mesosphere and atmosphere. Determining the
meteoric mass distribution is critical for characterizing the mass input into
the mesosphere -- including the metal deposition -- which plays a significant
role in the local chemical processes. The meteoric mass is then transported to
the middle atmosphere, where coupling with the lower atmosphere occurs. The
current models for predicting the speed at which this transport occurs are
sensitive to small changes in the total flux of mass from meteors -- which is
largely unknown over the observable mass range. The PIs approach of using both
optical and radar techniques simultaneously will enable an effective cross-
calibration of the two techniques for calculating meteor mass, resulting in a
significantly more accurate estimate of the total meteor mass input.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, simultaneous optical and radar observations
of meteor head echoes are proposed to set constraints on luminosity and
ionization efficiencies, respectively, in order to determine meteoroid mass in
the 100 microgram to 100 milligram range. Current data sets of common-volume
radar and optical observations of meteors from several different radars are be
used to address the science goals. Additional campaigns are proposed at specific
radar sites, in order to improve and enhance the meteoroid mass and flux
estimates based on lessons learned and the limitations of the current data. The
main result expected is the production of mass distribution indexes of meteors
from the sporadic meteor complex. The use of multiple radars will allow
different regions of the sky -- both Southern and Northern -- to be covered and
enable the detection of a large range of masses due to the varying sensitivities
of the radars. There is a lack of knowledge in several important areas in this
whole process and the proposed research will be a valuable tool in solving
several issues, such as the formation of noctilucent and polar stratospheric
clouds and the presence of meteoric dust. As a result of the review process and
careful consideration, this proposal is funded for a period of three years.