* 1523771
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Anna Johnson, Johnson                 Anna           L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Anna L. Johnson is
"Tracking the impact of species introductions and extinctions on ecological
interaction network structure over 100 years in a diverse island ecosystem." The
host institution for this fellowship is the University of Pittsburgh and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Tia-Lynn Ashman.

A key challenge in ecology is to understand how species invasions and
extinctions impact the structure and stability of complex ecological interaction
networks as environmental change occurs. Plant-pollinator interaction networks
provide valuable ecological services and are likely to be particularly
susceptible to species loss. The fellowship research tracks the impact of
species compositional shifts on pollinator-mediated pollen transport networks
using an extensive herbarium collection of the flora of the Hawaiian Islands,
collected by botanist Joseph C. F. Rock from 1909-the early 1920's. The Fellow
is reconstructing historic pollen transport networks from herbarium specimens
and then resampling contemporary flowering plant communities in the same regions
of Hawaii to determine 1) whether network connectivity is lost at a
proportionally slower rate than species in island pollination networks and 2)
whether invasive plant species are nested within the pollination network,
facilitating retention of network connectivity. The resulting data provide
valuable insight into the ways that biological systems respond over long time
periods to perturbations. It also pioneers new methods for pollen transport
network construction and automation of pollen data collection, with broad
applications to future research questions.

Training goals include new sampling and analysis methods and gaining experience
with a novel study system. Extensive community outreach, with the assistance of
experienced science educators, consists of a schoolyard plant-pollinator network
project that engages underserved K-12 students in Pittsburgh, PA in observing,
interacting with and studying what they see in the natural world every day.
Students are encouraged to make connections between their local ecosystems and
faraway tropical ecosystems and conduct their own experiments. In addition, the
research activities pioneer new methods for reconstructing historic pollen
transport networks that can be applied to other herbarium collections. This
project also generates voucher specimens from contemporary sampling and develops
a pollen reference library, all of which will be made publicly available as part
of the herbarium collection after completion of the research.