* 1523307
* Workshop: Using Elevational Treelines to Predict Climate Change Effects on the Future Size and Distribution of Mountain Forests; University of Idaho, August 4-7, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* William Smith, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2016
* USD 17,600.00

Mountains cover a major portion of the Earth's land area (approximately 24%),
house approximately 20% of the world's population, provide critical ecosystem
services to nearly half of the world population, and often form the boundaries
between countries. Most of these mountain ecosystems are covered with tree
forests that are key to important, often critical, services such as water
storage and supply, commercial building and heating products, recreation and
tourism, all of which dictate an important need for understanding their future
sustainability under future global changes. This workshop will bring together
experts from around the globe in an attempt to synthesize the mechanistic causes
of observed forest boundaries. Specifically, emphasis at the meeting will be
placed on ecophysiological adaptations and their linkages to genetic mechanisms.
The meeting will be held at a facility that offers summer experiences to high
school students interested in science but underrepresented in the fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. The workshop will allow
direct access by students attending summer classes at the field station. The
intellectual approach of the meeting will be to generate predictive capabilities
about potential future shifts in the elevational distributions of mountain
forests. The upper and lower treeline boundaries define this distribution
pattern, and future shifts have been projected based on current scenarios of
rising atmospheric carbon dioxide and global warming. Such shifts in the
boundaries and, thus, size of these forests could dramatically alter a host of
ecosystem services, including snowpack accumulation and water supply to
agriculture and municipalities. Moreover, future forest management policies
could benefit significantly from early estimates of the anticipated changes in
the future size and distribution of these mountain forests.

The workshop will bring together global researchers with recognized expertise
for understanding how the abiotic and biotic environment influences
mechanistically the elevation of the lower and upper boundaries (treelines) of
mountain forests and, thus, a method for estimating future changes in the total
breadth of the zonal forest bands found on mountains across the globe. Mountain
forest boundaries have been recognized previously as a bellwether of climate
change impacts on global ecosystems. Yet, little consensus exists regarding the
specific mechanisms driving the elevations currently observed for treelines
across the globe. Conflicting ideas currently exist concerning physiological
constraints, including fundamental metabolic processes such as the
photosynthetic capture versus the metabolic processing of carbon, plus the
abiotic/biotic factors that may be limiting either. Moreover, most of the
evidence for mechanisms driving treeline elevations comes from measurements on
mature trees, rather than the early establishment stages when mortality is often
the highest of all life stages. More specifically forest tree reproduction at
treelines has been a neglected area of focus, including the idea that new
seedling establishment is a critical, bottleneck life stage. Also, workshop
participants will address the idea that carbon processing (sink) instead of
carbon acquisition (source) limitations should be included as a missing, yet
crucial, component for understanding new seedling establishment at treeline. The
ultimate objective will be the formulation of a synthesis manuscript to be
submitted for publication in an internationally-refereed journal with a broad
readership. Another primary objective will be to involve the interaction of as
many external workshop participants as possible via the K-12 program at the
workshop venue (McCall Field Station, Univ Idaho), participating graduate
students and Assistant Professors, and major social media outlets.