* 1523748
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Gavin Leighton, Leighton                Gavin          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Gavin M. Leighton is
"The influence of sociality on the complexity of communication in avian
species". The host institution for this fellowship is Cornell University, and
the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Michael Webster and Dr. Irby
Lovette.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological organisms that live in groups
communicate with other group members; and benefits associated with identifying
predators or identifying foraging resources likely select for new signals in the
communication repertoire of the group. Species that live in groups may therefore
develop a more complex communication system than thosse who do not live in
groups. Similarly, the benefits of unambiguous communication may produce less
acoustically complex signals. To test these predictions about social
communication the fellowship research uses the Macaulay Sound Library at Cornell
University to examine these questions across bird species. The Macaulay library
has over 200,000 sound files from birds, allowing sampling a vast array of
species to determine the complexity of the vocalizations in each species. Data
are being collected from published sources on whether species live as solitary
individuals or whether individuals live in groups for some part of the year or
the entirety of the year. The resulting datasets are being combined to determine
if sociality influences the complexity of communication. This unprecedented
analysis comparing communication and sociality promises to yield insight into
the effects of group living and how individuals signal to one another when they
are part of a group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals are to develop
proficiencies in multiple contemporary techniques including the use of software
that measures and analyzes acoustic components of bird song and comparative
analysis of acoustic data and social variables. Educational outreach includes
training students in computer-programming techniques and analyzing large
biological datasets.