* 1523893
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Michael Harvey, Harvey                  Michael        G
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Michael Harvey is
"Assessing the importance of plumage divergence within species for the evolution
of plumage diversity across birds." The host institution for this fellowship is
the University of Michigan, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Daniel
Rabosky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on connecting variation among
individuals within species to differences across species. Individuals within a
species often differ greatly in genetic make-up (genotype) as well as appearance
(phenotype). Some of these differences are associated with geography such that
individuals from one region are readily distinguishable from those from another
region. It is unclear, however, what the implications of this geographic
variation are over longer evolutionary timescales. Do species with greater
variation tend to produce more species or last longer than species with limited
variation? The fellowship research is assessing whether the pattern and rate of
phenotypic divergence within bird species predicts patterns or rates of
phenotypic diversification across species. Using digital photography and
measurements from computer vision, data on phenotypic variation in birds are
being gathered from museum specimens at the Museum of Zoology at the University
of Michigan and other museums as needed. Estimates are then made of evolutionary
history using genetic data also gathered from collections to model the history
of phenotype evolution both within and across species. These studies reveal what
correlations exist between phenotypic divergence within species and phenotypic
diversification among species and represent one of the first comparative
analysis of phenotypic divergence within and across species at a large scale.
Then it can be determined what types of variation within a species have lasting
impacts on the evolutionary trajectory of its
descendants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals include gaining expertise in
using digital imagery and computer vision to quantify phenotypes. Educational
outreach to undergraduate students involves them in using museum collections,
conducting high-throughput digital photography, training computer vision
algorithms, and learning genetic techniques.