* 1523934
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jennifer Hodge, Hodge                   Jennifer       R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Jennifer Hodge is
"Evolution of color pattern: function and rates of diversification." The host
institution for this fellowship is the University of California, Davis, and the
sponsoring scientist is Prof. Peter Wainwright.

Coral reefs afford an rich environment in which to study biodiversity and the
mechanism and rate of adaptive change and evolution as coral reef organisms
experience environmental change. Coral reefs are endangered in many locations
around the world and better knowledge of their biology and ecology informs
conservation efforts. The fellowship research uses biological collections from
the California Academy of Sciences and the Smithsonian, as well as open-access
collections of digital photographs and geographic range maps to determine how
color pattern has evolved in coral reef butterflyfishes and the primary
ecological functions color patterns may serve. Biological collections provide
the opportunity to obtain fine-scale measurements of the color patterns of the
fish for use in mathematical models to describe the variety of color patterns
observed in butterflyfishes. Results promise to explain how color patterns in
butterflyfish have evolved adaptively in relation to ecological niche and to
what extent color pattern is important in species recognition and mate
selection. Training goals include applying functional morphology as an indicator
of ecological niche, mathematical modeling to simulate biological patterns, and
comparative phylogenetic analyses to test predictions about trait correlation
and rates of trait evolution. Educational outreach includes mentoring
undergraduate students participating in the Ecology and Evolution Graduate
Admissions Pathways program. Educational outreach activities also include guest
lectures and engagement with the community at public science exhibits.