* 1523162
* EXP: Partners in Learning: Building Rapport with a Virtual Peer Tutor
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Amy Ogan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 588,617.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. This project seeks to understand, and capitalize on, how teachers
or tutors build rapport with learners by building technologies that support
rapport. Research will study what rapport with learners looks like, when
students deploy rapport techniques, when and how deploying rapport techniques
(whether by people or automated agents) increases learning, and how rapport
evolves over time. The project will build software that can help measure rapport
between learners and with computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
begin by building a multimodal sensing rapport-detection system , based on
recent advances in computer vision, signal processing, and machine learning
which will automatically recognize audio and visual behaviors during learner
interaction with an intelligent tutoring system. Human-human tutoring
interactions will be used to guide development of the rapport detection system.
Both short term and longitudinal analyses will be conducted using students
working with an AI-based math tutor, focused on their visual behaviors (head
gaze estimation will be used to measure facial action units and gestures like
head nods or shakes, and mutual gaze between humans), verbal behaviors (using
CoreNLP and other software to detect verbal utterances that represent rapport-
related social constructs such as politeness, friendship, etc.), and entrainment
behaviors (synchrony or asynchrony, divergence and convergence). The project
will then design RAPT, the Rapport-Aligned Peer Tutor, which encompasses both
the rapport detection system and an intelligent pedagogical agent that accounts
for the persistent social states of rapport and non-rapport. Mockups/simulations
of the interface will be used to test the designs before the full pedagogical
agent is built. Trials will be conducted in 9-11 grade classrooms working with
an intelligent geometry tutor using a two-iteration design-based research study.