* 1523405
* Lake Sediments as Records of Atmospheric Elemental Carbon, ~1900 to 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Liaquat Husain, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2016
* USD 151,330.00

The primary objective of this project is to determine a detailed history of
atmospheric elemental carbon (EC) concentrations for a site in the Northeastern
US over the last century and compare it to model predictions. EC aerosols play a
key role in regional and global climate forcing because of absorption of solar
radiation and possible cloud formation. EC also impacts the environment and
human health as a major component of fine particulate matter. In the
northeastern United States, sources of EC aerosols have changed dramatically
during the last century, and these changes are reflected in atmospheric
concentrations of EC. However, past data on atmospheric EC is sparse. It is
hypothesized that atmospheric EC can be determined from the EC concentrations in
lake sediments.

Daily aerosol samples will be collected at Whiteface Mt., NY between 2011 and
2014. These filters along with archived filters for 2006-2010 will be analyzed
for EC concentration to provide continuous data from 1978 to 2014. The EC
concentration in sediment cores from three lakes around Whiteface Mt. will also
be determined using freeze-coring techniques. Efforts will also be made to
locate a laminated lake where direct varve (layer) counting can be used to
obtain a highly accurate chronology and fine time resolution, about 5-10 yrs.
These data will allow the quantitative relationship between concentrations in
lake sediments and the atmosphere to be determined. EC concentrations in deeper
sediments are to be used to estimate the pre-industrial age background. The
archived lake cores can also be used for studies of toxic metals such as
mercury, and many other chemical species, such as polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs).

This project will provide educational opportunities for undergraduate students
and post-doctoral researchers. The results of this work will incorporated in
courses in environmental chemistry as well as interdisciplinary research. Public
outreach activities are also planned.