* 1523390
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Alexandria Liang, Liang                   Alexandria     D
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2017
* USD 173,462.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Alexandria Deliz
Liang is "Controlling the function of metal-dependent proteins inside living
cells." This fellowship is jointly funded by NSF's Office of International
Science and Engineering. The postdoctoral fellow will conduct two years of
research abroad at the host institution, the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
in the United Kingdom. The sponsoring scientist for this fellowship is Jason
Chin. The fellowship research seeks to evaluate the role of proteins in living
cells. Proteins provide essential functions within living cells where individual
proteins work together to regulate cellular functions. Traditionally it has only
been possible to isolate and study proteins by reconstituting them in vitro,
which is not their natural state. Because living cells are complex, examining
the function of an individual protein in its natural environment presents
diverse challenges. Almost half of all proteins require metal coordination for
function. However, the ability to evaluate these metal-binding units inside
living cells is limited. New tools are needed to study metal-dependent proteins
(metalloproteins) in living systems. The approach employed here is to develop a
system for temporally controlling metalloprotein function inside living cells by
genetically incorporating unnatural amino acids into metalloproteins beginning
with the iron-containing protein, mitoNEET, in single cells from model
organisms. A plant pathogen (Ralstonia solanacearum), a flowering plant
(Arabidopsis thaliana), and mice from biological collections are being used to
provide mitoNEET genes and cell cultures. These materials are critical for
comparison of NEET proteins from different organisms.

Increasing the set of tools available for evaluating proteins inside living
cells enables more productive use of cell cultures from collections around the
world. The Fellow is pursuing interdisciplinary research that addresses
challenges in bioinorganic chemistry using advanced tools from chemical biology
in one of the foremost molecular biology institutes in the world. This
international research opportunity furthers international collaboration
benefitting both the United States and the host institution. Research abroad
enriches these scientific pursuits, provides immersion in an alternative
educational and research setting, and promises new tools to address
interdisciplinary studies relating to molecular biology.