* 1523120
* FASEB Conference on Mechanisms in Plant Development, Saxton's River, Vermont, August 2 - 7, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Dominique Bergmann, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* philip becraft
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,500.00

This project will promote interactions between biologists who are using
different scientific approaches to show how the major sources of our food, fuel
and shelter -plants- grow and develop. These interactions will take place at the
14th International meeting on Mechanisms in Plant Development, which will be
held from August 2nd-7th, 2015 in Saxton's River, Vermont, USA. This meeting is
the only regular international conference devoted entirely to plant
developmental biology, which is the study of how plants grow and how they are
able to make different structures, such as leaves, fruits and grains, that are
critical to our agricultural economy. It is hoped that discoveries in
developmental biology will help design better crops for food and biofuel
production, as well as reducing the impact of agriculture on the environment.
This particular project is special because of the small size and secluded
location of the meeting, which make it a fantastic opportunity for discussion of
new ideas and emerging concepts. The conference will also promote education of a
diverse group of scientists at all career levels. Graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and young faculty will be strongly encouraged to submit
poster abstracts, and approximately one third of the speakers will be chosen
from these submitted abstracts. Participation by minority and female scientists
will also be strongly encouraged; this will be achieved by identification and
encouragement of individuals, as well as by advertising the conference widely.
The results of the conference will be summarized by meeting participants and
made available to the general public through posting on developmental biology
hubs such as "The Node" and on the organizer's public websites. Materials will
also be provided directly to participants to spread the exciting new findings
presented at the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is an important
and unique scientific meeting where the intersections of plant development,
signaling, modeling and genomics are explored through talks, poster sessions,
and intensive scientific discussion. The meeting includes outstanding
researchers from around the world, presenting cutting edge research directed
towards a fundamental understanding of how different aspects of plant growth and
development are controlled in response to intrinsic and external signals, and
how such mechanisms are modified over evolutionary time. This meeting will cover
broad areas of plant development, including sessions on local and long-range
signals, the interface between cell and developmental biology, new approaches to
modeling development and plants emerging as new models for important
developmental traits. This year, in particular, the meeting organizers have
planned to include more plant/environmental interactions (be they biotic or
abiotic) because new technologies and their life histories make plants
especially well suited to lead the way to understanding the positive and
negative interactions between a complex macroscopic organism and the world
around it.