* 1523459
* "Science Live!" Workshop on the Acquisition of Recursion across Languages; Holland - July, 2015
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Thomas Roeper, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 10/31/2016
* USD 29,681.00

This project will organize a series of workshops that will culminate in a museum
exhibit on children's acquisition of recursion in grammar. The exhibit will be
presented as part of the Science Live! program at the NEMO Science Museum in
Amsterdam in summer 2015, and later will be shared with other museums and
schools in the U.S. and abroad. The goal is to educate museum-goers about
research by having them participate in on-going data collection as well as
demonstrations and learning experiences on the topic of the research.

Recursion is the process of "putting something inside itself," much like Russian
dolls within dolls within dolls. Recursive routines are commonly found in
computer programs and are the basis for learning the number system--creating the
series of n, (n+1), ((n+1) +1), etc. In a generative grammar, it is the
mechanism by which small meaningful units are recombined into an unlimited
variety of larger structures. All languages have the basic form of recursion,
while other forms vary from language to language. For example, few languages
allow recursive possessive phrases the way English does, illustrated by a
3-year-old who said: "You are my Mom's Mom." The recursive process of putting a
possessive inside a possessive could, in principle, continue indefinitely.

Despite its importance, surprisingly little is understood about how and when the
specific recursive structures found in various languages are acquired. The goal
of the proposed exhibit is to use the principles of hands-on, informal learning
to translate the abstract concept of recursion into concrete experiences for
people of many different ages and backgrounds. The experiments which are the
heart of this project provide engaging activities using hands-on apps on an iPad
through which subtle aspects of children's understanding of the meanings and
limits of recursive structures can be explored. The simplicity and flexibility
of the iPad protocol permit the researcher to test a variety of structures
across a wide range of ages, and ask further, at what level of abstraction
learners generalize. Through the exhibit, the investigators will gather
experimental evidence from museum-goers to test their hypotheses; the
demonstrations that follow the actual experiments will engage children and their
caregivers in challenges similar to those given to children around the world by
colleagues in Japan, Canada, the Netherlands, Germany, and among indigenous
peoples in Brazil, and will help them understand this fundamental dimension of
what makes us human. By emphasizing the abstractness of representations required
for all human languages, the project will work to counteract negative
stereotypes about so-called 'primitive' languages, sometimes claimed to lack the
fundamental property of recursion.