* 1523409
* Improving Access to Coordinated Archaeometric Services, Method Development and Post-Analysis Data Validation and Interpretation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Hector Neff, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 249,213.00

The Center for Archaeology, Materials and Applied Spectroscopy (CAMAS) at Idaho
State University provides analytical elemental, isotopic and micro-scale imaging
tools to researchers in the archaeological, paleoenvironmental and geochemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;Since its inception in 2008, the center has completed
analysis for over 400 novel research Projects: these include faculty and student
researchers at ISU, national and international academic research collaborations
and fee-based contract analysis. This award will provide support to upgrade
CAMAS' instrumentation and to make its services available to a wide range of
researchers in archaeology and multiple other areas of research. The data thus
collected, in addition to offering insight into past behaviors have the
potential to address current day environmental issues by providing more precise
characterizations of present day environments and setting these into an extended
chronological framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAMAS has endeavored to position
itself as a regionally-recognized archaeometry laboratory with disciplinary
strengths in provenance analysis, paleoclimatic reconstruction and biomolecular
archaeology. Implicit in this research mission is to make these technologies
available to researchers regardless of their ability to pay for archaeometric
services. CAMAS was envisioned as a user-based facility,meaning that individual
researchers are encouraged to perform the instrumental analyses themselves and
participate in data collection, reduction and interpretation under the mentoring
of CAMAS staff and research personnel. Presently, CAMAS offsets the cost of
subsidized analysis with fee-based contracts from research, governmental and
commercial clientele. This award will increase the opportunities that CAMAS can
provide to researchers, through acquisition of integrative technologies,
initiation of a visiting researcher program and provision of training
opportunities for graduate students to become expert users and interpreters of
generated data. Funding will support analytical work with a broad range of
materials, from archaeological lithics and ceramics, sediments and residues to
bones and teeth, and will bring the expertise of archaeologists, geologists and
forensic scientists to bear on the interpretation of analytical results.
Specifically this award provides funding for equipment upgrade and maintenance
(pXRF and SEM-EDS), acquisition of a compact, high-sensitivity FTIR, tools and
reagents for constructing matrix-matched analytical standards, and a
comprehensive visiting researcher program promoting subsidized analysis,
research design, method development, and post-experiment data validation and
archaeological interpretation.