* 1523458
* SBP 2015 Outreach Efforts to Increase Diversity and Participation of Minorities
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2018
* Donald Adjeroh, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 01/31/2018
* USD 19,836.00

The 2015 Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling, and Prediction (SBP)
conference will be held in Washington DC from March 31- April 3, 2015. The
primary objectives are to provide an international platform for collaborative
and exploratory research for a synergistic advancement of the emerging field of
social computing. Social computing and behavioral modeling lie at the
intersection of various disciplines, from computing and linguistics to the
social sciences, economics and medicine. SBP is a highly interdisciplinary
conference offering a rare and exciting opportunity for behavioral and social
science researchers to come together with computational and computer scientists
and other related disciplines. Through reaching out to students from diverse
backgrounds, the travel grants supported by this award will broaden the base of
interdisciplinary research involving computer science; students from many of
these disciplines are less likely to have other travel support options than
computer scientists. Past travel awards to SBP have been effective in attracting
applicants from groups underrepresented in Computer Science. Through paper and
poster presentations, interdisciplinary tutorials, keynote presentations,
technical challenge problems and cross-fertilization round table sessions
involving researchers and program staff from federal agencies, the conference
aims to offer training, professional development, and community building
opportunities.