* 1523732
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Hannah Owens, Owens                   Hannah         L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Hannah L. Owens is
"Integrative analysis of the tropical diversity gradient from museum collections
of New World swallowtail butterflies." The host institution for this fellowship
is the University of Florida, and the sponsoring scientists are Robert Guralnick
and Akito Kawahara.

One of the most profound patterns in geographical ecology is that biodiversity
is higher in the tropics than in temperate zones. Understanding the
contributions of various hypothesized drivers of species, diversification rates
and, ultimately, observed diversity, makes it possible to predict future
biodiversity in regions undergoing rapid environmental change. Using cutting-
edge methods for collecting new data from existing biological specimens, this
research promises to develop a synthetic understanding of the ecological and
evolutionary processes that lead to the tropical diversity gradient in New World
swallowtail butterflies. Innovative analyses of the tropical diversity gradient
involves incorporating traditionally-hypothesized drivers of the pattern, such
as evolutionary history, lineage age, and diversification rate, with novel
factors such as tropicality of suitable environments, breadth of suitable
environments, and morphological variability. This work is being conducted at the
McGuire Center for Lepidoptera and Biodiversity (MGCL) and Florida Museum of
Natural History (FLMNH) at the University of Florida, which houses one of the
largest and fastest-growing collections of Lepidoptera in the United States, and
also uses the collection of the National Museum of Natural History. This work is
transformative in its use of cutting-edge methods for collecting genetic and
morphological data from museum specimens, and by improving the connection
between specimens and the data derived from them.

Training goals include genomics, digitizing museum specimen information,
teaching, and public outreach to develop as an independent researcher and
educator. Data collected during the course of research is being incorporated
into laboratory activities for upper and lower division college courses, in
order to familiarize students with the vast array of useful information to be
collected from museum specimens. Further, as papillionids are colorful,
charismatic, and easy to observe, they represent an ideal group for developing
public outreach opportunities. In collaboration with the FLMNH?s Center for
Science Learning, public education materials are being developed to explore
distributions of Florida native papillionid butterfly species, especially that
of the endangered Schaus swallowtail.