* 1523369
* Conference: Dissecting Inequality: Difference and Disparity in the 21st Century
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* William Darity, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 36,000.00

This award provides partial support for a conference to be held at Duke
University in 2015. The conference includes a variety of activities to support
the overall theme of "Dissecting Inequality: Difference and Disparity in the
21st Century". Funds from the NSF award will support an innovative plan to have
junior scholars in Economics, Sociology, Psychology, Demography, and related
fields work together plans for future collaborative research under the guidance
of a distinguished group of senior scholars from Economics and Sociology. The
fact of income inequality in the United States is well-documented in existing
work. The goal of the conference is to spur new research on the causes and
consequences of inequality. The conference will promote the progress of science
on this important topic of research. It will also advance the national
prosperity and welfare; better science in this area can contribute in an
important way to policies designed to promote prosperity for all
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research sessions at the conference will
consider the current state of research on inequality and group identity.
Directions considered for future research will rely on a mixed methods approach
that includes both broad-based survey research and field experiments. Four
specific domains will be considered: education, employment, income/wealth, and
health/wellbeing. Attention will be given to the construction of group identity
at both the social and individual levels and how that identity results from and
possibly contributes to the reproduction of inequality.