* 1523648
* An Evaluation of the Timing, Development, and Scale of Anthropogenic Burning in Central California
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kent Lightfoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 215,555.00

Understanding how indigenous people employed management practices to increase
the diversity and productivity of plants and animals is an important issue for
researchers, tribes, and stewards of public land. Human induced or
"anthropogenic" burning was one of the most effective tools indigenous people
used to enhance the vigor and health of plant and animal communities at the
landscape scale. By igniting frequent, low-intensity fires, indigenous groups
were able to create patchworks of biotic communities at different stages of
succession, which in some cases maintained higher than natural levels of
heterogeneity and biodiversity. Archaeology offers the necessary long-term
perspective for examining how people used fire to enhance landscape productivity
at local and regional scales and for evaluating the outcomes of these practices
over many centuries. This project employs an innovative eco-archaeological
approach to address how the landscape burning practices of ancient and historic
hunter-gatherer societies in California may have augmented the yields,
biodiversity, and sustainability of local ecosystems. The research will provide
new information that can be used to improve stewardship of open spaces, enhance
the biodiversity and the vitality of local habitats, mediate the effects of
massive firestorms in the face of global warming, and educate students and
members of the public about traditional land use practices of indigenous people.

The project examines the timing, evolution, and scale of anthropogenic burning
using a methodology that brings together multiple types of evidence to
reconstruct ancient vegetation conditions and to understand how humans used
biological resources and modified landscape biota over the last several thousand
years. To explore these topics, researchers will synthesize new data from the
analysis of microscopic plant remains from soils and archaeological sites;
artifacts, faunal remains, and charred macroscopic plant remains from dated
archaeological contexts; along with previously published data on fire ecology,
paleo-ecology, ethnohistory, vegetation history, and climate. Investigators will
also develop novel ways to integrate cutting-edge genetic research into the
study of long-term management practices through ancient DNA and phylogeographic
research on biotic resources used by humans. Long-term patterns in the cultural
practices of hunter-gatherer groups will be evaluated in two study areas along
the central California coast - Point Reyes National Seashore and Año Nuevo State
Park. Researchers include archaeologists, environmental scientists, and
geneticists from the University of California at Berkeley and Santa Cruz. They
will work in close collaboration with native scholars from the Amah Mutsun
Tribal Band and the Federated Indians of Graton Rancheria, along with land
stewards and archaeologists from the National Park Service and California State
Parks. The project will contribute to the current management of public lands in
California by providing long-term data on historical ecological processes that
will guide stewardship decisions by land managers; deliver relevant information
to tribal partners who are re-instituting traditional management practices as
part of their on-going cultural revitalization efforts; and create and enhance
educational and training opportunities for both students and tribal scholars.