* 1523320
* 2015 Liquid Crystals GRC: Liquid Crystallinity in Soft Matter at and Beyond Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Linda Hirst, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 03/31/2016
* USD 35,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the 2015 Gordon
Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar on " Liquid Crystallinity in
Soft Matter at and Beyond Equilibrium " with support provided by the Condensed
Matter Physics, Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, Biomaterials, Polymers,
and Solid State and Materials Chemistry Programs in the Division of Materials
Research, Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems in
Engineering and the Office of Multidisciplinary Affairs in the Division of
Materials Research. This conference has grown to be the premier US conference on
Liquid Crystals and attracts a broad group of engineers (including chemical
engineers), chemists, physicists, life scientists, materials scientists, and
mathematicians. Liquid crystal science is truly interdisciplinary and spans
research frontiers in transport and interfacial phenomena in soft matter
systems, supramolecular chemistry, condensed matter physics and materials,
colloidal phenomena and microfluidics, biomaterials, as well as computational
methods and theories of anisotropic soft matter. This breadth of topics and
interdisciplinary flavor generates novel, creative solutions to applied problems
as well as bringing deeper insight into fundamental science. A conference of
this type breeds inter- and multi-disciplinary ideas and approaches to complex
and relevant problems. In addition, this conference will be preceded by a Gordon
Research Seminar that provides a unique opportunity for young researchers to
share in the GRC experience and build informal networks with their peers.