* 1523669
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Natasha Bloch, Bloch                   Natasha        I
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2019
* USD 275,727.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Natasha I. Bloch is "Evolution of color vision genes in guppies
(Poecilia reticulata) relative to male color: a window into the genetics of mate
choice." The host institutions for this fellowship are the University College
London (London, UK) and the University of Illinois, and the sponsoring scientist
Prof. Judith Mank and Prof. Rebecca Fuller. The fellowship is funded jointly
with the Office of International Science and Engineering. Forming international
collaborations is not only beneficial to the young scientist who conducts
research at the foreign location but is also in the U.S. national interest
because that experience in a world-class research organization exposes the next
generation of science leaders to the best the host country has to offer in terms
of state-of-the-art research and the promises of continuing collaborations that
will continue to strengthen U.S. science in the future. The spectacular colors
displayed by males during courtship are known to play a role in mate choice by
females. Female visual perception therefore may play a critical role in the
evolution of male colors. In guppies, male color has evolved multiple times
apparently as a trade-off between female preference and predation pressures.
Populations under low-predation regimes have repeatedly and independently
evolved more colorful males, and females with relatively strong preferences for
color. To shed light into the evolutionary relationship between male color and
female preferences, the fellowship research uses an integrative approach to
study variation in opsins, the visual pigments that mediate vision, asking
whether it mirrors the pattern of repeated evolution of male color traits. Next-
generation sequencing is being used to evaluate the total number of opsin genes
and their genomic position to assess variation in opsin sequence and expression
associated with the evolution of colorful populations. To study divergence in
the visual system beyond opsins, genes that are actually being expressed are
being compared in the retina and the brain's optic lobes. Behavioral experiments
are being conducted to determine guppies' sensitivity to color. These last
experiments are aimed at linking initial discoveries at the genetic level to
their ultimate consequences on guppies' vision and behavior. The results of this
research promise a cohesive, integrative and multi-faceted understanding of the
role of opsin variation in this a model system of evolution and mate selection.
Training goals include extensive training in bioinformatics, particularly
applied to the processing and analysis of genomic data, as well as the design
and setup of behavioral experiments to study color vision. Educational outreach
to students through existing programs that serve under-represented groups are
promoting science education and encouraging young students to pursue careers in
science and the participation of minority students in biology.