* 1523283
* 2015 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 05/31/2017
* USD 34,000.00

2015 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers; June 1-5 2015; Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, State College, PA

Penn State's very popular astrostatistics summer school has trained over 635
total participants since its inauguration in 2005. If maintained at a steady
state, this activity will train about 10% of the nation's young astronomers,
providing critical skills to the US scientific workforce. Oriented towards
graduate students and young researchers, participants receive an intense
immersion in statistical methodology taught by highly skilled instructors. The
three-pronged curriculum provides instruction in the underlying principles of
modern statistics, exposure to advanced methodologies useful in astronomy, and
hands-on training in statistical software. Attendees come away with a much
heightened expertise in statistics and its applications to their science, a
better understanding of how to teach this material to others, and a fine
appreciation for the value and meaning of statistics in science. The instructors
have devoted considerable effort to adapting the course material to their
audience, and the curriculum continues to evolve. The formal textbook based on
this curriculum was published in 2012.

Although the dominant mode of observational astronomy in the 20th century
involved an individual observing a few celestial objects to investigate the
properties of well-defined classes of source, during the 21st century, enormous
resources are being poured into telescopes devoted to wide-field astronomy. This
has led to a proliferation of projects that survey large parts of the visible
sky, with even more coming online over the next few years. While the promise is
great, achieving the scientific goals depends critically on extraction of useful
knowledge using statistical inference, and especially the use of advanced
statistical methods. Observational astronomers are thus confronting a wider
range of statistical challenges than ever before, while unfortunately most U.S.
astronomers are not well trained in statistics, learning only elementary
methods, receiving inadequate conceptual foundations in mathematical statistics,
and getting little guidance in advanced applied statistics. Statistics is an
available technology that must be tapped to advance the needs of astronomy and
astrophysics.

The 2015 Summer School in statistical inference for young astronomers will
present concepts and methodologies at an intermediate level, using experienced
instructors and an innovative curriculum. Lectures are accompanied by hands-on
software R tutorials, and training in high performance cluster computing with
applications to astronomical datasets. The Penn State Research Computing &
Cyberinfrastructure Group, and its Institute for CyberScience, are providing
technical manpower and partially supporting the high-performance computing.