* 1523986
* Long Term Human Response to Sea Level Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Naomi Cleghorn, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,948.00

Understanding how human societies respond to large-scale environmental changes
has become a critical issue across multiple scientific disciplines. Archaeology
is well positioned to study the long-term dynamics of these responses. With the
support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Naomi Cleghorn and an
international team of research archaeologists and students will investigate
early human responses to drastic shifts in ecosystems and landscapes, and how
human-environment interactions during glacial-interglacial cycles shaped modern
human behavior. Previous scholarship suggests that human populations may respond
to massive environmental shifts through innovations in technology and food-
acquisition strategies, as well as through societal re-organization. Southern
Africa is a region with some of the oldest evidence for complex technology,
symbolic and artistic traditions, and the first evidence for coastal foraging (a
strategy that has been linked historically to hierarchical social structures).
In this region, it has been proposed that the evidence for these key cognitive
developments (which characterize modern human behavior) correlate with peak cold
and dry periods, and may be adaptive responses that buffer populations by
creating social and subsistence-related safety-nets. However, less is known
about how humans coped with the long phases of environmental instability leading
up to these periods. This project focuses on those periods of prolonged
instability and investigates the related issues of continuity and disruption in
human traditions and adaptations. These issues are of relevance today as modern
societies in both industrialized and developing contexts struggle to adapt to
changing climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Cleghorn and her team are
investigating site use, subsistence strategies, and technological adaptations in
the context of a landscape that, over the past 45,000 years, has fluctuated
between a coastal zone with rich marine resources, and a broad plain with
terrestrial plant and animal resources. Since 2014, excavations at the site of
KEH-1 on the southern coast of South Africa have produced evidence of intensive
site use during periods when the relative location of the coastal zone was
shifting between 5 and 75 km in distance. This occupational sequence provides a
unique opportunity to study responses to large-scale environmental changes that
would have presented human foragers with radically shifting foraging
opportunities and challenges. With support from the National Science Foundation,
Dr. Cleghorn will lead a multidisciplinary team of archaeologists, faunal
specialists, geochronologists, and geoarchaeologists in the analyses of
materials excavated from KEH-1. The integration of the resulting datasets will
contribute to models of human behavioral adaptations to fluctuating resources.
The team will implement and build on new analytical methods while creating
training and collaboration opportunities for junior scientist and students.