* 1523277
* Conference Proposal: The Second International Conference on Bioinspired and Zwitterionic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2015,10/31/2015
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 10/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Washington at Seattle is to support a two-
day conference titled "Conference Proposal: The Second International Conference
on Bioinspired and Zwitterionic Materials" at University of Washington, Seattle,
WA on August 12-14, 2015. This award is cofunded by the Interfacial Processes
and Thermodynamics, and Biomedical Engineering programs, both in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (ENG). This
second international conference on Bioinspired and Zwitterionic Materials will
present new scientific discoveries and developments, and will broadly discuss
potential applications in a wide range of scientific and engineering
applications. The conference will provide the mechanism for the exchange of
ideas, generation of new approaches and technologies and initiation of future
collaborations among the attendees. This international conference is expected to
attract researchers from different countries, and different regions of the
country, and they will have opportunity to interact during this conference, and
this in turn would enhance and improve scientific, engineering and educational
activities in the proposed topics. These interactions are particularly important
for students and postdoctoral fellows. The other broader impact goal of this
proposal is to increase the participation of students and underrepresented
minority students in science and engineering areas. The conference format will
provide students with various opportunities to attend state-of-art lectures by
top scientists and meet with them, communicate and present their results, and
participate in discussions at the conferences, during poster sessions, and
conference breaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Researchers attending this
conference will exchange information on new discoveries related to fundamental
studies and engineering/medical/life science applications of bio- and
zwitterionic materials. The planned sessions include: 1) Bioinspired and
zwitterionic materials - Fundamentals of Molecular Design and Synthesis; 2)
Characterization and Surface Engineering of these Materials; and 3) Applications
of these Materials in Medical Devices and Biosensors, Antifouling and Membrane
Technologies, and Conducting and Energy-related Systems. The main
characteristics of the conference are: (a) researchers working in this area will
exchange information on new discoveries related to fundamental studies and
potential applications; (b) researchers outside zwitterionic materials field
will learn of the unique capabilities of these materials to solve challenging
problems; and c) career and professional development opportunities for students,
postdoctoral scholars and young faculty members.