* 1523588
* PREM: Cal State L.A. &amp; Penn State Partnership for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2024
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 3,499,390.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This is a Partnership for Research and
Education in Materials (PREM) between California State University, Los Angeles
(CSULA), and Penn State University (PSU). Through collaboration between three
CSULA departments (Physics, Chemistry and Biochemistry and Mechanical
Engineering) in two colleges (Natural and Social Sciences and Engineering and
Technology) and the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
for Nanoscale Science at PSU, this PREM is designed to enhance the research and
education of materials sciences and engineering at CSULA, a minority-serving
institution. Its focus is on mentoring, guiding and training undergraduate and
master's students for careers in materials via a comprehensive scientific and
educational program that also facilitates the development of a Master's of
Science Degree in Materials Science and Engineering at CSULA while establishing
a bridge structure for CSULA students to continue on to PhD studies at Penn
State or other leading institutions, or to seek employment in the field after
graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The PREM
integrates three research topics with one educational component as follows. (T1)
Magnetic, Electrical, Thermal and Ferroelectric Properties of the Oxygen-isotope
Substituted Half-doped Manganites seeks to study and develop new interfaces
using isotope substitutions in specific multiferroic materials that present
potentially controllable electric and magnetic properties near room temperature.
Such materials are very promising for the development of low-power spintronic
devices. (T2) Oxygen-evolving Electrocatalysts and Photoelectrocatalysts
Immobilized onto Light-absorbing Perovskite Metal Oxides seeks to develop new
routes to renewable energy sources (hydrogen production) by extracting the
catalytic cluster that allows the process of water splitting in plants and
stabilize it onto perovskite substrates using synthetic methods. (T3)
Development of Catalytic Nanopumps Utilizing Carbon Nanotubes and Layer-by-Layer
Processing studies catalytic, non-mechanical, nanopumps able to function without
a power source and deliver controllable microscale flows that respond to
specific stimuli. This project utilizes catalytic enzymes attached to vertically
aligned carbon nanotubes and fabricated using layer-by-layer techniques. The
educational, long-lasting, impact of this PREM is reflected in the development
of curriculum and the implementation of a higher degree in the field of
materials science and engineering though (T4) Development of CSULA's Master of
Science Degree in Materials Science and Engineering and Educational Plan for the
PREM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A central theme in all PREM activities is the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented minorities in sciences and
technology. These activities are critical to the vision and strategic planning
of CSULA and its service to the community, given its location in the Los Angeles
area, its ever-increasing role in the education of underrepresented students,
and the expanding and evolving field of materials science. A summer research
experience for talented high schools students is also offered in collaboration
with four local minority high schools (Roosevelt, Garfield, Lincoln and Wilson)
with &gt;95% Latino enrollment.