* 1523980
* Reputations in Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Boyan Jovanovic, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 271,985.00

This award fund research that develops new theories about the possible
relationship between firms? investment in reputation and macroeconomic outcomes.
We have long known that businesses are willing to invest in building strong
reputations. A reputable business can charge higher prices, it will have more
clients and a higher demand for its products. This study will analyze how
investment in reputation responds to aggregate and sectoral shocks, and how it
generates business cycles even when shocks are not present. The overall goal is
to understand how unexpected new information (so called news shocks) affect
investment, prices, output, and consumption when firms care about the reputation
of their products and/or services. Because the project has implications for
corporate tax policy, besides advancing the progress of science it may also
enhance national prosperity.

The model takes previous work on firm reputation for unobservable quality and
expands it to a general equilibrium setting with aggregate shocks and asset
trading. The goal is to offer new explanations of macroeconomic outcomes. News
shocks raise output and asset prices. New products are more subject to
reputation concerns given that their quality is more uncertain at early stages
of development; assuming that the durables sector features a faster flow of new
products, this sector is a leading indicator. Idiosyncratic volatility and
aggregate volatility move in opposite directions. Multiple equilibria arise
because production has a pecuniary external effect that works through the
discount factor. Although the model has no direct externalities, some equilibria
are cyclical even if there are no shocks.