* 1523606
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Robert Kambic, Kambic                  Robert         E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Robert E. Kambic is
"How the avian neck got its twist: linking joint mobility and mechanics in an
evolutionary context." The host institution for this fellowship is Harvard
University, and the sponsoring scientists are Stephanie E. Pierce and Andrew A.
Biewener.

Vertebrate joints are a result of complex interactions among tissues such as
bone, ligament, and muscle. Current understanding of how these interactions
result in the morphology and mobility observed at a joint is quite limited,
particularly in non-humans. The vertebral column provides a compelling system to
investigate joint function since it is under-studied and common to all
vertebrates and has undergone significant evolution in anatomy and function. The
avian neck is a fascinating example of the adaptable vertebral column given the
innate ability of birds to twist their necks into a variety of unusual poses.
The interdisciplinary research proposed here combines techniques from biology
and paleontology to examine the evolution of this flexible neck by determining
how soft tissues (muscle, ligament) and hard tissues (bone) contribute to neck
joint mobility and how the mobile neck of birds evolved from non-avian theropod
dinosaurs to birds. The paleontological and ornithological collections at the
Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard are the source of data for the study and
in turn will be enhanced with additional specimens and data generated during the
research. Further, results promise to provide significant insights into the
evolution of a complex musculoskeletal system with a focus on the roles of hard
and soft tissue and the tradeoff between mobility and leverage for muscles
crossing joints. Other outcomes include the timing of evolving novelties and
validation of models of extinct species.

Training objectives for the fellowship include learning to integrate
experimental biological techniques with collections-based paleontological
techniques, learning musculoskeletal computer modeling, and developing
professional and museum skills as career advancement activities. Working with
the Harvard Museum of Natural History, the Fellow aims to enhance science,
technology, engineering, and math teacher professional development, facilitate
public engagement with science, and increase understanding of science through
talks to professional development programs for science teachers, adult classes
open to the public on the evolution of dinosaurs and birds, and shared content
for other museum programs including public outreach days and summer classes for
K-8 students. The Fellow mentors undergraduate and graduate student as well as
delivering a lecture on bird evolution in an upper-level undergraduate
paleontology course.