* 1523781
* Catchment Science: Interactions of Hydrology, Biology and Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Kathleen Weathers, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2016
* USD 58,500.00

Catchments (also known as watersheds) are fundamental landscape units that
contain interpretable physical, chemical, and biological signals in their
plants, soils, drainage waters, and ecosystems. Catchments are responsive to the
local, regional and global environment: the effects of climate variability,
atmospheric deposition, land use shifts, episodic events, and other drivers of
global change can often be detected in catchment water, soils, and plants.
Catchment Science, which is the focus of a June 2015 Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) and associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS, for early career scientists),
is a truly interdisciplinary and international endeavor conducted by (among
others) hydrologists, ecologists, engineers, soil scientists, and
biogeochemists, whose goal is to explore and understand catchment processes and
responses to chronic and episodic signals in order to better anticipate the
future challenges facing water and ecosystem managers. It is critical to improve
understanding of catchments in the face of predictions for serious threats to
water resources in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this upcoming
GRC is to bring together established and developing (early career) experts from
around the world in the field of Catchment Science, from academic institutions,
research institutes, and government agencies, in order to share the results of
cutting-edge research, develop new collaborations, and assess the current and
future state of catchments and catchment science. The Catchment Sciences GRC has
taken place biÂ¬annually since 1991 and continues to represent a unique
opportunity for scientists in this field as there are no other focused
conferences related to this topic. Indeed, while large catchment network
programs such as CUAHSI and the Critical Zone Network have workshops for their
program participants, scientists from those programs find that attendance at the
Catchment Sciences GRC is their opportunity to interact with a broader range of
catchment scientists and to expand their vision beyond focused programs.
Importantly, the GRS provides the opportunity for new catchment scientists to
initiate lifelong collaborations with their peers as well as to network-- and
have substantial interactions with and mentoring from experts in their field.
This kind of networking has been shown to be of crucial importance in advancing
the science and early career scientists.