* 1523875
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Michael Gil, Gil                     Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2018
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Michael Gil is "Effects of prey social context on predator-prey
interactions and community stability in coral reefs." The host institution for
this fellowship is The University of California at Davis, and the sponsoring
scientists include Andy Sih (primary), Marissa Baskett, and Mullica
Jaroensutasinee (Walailak University, Thailand).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a
variety of ecosystems, prey have been shown to rapidly propagate danger
reactions and signals, across species and wide spatial ranges, by incidentally
providing information to one another, e.g., by evading a predator. Prey behavior
that results from this social information may have important consequences for
predator-prey interactions and, ultimately, the structure of the greater
community. In coral reefs, where mixed-species prey fishes consume algae that
drive coral declines, social information shared among prey could influence
global coral reef degradation to alga-dominated states. The fellowship research
uses field experimentation, assisted by computer vision technology, combined
with mathematical simulation modeling to examine the behavioral and ecological
effects of social information in mixed-species reef fish assemblages. This
integrated approach is revealing important insights regarding the role of social
information in the dynamics and function of animal communities, a topic of
general conservation concern that is largely unexplored in most taxa. Further,
it elucidates mechanisms underlying community stability in coral reefs, a topic
that continues to perplex researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals
include emphasis on quantitative methods and the study of animal behavior to
formulate and parameterize a mathematical model for predicting the effects of
social information on predator, prey, and resource dynamics. Public outreach
includes creating micro-narrative films that educate a diverse public audience
of non-scientists on core concepts in ecology/animal behavior and on what
science and a career therein actually entail. These products are to be
distributed through a variety of outlets, including an interactive public
science communication website (co-administered with students) and lectures given
to high schools with large populations of under-represented students. An
international collaboration is being established between UC Davis and Walailak
University (Thailand) whose benefits include ongoing ecological monitoring in
Thailand and informing conservation efforts in socioeconomically invaluable
coral reef ecosystems.