* 1523256
* Conference:  Environmental Nanotechnology: Gordon Research Center and Gordon Research Seminar, June 20-21, 2015, Mount Snow Resort, West Dover, Vermont
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Paul Westerhoff, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 03/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

CBET - 1523256&lt;br/&gt;Westerhoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Conference:
Environmental Nanotechnology: Gordon Research Center and Gordon Research
Seminar, June 20-21, 2015, Mount Snow Resort, West Dover,
Vermont&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2014 assessment by the Presidential Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology of the National Nanotechnology Initiative
determined a critical turning point has been reached in which the industrial and
academic communities must transition toward facilitating commercialization. This
must be done through partnerships between public and private sectors. The Gordon
Research Conference on Environmental Nanotechnology is an ideal venue for this
nucleation and building of such partnerships, as participants include
researchers and practitioners from academia, government, non-profit, and
industrial sectors. The conference brings together academic, government, and
industrial scientists from around the world. The goal of this third Gordon
Research Conference on Environmental Nanotechnology is to address the safe
implementation of nanotechnology in commercial, industrial and environmental
applications. This will be the first year that an associated Graduate Research
Seminar will be held. The Gordon Research Conference will be June 21 - 26, 2015
and the Gordon Research Seminar will be held immediately before the Conference,
June 20 - 21, 2015, they both will take place at the Mount Snow Resort, West
Dover, Vermont. The greater scientific community will derive benefit through the
collaborations and networks resulting from this conference. In addition, this
third meeting will provide support for graduate students and post docs to
present their research, to interact with established researchers, faculty, and
industrial representatives, and to communicate the importance of their research
to a broad audience. The 2015 Environmental Nanotechnology Gordon Research
Seminar will focus on cutting edge methods used to synthesize ENMs to promote
their positive benefits to society while keeping in mind their safe
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique aspects of the conference lies in the
exchange of ideas, analytical methods and experimental approaches that balance
the beneficial aspects of nanotechnology against their potential adverse risk to
the humans and the environment. In this new area of commercialization of nano-
enabled devices and technology, the planned Gordon Research Conference program
will frame the discussion around considerations for safe synthesis,
manufacturing, and disposal of products. Additionally, topics will explore the
newest developments in the use of engineered nanomaterials in the fields of
water, air, and soil treatment, considering the potential for intentional or
unintentional exposure by humans and the ecosystem and pose.