* 1523191
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mapping Community Exposure to Coastal Climate Hazards in the Arctic: A Case Study in Alaska's North Slope
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Robin Leichenko, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2016
* USD 13,590.00

This research investigates community exposure to coastal climate hazards in
Alaska?s North Slope and incorporates community assessment of the potential
effects on loss of land, infrastructure, and other assets. This analysis will
inform response strategies and planning by developing new methods of hazard
assessment that can support community resilience in the North Slope and
potentially serve as a model for advancing assessment and planning in other
rural and urban communities. This research will expand traditional assessments
of financial exposure to also include non-material factors such as values and
priorities of diverse social groups within a community including a diverse set
of stakeholders, ranging from multinational oil companies to individual
subsistence hunters. This study surveys community views of asset importance and
integrates results with a geophysical hazard data model for a coproduced
community exposure map of the North Slope coast. This research will contribute
to understanding the human and social dimensions of climate change impacts,
including how social, economic, political, and cultural factors shape
vulnerabilities and condition response strategies. Methods and findings could
enhance nation-wide efforts in the United States to map community exposure to
coastal climate hazards by demonstrating methods for, and the importance of
systematically incorporating non-market values in exposure
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposed research include
adapting the U.S. Geological Survey's (USGS) coastal vulnerability index (CVI)
to the Arctic context, and integrating results with formal asset databases and a
spatial community landscape value model while working with affected communities
during the process to coproduce exposure maps. Specifically, working with North
Slope Alaskan communities the study will incorporate wind fetch (i.e., the open
water distance over which wind can generate near shore waves, determined by sea
ice extent) into the CVI and get community feedback on the results. In addition
to community input on the CVI maps, coproducing the exposure maps includes the
community assigning values to traditional land use places using existing spatial
datasets and mapping and investigating specific sites threatened by coastal
hazards with the aim to learn why exposed assets threaten the community.