* 1523667
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Ryan Folk, Folk                    Ryan           A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Ryan Folk is "Niche
biology in deep time: new methods for ancestral niche reconstruction applied to
the Saxifragales." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
Florida, and the sponsoring scientists are Robert P. Guralnick, Douglas E.
Soltis, and Pamela S. Soltis.

An ecological niche is the role of a species in an ecological community,
encompassing all of its interactions with other species and its physical
environment. Ecological niche modeling (ENM) uses computer algorithms to model
the ecological requirements of species and has emerged as an indispensible tool
to predict their geographic distributions -- past, present, and future. ENM is
perfectly suited to use the increasingly large and accessible amount of
biological museum specimen data being generated across the world. These data and
new modeling methods promise to provide answers to critical questions at the
interface of ecology and evolutionary biology, such as the degree to which
organisms can shift in ecological niche over time, with implications for their
potential responses to present-day environmental change. The fellowship research
is developing broadly applicable computational packages that utilize biological
collections data and then using these tools to further integrate ENM with
evolutionary history. Further, these computational tools are likely to see
broader use by others to enable integrative research from the level of DNA to
the structure of organisms. As a test case, the research focuses on the plant
lineage Saxifragales, chosen for its particularly remarkable variation in
ecological requirements, from northern tundra to desert, aquatic, and alpine
habitats. This lineage is significant for containing familiar agricultural and
garden plants such as currants, gooseberries, sweetgum, witch hazel, peonies,
and coral bells as well as invasive weeds such as watermilfoil.

Training goals for the Fellow include learning methods in biological informatics
and ecological modeling and developing expertise in the natural history of
saxifrages. The informatics training includes the use of scripting languages to
parse and handle the large datasets now increasingly characteristic of
biological collections research, thus preparing the Fellow for a research career
using biological collections. Educational outreach includes both undergraduate
biology courses and high school teaching.