* 1523098
* INSPIRE: Minimal adaptive and replicating cell
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2015,04/30/2016
* Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE project is co-funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in
the Chemistry Division in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, the Physics of
Living Systems Program in the Physics Division in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Office of Integrative Activities in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
two fundamental characteristics of living systems are their ability to replicate
with precision and adapt to changing environmental conditions. The discovery of
the structure of DNA, the molecule that carries genetic information, provided
only a framework for describing how the genetic code is copied. However,
focusing on DNA in isolation does not provide insights into how the entire
machinery, needed to sustain the viability of the cell, is conveyed from the
mother to the daughter cell. This is accomplished by networks of other protein
molecules that transmit information through chemical reactions both in the
process of replication, cell division, and adaptation. How do theses individual
molecular components interact and function in a system that is capable of
replicating, adapting to changing environment, and operating robustly in noisy
crowded milieu? What is the minimum level of complexity needed for a living cell
to function? What sets the length scale of such a living system in terms of the
molecular constituents? The goal is to develop a quantitative conceptual
framework to answer these questions so that the ability to process signals,
adapt, and replicate with high fidelity can be described using the laws of
physics and chemistry and using a bacterium as a case study. The
interdisciplinary approach to this research involves integrating physics,
chemistry, and information theory concepts, and is expected to provide a
versatile training ground for students and postdoctoral fellows with diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve the major objectives of
the proposed research it is necessary to break new ground by creating new models
and ideas coming from a variety of fields. An integrated approach will be
developed by combining coarse-grained models of enzymatic reactions, ways of
coupling feedback effects due to synthesis of small molecules and proteins, and
accounting for non-equilibrium processes. These ideas will be used to explore
the organization principles for adaptation to environmental fluctuations, cell
size control, and competition between various factors that promote homeostasis.
These new concepts will be used to provide a new framework on how a simple
bacterium is versatile enough to respond to harsh environmental fluctuations
(high salinity or osmolarity) and adapt in a noisy environment. Analyzing such
behavior will require combining control theory and the underlying stochastic
aspects of signal transmission achieved through chemical reaction networks. In
addition, the key question of how cell shape and size (on the order of a micron)
emerge will be explored based on the notion that they use feedback to maintain
proteostasis and keep the concentrations of metabolites in check. The questions
raised here are fundamental and even if answered partially could have far-
reaching implications in our understanding of how living systems function. An
overarching long term goal of these studies is to begin to provide the framework
to eventually design and control macroscopic cell behavior in terms of its
underlying components.