* 1523393
* Mantle Metasomatism and the Origin of Diamonds
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Lawrence Taylor, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,994.00

The amount of water in the mantle of the Earth may exceed that in all the
oceans, lakes, and rivers of the world. The finding of water as hydroxyl (OH) in
mantle minerals in the 90's was highly significant, but these minerals may have
been altered upon ascent from depths to the surface in the kimberlites, also the
host for diamonds. However, a recent discovery of water in the mineral
'ringwoodite' (Mg2SiO4) included in a diamond has demonstrated that water can
reside within minerals deep in the Earth's mantle for a long time. Mineral
inclusions in diamonds are thought to have remained pristine since their
encapsulation hundreds of miles deep in the Earth's mantle, where diamonds are
formed. They are the only samples we have of the &gt;100 mile-deep portions of
the Earth and are the subject of this proposal. In particular, it is the fluids
in the mantle that formed the diamonds, the water-bearing metasomatic fluids,
which can reveal the conditions responsible for formation of diamonds as well as
their inclusions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the proposed
research are several, all associated with understanding the metasomatic,
hydrothermal, carbonatitic system that carries the signatures of the super-
critical fluids that constitute the 'hidden reservoir' of water within the
Earth. The mineral inclusions in diamonds will be chosen from the &gt;100
diamondiferous xenoliths, upon which this team has previously studied and
published. Specifically, the study will focus on the chemistry of diamond
inclusions, particularly their volatile contents and isotope compositions (e.g.,
OH and D/H values in silicates; Cl-F-S in sulfides). This renewal period will
capitalize on this team's ability to effectively polish diamonds, exposing their
numerous mineral inclusions simultaneously on one surface. With
cathodoluminescence imaging of these several inclusions, it will be possible to
sample them for further studies of their relative ages and possibly recreate the
chemistry of the changing metasomatic fluids during the individual diamond's
lifetime of growth, covering perhaps 10's of millions of years.