* 1523821
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Christine Sprunger, Sprunger                Christine      D
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

___________ This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology
for FY 2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden
participation of groups under-represented in science. The title of the research
plan for this fellowship to Christine Sprunger is "Belowground carbon: improving
soil health in low carbon soils." The host institution for this fellowship is
the Earth Institute at Columbia University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Cheryl Palm.

Increases in soil carbon can lead to enhanced soil structure, biological
diversity, and nutrient retention, all of which lead to healthier soils and
increased crop production for agriculture. Soils also store large amounts of
carbon, meaning that agriculture can help mitigate elevated atmospheric carbon
dioxide levels by retaining carbon in the soil. However, the effect of plant
roots, nutrient inputs and soil moisture on soil carbon is not well understood.
Identifying the mechanisms that control soil carbon is especially important in
many agricultural areas, for example, Sub Saharan Africa, where soil carbon
levels are consistently inadequate, leading to soil erosion and food insecurity.
The fellowship research draws on biogeochemistry and social science disciplines
to determine carbon dynamics in small-holder farms in Kenya and Tanzania as the
study system. Specific objectives are to determine the influence of crop
rotations and legume incorporation within maize based systems on root
production, root carbon inputs, and soil carbon pools; measure the influence of
nitrogen fertilizer on plant biomass allocation, root productivity, and soil
carbon pools in tropical soils; and determine the influence of rainfall
variability on soil carbon in agriculture and forest ecosystems differing in
soil fertility.

Training goals include enhancing skills in both biogeochemistry and social
science and the conduct of interdisciplinary and international research. To
broaden participation in biology, the Fellow serves as a mentor and role model
in the Summer Research Program at Columbia University, which specifically
exposes underrepresented college students to graduate level independent research
projects.