* 1523551
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Ana Longo, Longo                   Ana            V
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. This fellowship to Ana V. Longo supports
research on what defines the ability of fungal pathogens to infect multiple
species of amphibians. The host institutions for this fellowship are University
of Maryland (UMD) and the Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute (SCBI), and
the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Karen Lips and Dr. Robert Fleischer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungal diseases are currently recognized as an important
threat to biodiversity and food security. High virulence, long-lived
environmental stages, and opportunistic strategies are characteristics that not
only allow fungal pathogens to counteract host immunity in different species but
also to persist in the environment in the absence of a host. The fellowship
research focuses on two fungi that are involved in global amphibian declines.
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis is a generalist and infects species over three
amphibian taxonomic orders, whereas B. salamandrivorans only infects salamanders
and newts. Three research objectives include: (1) determine the relative
contribution of host phylogeny, ecology, and geographical distribution to host
specificity in Batrachochytrium fungi, (2) perform experimental co-infections to
measure fungal competition, colonization success and disease severity, and (3)
investigate the putative role of Batrachochytrium in enigmatic declines of
Plethodontid salamanders in the United States. By extending beyond single-host
single-pathogen systems, the Fellow aims to elucidate new transmission events
that may have contributed to the recent increase in disease
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals include techniques in
biodiversity informatics, use of natural history collections, landscape
epidemiology, fungal metagenomics, phylogenetic reconstruction, and use of
social media for science communication. The plan to broaden participation
includes the recruitment, training, and mentoring of undergraduate/graduate
students from under-represented groups in science. Considering the demographic
diversity at College Park, MD, where under-represented minorities comprise
&gt;40% of the population, the Fellow will take advantage of available networks
at UMD to identify students interested in disease ecology and conservation.
Additionally, educational outreach to local high school students focuses on
disease ecology and amphibian conservation through talks, local field trips, and
visits to the lab, giving young students a glimpse of how scientists approach
research questions in a university setting.