* 1523488
* EAGER: Contaminant Transport Behavior in and at the Interface of Fine-Grained Sediments; Visualization, Simulation and Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2018
* George Pinder, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2018
* USD 199,973.00

1523488&lt;br/&gt;Pinder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Contaminant
Transport Behavior in and at the Interface of Fine-Grained Sediments;
Visualization, Simulation and Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPA estimates that
there are 235,000 to 355,000 contaminated groundwater sites across the United
States that require remediation. The annual operation and maintenance costs, per
site undergoing remediation, are estimated to range from $610,000 to $770,000.
It is well known that contaminants behave differently in fine grained sediments
and may lead to long term contamination of groundwater used as a source of
drinking water. However, in spite of this high level of concern there is very
little known about the behavior of contaminants that reside in these fine
grained formations. It is therefore critical that the fundamental physical-
chemical mechanisms responsible for contaminant behavior in fine-grained
formations be thoroughly understood. The resulting analysis will elucidate the
mechanisms that govern the long-term tailing phenomena observed in contaminated
groundwater sites. Such contaminant tailing impacts industry financially, not
only because of the direct costs, but also because of their requirement to hold
money in reserve to assure long-term financial support for site remediation. The
general public, government and industry seek to accelerate groundwater
contamination cleanup and this research is designed to help satisfy this need.
Finally, this proposal seeks directly to increase the number of women in
engineering. The vehicle is the Engineering Institute that is one of four STEM
components of the Governor's Institutes of Vermont.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
combination of experimental investigation, modeling and analysis proposed in
this proposal to address a critical environmental need will yield the following
expected outcomes; 1) the transport behavior of dissolved solutes in media
characterized by fine and coarse grained materials separated by a sharp
interface will be revealed both qualitatively and quantitatively as a function
of time using a novel MRI technology, 2) the veracity of current theory to
capture the transport behavior in this system will be evaluated through the
fusion of experimental results and transport modeling, and, 3) the experimental
results in combination with the modeling will be analyzed to uncover the factors
impacting the contaminant-tailing phenomenon which is critical to cost-effective
groundwater remediation. The transformative outcomes will be achieved by; 1)
employing novel MRI technology to reveal the behavior of tracer transport in
porous media, 2) employing mathematical modeling to simulate the behavior
observed in the MRI experiments, and, 3) combining experimental and mathematical
modeling results to analyze the impact of the movement of tracers in fine-
grained media separated from a coarse-grained host by a sharp interface.