* 1523116
* EXP: Learning Parallel Programming Concepts Through an Adaptive Game
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brian Smith, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2019
* USD 581,770.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. This particular project will develop educational games that adapt
to the skill level of the user and will conduct research on using them to teach
concepts from computer programming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern computing is
increasingly handled in a parallel fashion and despite the growing body of work
on how to teach parallel programming, little is understood about the learning of
this subject. This project will shed light on the challenge of learning parallel
programming and gather initial data on ways to scaffold it in college-level
courses. We propose to develop a genre of adaptive learning games in which we
will gather data on how experts and novices address parallel programming
problems and study ways to scaffold learning. Our research will advance
understandings of how people learn concepts associated with parallel
programming, as well as investigating which activities enhance the learning
process in this domain. We will generate content tailored to specific students
through a method entitled procedural content generation. This work will
transform the transition from sequential programming to parallel programming in
undergraduate computer science curricula and advance personalized learning. We
will disseminate our prototype and results via the CSinParallel network, an NSF-
funded national organization that works to introduce concurrent, parallel, and
distributed computing concepts into a greater percentage of computer science
curricula. The research will further our understanding of how students learn
parallel programming concepts and contribute to training a competitive workforce
that is better prepared for today's parallel computing world.