* 1523923
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Sarah Bengston, Bengston                Sarah          E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Sarah E. Bengston is
"The evolutionary history of social parasitism in rock ants (genus:
Temnothorax)." The host institution for this fellowship is University of
Rochester, and the sponsoring scientist is Christian Rabeling. Conflict and
cooperation are foundational traits in many animal societies. The balance
between these two forces takes many forms and often is reflected in the ecology
of an entire species. Social parasitism is one such example and occurs when
members of a social species exploit the resources of another social group or
species, creating complex evolved traits in both the parasite and the exploited
host. In social insects (such as ants and bees), social parasitism may occur
both within and between species, meaning colonies may exploit colonies of the
same species, other species or both. The research addresses the question of how
parasitism arises. As parasitism can drive biodiversity, cost millions of
dollars in agricultural damage annually, result in new vectors for disease
transmission and affect conservation efforts, understanding how parasites arise
and diversify is of fundamental interest to society. The research portion of the
fellowship investigates the first recorded case of social parasitism in the
western U.S. species of brown rock ant (genus: Temnothorax). Specimens from
biological collections at the California Academy of Science, the Smithsonian
Institution and the Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology are the source of
molecular and morphological data for addressing three research objectives:
elucidate the natural history of Temnothorax host/parasite pairs to determine
how widespread is social parasitism, both within and between the species;
reconstruct the evolutionary history of Temnothorax ants to understand how
social parasitism arose; and identify if subsets of the population has become
reproductively isolated, that is, displaying behavioral shifts and other
adaptations resulting from limited gene flow with the rest of the population.
Training goals include learning and mastering new molecular genetic and genomic
techniques, working with curated natural history collections, and career
development activities for a future research career with a focus on evolutionary
genetics, sociobiology, kinship and kin-conflict theory, speciation, and the
evolution of social parasitism. Broader impacts include educational outreach to
undergraduate and graduate students and collaborating to develop a curriculum
for the Biology in a Box program, which serves under-privileged students in 33
school systems in 5 states, to provide hands-on, inquiry based supplemental
material for STEM curricula in K-12 schools.