* 1523561
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Instruction in Undergraduate Mathematics via Primary Historical Sources (TRIUMPHS)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Kathleen Clark, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 494,687.00

Mathematics faculty members and educational researchers are increasingly
recognizing the value of the history of mathematics as a support to student
learning. This collaborative project, involving seven diverse institutions, will
help students learn and develop a deeper interest in, and appreciation and
understanding of, fundamental mathematical concepts and ideas by utilizing
primary sources - original historical writings by mathematicians on topics in
mathematics. Educational materials for students will be developed at all levels
of undergraduate mathematics courses, and will be designed to capture the spark
of discovery and to motivate subsequent lines of inquiry. In particular, the
student projects to be developed will be built around primary source material to
guide students, including pre-service teachers, mathematics majors, and other
STEM discipline majors, to explore the mathematics of the original discovery in
order to develop their own understanding of that discovery. Mathematics faculty
and graduate students from over forty (40) institutions will participate in the
development and testing process, thereby ensuring a large national network of
faculty with expertise on the use of these educational materials. The impacts of
the materials and approaches to implementing them will be investigated in terms
of teaching, student learning, and departmental and institutional change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TRIUMPHS project will employ an integrated training
and development process to create and test approximately fifty (50) student
projects, which will include (1) twenty (20) primary source projects (PSPs)
designed to cover its topic in about the same number of course days as classes
would otherwise and (2) thirty (30) one-day mini-PSPs. In addition to the well-
researched benefits of engaging students in active learning, particular
advantages of this historical approach will involve providing context and
direction for the subject matter. Important goals of the TRIUMPHS project are to
(a) hone students' verbal and deductive skills through studying the work of some
of the greatest minds in history and (b) invigorate undergraduate mathematics
courses by identifying the problems and pioneering solutions that have since
been subsumed into standard curricular topics. Through intensive, research-based
professional development workshops, the TRIUMPHS project will also provide
training in various aspects of developing and implementing PSPs to approximately
seventy (70) faculty and doctoral students. By working collaboratively to
develop PSPs while training faculty across the country in their use, the
investigators will ensure that these educational materials are robustly
adaptable and proactively disseminated to a wide variety of institutional
settings, while simultaneously developing an ongoing professional community of
mathematics faculty interested in teaching with primary sources. An evaluation-
with-research study will provide formative and summative evaluation of the
project, as well as contribute to the general knowledge base of (i) how student
perceptions of the nature of mathematics evolve, (ii) how students' ability to
write mathematical arguments changes over time, and (iii) how to support faculty
in developing and implementing this research-based, active learning approach.