* 1523083
* EXP: Teaching Bias Mitigation through Training Games with Application in Credibility Attribution
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Norah Dunbar, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2017
* USD 549,061.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. This project will develop and study an interactive game entitled
VERITAS for making players aware of their cognitive bias in decision making and
attempting to mitigate its effects. The game focuses on detecting deception and
many of the research participants are from law enforcement.

Heuristics are cognitive shortcuts acquired from existing beliefs and past
experiences. Heuristics and cognitive biases affect virtually every judgment
being made in daily life. Humans often perform no better than chance when
attempting to distinguish truths from deception and tend to be over-confident in
their ability to detect deception. They are rarely aware of their own biases and
are resistant to traditional training efforts aimed at changing decision-making
processes. There are few studies verifying our ability to mitigate cognitive
biases. This project will explore using game-based learning to make people aware
of cognitive biases and reduce their reliance on simple heuristics. The project
asserts that the experiential environment afforded by game-based learning should
be particularly effective at facilitating the introspection necessary for
learners to actively experiment with more systematic decision-making techniques.
It will experimentally test the effectiveness of a game-based training program
targeting law enforcement officials. This research integrates a theory-driven
design using multiple research methods, including observation of behavior during
game play, surveys, interviewing, and experimentation. This project will
contribute to the understanding of how cognitive biases function within the
context of deception detection and will advance understanding of how a game may
be better suited than traditional learning methods at mitigating cognitive
biases. Results will be disseminated through convention exhibitions and journal
publications and the team plans to showcase this game at professional
conferences with game developers, law enforcement officials, and the general
public.