* 1523395
* 2015 Summer Program at Center for Theoretical Underground Physics and Related Areas (CETUP*)/PPC June 15-July 17, 2015 in Lead/Deadwood, SD.
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Akif Baha Balantekin, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 02/29/2016
* USD 12,000.00

This award will provide participant support for early career scientists and
graduate students to participate in the fifth CETUP* (Center for Theoretical
Underground Physics and Related Areas) summer program that is planned to take
place on June 15 - July 17, 2015 in Lead/Deadwood, SD. The main goal of CETUP*
is to bring together people with different expertise to address the most
exciting questions in particle and nuclear physics, astrophysics, geosciences,
and geo-microbiology. This year's program will focus on Dark Matter and Neutrino
Physics, bringing together experts in dark matter, neutrino physics, particle
physics, nuclear physics, astrophysics and cosmology. Scientists invited to
participate in the program will not only provide theoretical support to the
underground science, but they will also examine core questions of the 21st
century including: What is dark matter? How well do we know the neutrino
parameters? How have neutrinos shaped the evolution of the universe? How were
the heavy elements made? What are the fundamental underlying symmetries of the
Universe? Is there a Grand Unified Theory of the Universe? How do supernovae
explode?

The 2015 CETUP* will consist of a 5-week long program. A two-week long session
on Dark Matter physics will be followed by a two-week long program on Neutrino
physics. The IXth International Conference on Interconnections between Particle
Physics and Cosmology (PPC) will be hosted in the time between these two
sessions covering the subjects of dark matter, neutrino physics, and collider
physics from both theoretical end experimental aspects.

Broader Impacts: basic research affects many areas of modern science and
technology. A better understanding of the potential connections between new
fundamental particles will lead to determining their impact on the early
universe. The program will offer a stimulating environment for research
collaborations between diverse groups of scientists and training of young
scientists, including undergraduate and graduate students and underrepresented
groups. Numerous outreach efforts will aim to share the excitement of the
research with K-12, undergraduate and graduate students, teachers and the
general public.