* 1523543
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Thiago Lima, Lima                    Thiago         G
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Thiago Ghirello Aur Lima is "The genetics of reproductive
isolation in a copepod species lacking chromosomes that specify male or female."
The host institution for this fellowship is Scripps Institution of Oceanography-
UCSD, and the sponsoring scientist is Ronald Burton. Studying the process by
which new species are formed (speciation) explains how biological diversity has
developed in nature. Studies of the genetic basis of speciation have focused on
a few model systems, most which have chromosomes that specify male versus female
(such as mammals and fruit flies). These studies have found that these
chromosomes play an important role in the process of speciation, however, a
large number of species in nature do not have such chromosomes, among them are
many plants and reptiles, some fishes, crustaceans, insects and nematodes. By
comparison, studying the process of speciation in species that lack chromosomes
that specify male versus female may reveal novel biological patterns, previously
unobserved in these model systems. The fellowship research uses the copepod
Tigriopus californicus, a small crustacean that lacks male or female specifying
chromosomes, to study the genetic basis of speciation. Different populations of
this copepod are being hybridized in the laboratory, and the genome of the
hybrids surveyed for regions that contribute to hybrid dysfunction. The premise
is that these regions should harbor genes or genomic structures that contribute
to speciation. The different hybrid crosses can be compared to determine if the
same regions of the genome are contributing to hybrid dysfunction, and if
certain chromosomes contribute disproportionately to this process in all
crosses. The interactions within the hybrid's genome can also be assessed, in an
effort to determine if certain parts of the genome play a special role in the
process of speciation when a species does not have chromosomes that specify male
versus female. Results promise to provide general principles of evolutionary
biology, as it will allow for comparative studies between species with different
male versus female determination mechanisms.

Training objectives include broadening knowledge in genetic techniques,
specifically in functional genetics. An educational component focuses on
increasing the interest, knowledge and participation of underrepresented
minorities in science by introducing K-12 students from underserved areas to
current research at Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO), by pairing SIO
researchers with school teachers to create science lesson plans. These
activities help students connect subjects they learn in the classroom with real
world applications of these topics.