* 1523908
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Christopher Schell, Schell                  Christopher    J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2018
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Christopher J. Schell is "Cosmopolitan carnivores: An
investigation of the behavioral, hormonal, and genetic factors underlying coyote
success in urban environments." The host institutions for this fellowship are
Colorado State University and the National Wildlife Research Center, and the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Lisa Angeloni (CSU) and Stewart Breck (NWRC).

Human-dominated landscapes are consistently expanding. Landscape conversion and
fragmentation are particularly salient for carnivores, as they require large
contiguous habitat, have strict dietary needs, and have a low reproductive
output. Nevertheless, various carnivores have adjusted to cope with human-
induced environmental change via dietary, activity, and landscape use changes.
Individual behavioral flexibility is considered integral for carnivore urban
residency, yet no study to date has quantified this flexibility. Hormones and
genetic variation likely underlie this flexibility; however, no endocrine or
genetic data exist. Coyotes are an excellent model system to quantify the
biological consequences of urban residency, as multiple rural and metropolitan
areas have established and documented populations. The fellowship research
assesses the relationships among stress hormones, genetic variation, and
personality traits of coyotes in the Denver, CO and Los Angeles, CA areas,
specifically, how the hormone cortisol (crucial to the biological stress
response) and the dopamine receptor D4 gene (linked to heightened activity,
impulsivity, and novel-seeking behaviors) co-vary with tolerance and boldness of
coyotes from natural to urban habitats. These data are useful for interpreting
the range of behavioral flexibility and other associated biological factors in
urban coyotes.

Career advancement activities include refining teaching skills. The Fellow is
establishing a new scientific outreach program titled "The REAL Wile E. Coyote,"
an educational series to engage K-12 students in Denver and Los Angeles. The
program combines school visits with a congruent blog site to help dispel long-
held fallacies about coyotes in cities and provide students hands-on experience
with wildlife biology. Educational outreach also includes workshops for the
annual Diversity Symposium held at CSU, a two-day conference addressing
diversity issues to increase participation from under-represented groups in
wildlife science. Public outreach includes presenting research findings at town
hall meetings or neighborhood summits in Denver, making the work accessible to
an audience not directly familiar with urban carnivores.