* 1523249
* Oceanographic Instrumentation CY2015
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Timothy Deering, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2016
* USD 26,517.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation for the R/V
Hugh R Sharp, a 146 foot Regional research vessel operated as part of the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V Hugh R Sharp is a state-of-the-art, coastal
research vessel that is owned and operated by the University of Delaware. The
vessel can carry fourteen to twenty scientists on cruises up to eighteen days in
duration, and supports projects from all disciplines of oceanography. The vessel
is a regional asset, serving researchers from many institutions throughout the
mid-Atlantic. The vessel typically operates in the coastal waters from Long
Island, New York, to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, as well as the Delaware and
Chesapeake Bays. Projects occasionally require the vessel to work as far north
as the Gulf of Maine, as far south as Florida, and as far offshore as Bermuda.
In 2014, the R/V Hugh R Sharp completed 193 days at sea. NSF funded projects
accounted for 25% of the total sailing schedule (49 days). In 2015, R/V Hugh R
Sharp is scheduled for 200 days with NSF days accounting for 17% (34 days) of
the total sailing schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation
requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Network
Time Clock $8,736 &lt;br/&gt; UPS Replacement $10,240 &lt;br/&gt; Kongsberg
HiPAP Tracking System $341,924 &lt;br/&gt; Red Box High Capacity Data Storage
$17,781 &lt;br/&gt; $378,681 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review
Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure
support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in
support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually
undergo separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The
acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-
funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.