* 1523463
* PENN-UPR Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Arjun Yodh, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,269,986.00

****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The PENN-UPR PREM will further advance
knowledge in materials science with new research efforts that will lead to the
development of more efficient, cheaper and environmentally friendly electronic
devices for health, environmental, domestic and industrial applications. A
diverse group of faculty researchers from three undergraduate campuses of the
University of Puerto Rico (UPR): Humacao, Cayey and Bayamon, and the University
of Pennsylvania (PENN) Materials Research Science and Engineering Center will
work in multidisciplinary teams with significant participation of HS and
undergraduate students. The program will sustain a successful collaboration
between UPR and PENN that began in 1998 with the NSF CIRE program and has
continued with PREM support since 2004. It will further increase the
participation of minorities, women, and students from disadvantaged backgrounds
(low income families, first generation in college, and from isolated rural
areas) into materials research through a well-orchestrated education effort that
starts with informal community science activities and with the participation of
Middle and HS teachers, identifies and guides talented and motivated HS (and
K-8) students through undergraduate schools focused on PREM research. This
guided experience through a stimulating education, participation in competitive
materials research, training in state-of-the-art research facilities and contact
with role models, will promote high rates of students continuing graduate
studies and joining the science and technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The PENN-
UPR PREM research and education efforts will be centered on two
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs): 1) Multi-functional nanodevices from
optoelectronic materials, and 2) Nanoscale interactions of macromolecules at
soft and hard interfaces. IRG 1 will synthesize, characterize, and manipulate
optoelectronic materials to gain fundamental understanding of transport
mechanisms in these materials for potential device applications. The projects
include the study of new device structure combinations of single-atomic-layer
materials (MoS2, etc.) and nanofibers of electro-active polymers that hold
potential for transformative discoveries in chemical detection and energy
harvesting. IRG 2 will explore nanoscale interactions of macromolecules with
soft and hard interfaces with the long-range goal of assembling nanomaterials
into macroscopic structures with designed properties and functionality. The
study of nanoparticle-protein interactions represents both a fundamental
problem, as well as a research area for which the PENN-UPR team is uniquely
poised to attack in terms of nanoparticle synthesis, protein chemistry,
spectroscopy, and theory. The multidisciplinary research teams of UPR and PENN
faculty will integrate undergraduates and HS students into extended research
experiences that will lead to publishable results. Importantly, faculty will
also integrate their research topics, techniques, and results into laboratory
experiences, courses, and outreach activities. Finally, with support from an
external Evaluator, the effectiveness of the program and the short and long-term
impact on minority undergraduate institutions will be assessed.