* 1523325
* Collaborative Research: Lightning Studies in a Polluted Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Richard Orville, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 569,447.00

The process of electrification of convective clouds involves collisions of large
ice precipitation particles that are growing by collecting supercooled cloud
droplets (graupel) with ice crystals that grow by vapor deposition. The
negatively charged graupel fall and lower whereas the positively charged
crystals ascend with the updraft, thus separating the charges and increasing the
electric field until its breakdown in the form of lightning flashes. The
existence of supercooled cloud droplets and strong updrafts that are required
for the process can be ascribed to both thermodynamic and aerosol properties of
the air mass. Disentangling the dynamic and aerosol effects is a long-standing
question, because the aerosol and thermodynamic properties are often not
independent. This study addresses this challenge with a new combination of
observational tools that are applied to this problem for the first time. The
cloud microstructure is retrieved by the new NPP/VIIRS satellite measurements
that will provide retrieved cloud properties at a resolution of 375 m. Ground-
truth aerosol measurements will be continuously available. The Houston Lightning
Mapping Array (LMA) and the central Oklahoma LMA will provide accurate
3-dimensional mapping of the lightning sources and their polarity. The new
polarimetric radars will provide the evolution of the precipitation in the
clouds. These measurements will be conducted over the Houston area, which has
refineries and other sources of air pollution. Similar clouds in and outside of
the Houston pollution plume will be examined for separating the aerosol from
thermodynamic effects on cloud microstructure, precipitation forming processes
and electrification, including charging polarity. Similar studies will be
conducted in central Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
contribute to the education of several undergraduate and graduate students who
will directly participate in the research, which will include their sharing in
data acquisition and analysis. Included in this study is support for students
who will write theses and dissertations and present their results at seminars
and professional meetings. Research results will be incorporated into courses on
cloud physics and mesoscale phenomena. The research team will continue to
inform, engage, and disseminate information and data to the wider scientific
community through the project website. Access to the LMA real-time lightning
display is provided at no cost to the Houston community and surrounding areas.