* 1523041
* EDU: Deploying and Evaluating Secure Programming Education in the IDE
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2019
* Bei-Tseng Chu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 02/28/2019
* USD 299,788.00

A number of researchers have advocated that secure programming instruction be
integrated across a computing curriculum but there have been relatively few
efforts examining how to successfully do so. The proposed research expands upon
a previous project by focusing on advanced computing students and courses. The
proposed activities include expanding ESIDE tool implementation to support a
broader range of security guidelines and code, providing increased
contextualization of the instructional materials within the tool, and developing
materials and practices for faculty adopting the tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
preliminary research demonstrated that ESIDE can potentially provide greater
awareness and knowledge of secure programming. The primary goal is to
investigate whether ESIDE can increase students' awareness, knowledge, and
practice of secure programming. The project will also examine the incentives,
course structures, and faculty support that enable successful use and learning
with ESIDE within advanced computing courses. Through multiple deployment
studies, the project will gather measures of student attitudes, learning, and
behaviors, as well as course and faculty measures that impact ESIDE
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this research will provide a better
understanding of the integration of secure programming instruction within a
computing curriculum, as well as a deployable tool for faculty to adopt. Through
the deployment of ESIDE in the proposed research, the project will directly
impact students in at least 8 computing courses at different institutions,
including a HBCU. This research will inform the broader community on the
potential for integrated learning of security practices, and the specific tool
design and course practices that facilitate that learning. The resulting tool
and educational materials can then be adopted or expanded by faculty and
educators. The project will disseminate the ESIDE tool by releasing it as an
open source project; publishing at education and security venues; and working
with an author of a popular Java textbook to include the tool in future
editions.