* 1523665
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Nancy Chen, Chen                    Nancy
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Nancy Chen is
"Elucidating the genomic and phenotypic basis of contemporary evolution in
Florida Scrub-Jays." The host institution for this fellowship is the University
of California, Davis, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Graham Coop. Recent
studies have demonstrated evolution on ecological timescales (that is, shorter
than previously thought) in a number of different organisms. Studying
contemporary evolution is the only way to directly test many fundamental
questions in evolutionary biology, such as the persistence of high levels of
genetic variation in the presence of selection. Several theories seeking to
explain this long-standing paradox have been proposed; however, empirical
validations of these predictions are rare in natural populations because they
require a particular type of biological collection: archived DNA samples with
associated phenotypic and fitness measures for several thousand individuals over
multiple generations. Despite increasing interest in measuring evolution in
real-time and increasing availability of suitable datasets, rigorous methods for
inferring natural selection from these types of data are lacking. Needed is the
development of new methods that leverage longitudinal population samples and
pedigree information to test for selection on complex traits at different life-
history stages. This powerful framework for studying contemporary evolution
further increases the insights that can be gained from biological collections.
The fellowship research develops and applies novel analytical methods to study
short-term selection on complex traits in the Florida Scrub-Jay (Aphelocoma
coerulescens), using a unique collection of archived blood and DNA samples at
the Cornell Museum of Vertebrates as well as associated demographic and
ecological data stored at Archbold Biological Station. Application of these
methods to the Florida Scrub-Jays improves our understanding of the importance
of selection in maintaining genetic variation in natural populations. Training
goals include gaining the computational and quantitative skills necessary to
develop and apply novel population genetics and statistical genetics methods.
Broader impacts involve development of open-source software, undergraduate
training in interdisciplinary research, and communication of research findings
to the general public as well as government and conservation agencies. The
Florida Scrub-Jay is one of the rarest birds in North America, and results from
this work promise to inform conservation efforts for this species. Results are
also being disseminated via educational outreach activities and the Cornell Lab
of Ornithology?s communication outlets to increase public understanding of
evolutionary processes operating within populations in ecological time.