* 1523814
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Nowlan Freese, Freese                  Nowlan         H
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2018
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2015. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Nowlan Freese is "Regulation of stress response in salt-
stressed rice through the modulation of alternative splicing by methylation."
The host institution for the fellowship is the University of North Carolina at
Charlotte and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Ann Loraine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fifth of the world's daily calories come from rice.
Changing environmental conditions can impact agricultural production
significantly, and so it is particularly important to understand how rice plants
respond and adapt to stress conditions. This project investigates how rice
genomes respond to salt stress through changes in the DNA that alter the way
gene information is passed on. The process, called "alternative splicing,"
alters parts of genes resulting in differences in gene products. This project
will identify the molecular mechanisms that drive alternative splicing during
salt stress, providing the foundational information for researchers to explore
new frontiers in genomics and for breeders to develop salt tolerant varieties of
rice in the future. The Fellow will be trained in bioinformatics, statistical
data analysis, and methods in plant molecular biology. This project also
provides information and research experience to high school students to
facilitate understanding of basic science concepts in the relevant context of
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In plants, exposure to abiotic
stress triggers genome-wide changes in splicing patterns, enriching for stress-
specific transcript isoforms. However, the mechanism through which stress
pathways regulate splicing remains largely unknown. In rice, salt and other
abiotic stresses alter DNA methylation, an epigenetic modification that can
enhance stress tolerance. Evidence from animal systems suggests that DNA
methylation within genes influences co-transcriptional splicing by defining
intron/exon boundaries. This project will determine if a similar link exists in
plants by investigating the connection between DNA methylation, alternative
splicing, and stress response in salt-stressed rice. The objectives are to
identify salt-induced isoforms that result from splicing in two rice varieties,
investigate the role of methylation and identify specific splice variants. Data
generated from this project will be publicly available at the National Center
for Biotechnology Information's Sequence Read Archive -
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra.