* 1523345
* The Nuts and Bolts of Bioengineered Systems: A Workshop on Standards in Synthetic Biology; Valencia, Spain- March 8-10, 2015
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Julius Lucks, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 01/31/2016
* USD 49,999.00

This award "The Nuts and Bolts of Bioengineered Systems: A workshop on Standards
in Synthetic Biology" will provide funding for 13 US scientists and engineers to
participate in a workshop in March of 2015. Synthetic Biology sits at the
intersection of biology and engineering, where practitioners use engineering
tools and systems approaches to design novel biological systems, including
genetic circuits and whole cells, with which to explore governing principles
behind complex biological processes or to develop new functionalities that can
be exploited. Over the past ten years, the field has started to see foundational
advances in the fundamental understanding of how to engineer biological systems,
and the transition of research into applications that address critical problems
in sustainability, food, energy, water and health is now emerging. Because of
this transition, there is a growing need to address the issues of
standardization in synthetic biology to help facilitate the coordination of
research among laboratories, as well as to transition laboratory research from
the bench to the industrial marketplace. This workshop will address this need by
bringing in a broad array of scientific, technical, industry and policy experts
on standardization both in the US and in Europe to discuss the current state of
standardization and create a prioritized roadmap for research areas that will
critically accelerate standards-driven biological engineering.

The workshop will contribute to the enhancement and improvement of scientific,
engineering and/or educational activities by bringing together a leading group
of European Union researchers and US researchers along with funders and policy
makers from various member countries and their US counterparts. In addition,
this meeting will provide the foundation for international collaborations
between researchers in the US and Europe. The meeting conveners will produce a
report of the meeting that will be distributed to the participants and
sponsoring organizations (NSF and EC) and will be posted for the public on
several synthetic biology organization websites. The workshop's organizers will
ensure that workshop includes attendees from underrepresented groups in science
and technology and attendees who are at early stages of their career.