* 1523836
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Stacy Farina, Farina                  Stacy          C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Stacy C. Farina is
"Virtual fish gills: Modeling flow through microscopic structures of gills from
a variety of oceanic fishes." The host institution for this fellowship is
Harvard University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. George
Lauder.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The gills are some of the most important
structures in fish physiology as the primary site of gas and ion exchange. They
are comprised of long filaments covered with microscopic plates of tissue. These
plates provide a large amount of surface area for exchange of gases and ions
with the environment. They also act as biological "microfluidic devices" by
passively directing water flowing through them. Fishes are incredibly diverse,
particularly in the ocean: from fast-moving fishes that make global migrations,
to deep-sea fishes that spend their lives in complete darkness. There is
substantial variation in the microscopic anatomy of the gills among these
diverse species. The fellowship research investigates variation in gill
structure using specimens from the Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology (MCZ)
and nano-computed tomography (nano-CT) imaging to examine gill morphology of
species from a variety of oceanic habitats. These scans are used to create
three-dimensional virtual models of gills which are then tested using
computational fluid dynamics and finite element analysis simulations. These
simulations predict the effects of gill morphology on hydrodynamics and oxygen
uptake. Specimen data from the MCZ online database, including date, locality,
and depth, are vital for determining parameters for simulations. Understanding
variation in gills provides answers to fundamental questions in fish physiology
and biomechanics, including whether there is trade-off between increased surface
area for respiration and decreased resistance to water pumped across the gills.
Research results are applicable to design of microfluidic devices by
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals include gaining expertise in some
of the most advanced techniques for morphological visualization and computer
modeling, for example, creating and analyzing nano-CT models of anatomy. Broader
impacts include multi-media contributions to the publically-accessible MCZ
online database, such as images, movies of rotating nano-CT scans, and files for
3D printing. Educational outreach includes a new workshop at the Harvard Museum
of Natural History entitled "Life Underwater: The Amazing Adaptations of Fishes
for Aquatic Life," for 6-12th graders, incorporating videos of CT scans of gills
and other structures. Outreach activites are also directed to undergraduate
students and the engineering community.