* 1523621
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Spencer Ingley, Ingley                  Spencer        J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Spencer J. Ingley
is, "Can species capture beneficial traits and expand their ranges through
hybridization?" The host institutions for this fellowship are the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences
(NCMNS) and the sponsoring scientists are Karin Pfennig (UNC) and Bryan Stuart
(NCMNS). Can hybridization facilitate the expansion of a species' niche? The
fellowship research addresses this fundamental question through the use of
historic museum collections and data from behavioral studies. Several lines of
evidence suggest that hybridization with the New Mexican spadefoot toad
facilitated the spread of the Plains spadefoot toad into the American Southwest
via the capture of adaptive developmental traits. Using morphological signatures
of development speed and ancient DNA techniques, the role of hybridization in
developmental evolution, and its implications for range expansion, are being
investigated. Specimens from several museum collections, including NCMNS, Sam
Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History, University of Kansas Biodiversity
Institute and Natural History Museum, Texas Natural History Collections, and the
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, make this research possible and
provide a full range of present and past evolutionary and ecological dynamics.
Training goals include learning new data acquisition and analytic tools,
including ancient DNA extraction and analysis. Career development activities
include science communication to both public and scientific audiences. Broader
impacts fall into two categories. First, a robust plan is being implemented to
increase participation of underrepresented groups in science and outreach to the
public through existing programs, i.e., Darwin Day.