* 1523419
* Investigating "Non-Complexity" As A Mechanism To Resist State Incorporation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Sissel Schroeder, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2017
* USD 68,290.00

Archaeologists have long sought to develop models to explain the rise of the
state from contexts that had once been largely egalitarian. In contrast, the
emergence of societies that are consciously opposed to centralized authority and
were deliberately founded as "anti-state" communities have received relatively
less attention. Dr. Darryl Wilkinson (University of Wisconsin-Madison) will lead
a research team to undertake archaeological fieldwork in southeastern Peru, as
part of a project intended to examine the foundation of a group of prehistoric
societies that appear to have actively rejected the growing hegemony of the
nascent Inca Empire. How and why did such communities seek to differentiate
themselves from their more hierarchical neighbors? And given that they were
eventually incorporated into the Inca State, why did their efforts ultimately
fail? A desire to escape the impositions of centralized government, or to create
an ideal community away from mainstream society, are phenomena encountered in
the modern world no less than in prehistory. Studying the rejection of
civilization (rather than just its rise and fall) will therefore contribute to a
broader understanding of the diversity of political trajectories that human
societies can take.

Dr. Wilkinson, working with local colleagues and a group of undergraduate
students from the United States, will investigate the material culture of a
series of settlements dating to the Andean Late Intermediate Period (c. 1000 -
1400 CE). These communities were established in the Amaybamba cloud forests of
southern Peru, a region that was eventually conquered by the Incas, but which
for a time seems to have offered a refuge for those seeking to evade their
growing empire. Identifying communities that have made a deliberate choice to
reject mainstream political developments normally relies on evidence taken from
oral or written narratives. Such sources are not available for the Late
Intermediate Period however, and so the primary goal of the project will be to
generate empirically-grounded models for the recognition and analysis of anti-
state communities where textual sources are absent. The research team will
therefore carry out excavations and archaeological survey to produce data on
architectural and artifactual remains, so as to permit a reconstruction of the
everyday life of the prehistoric communities in question. Of particular interest
will be the presence or absence of ceramic materials that are known to have had
a role in hierarchical political ceremonies among closely-related communities
living in the nearby highlands. This project will thus facilitate the modeling
of anti-hierarchical communities in terms of their material culture, which can
then be used in the comparative study of such societies on a global basis. Also,
students from the United States working on the project will have an opportunity
to gain research experience in a Latin American context, while also developing
collegial relationships with Peruvian archaeologists.