* 1523639
* Gaining insights into the physiology of neutrophilic, iron-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophs.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Roman Barco, Barco                   Roman          A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Dr. Roman A. Barco is "Gaining insights into the physiology of
autotrophic, iron-oxidizing microorganisms." The host institutions for this
fellowship are Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences (BLOS) and the University
of Southern California (USC). The sponsoring scientists are Dr. David Emerson
(lead sponsor at BLOS) and Dr. Kenneth Nealson (co-sponsor at
USC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phylum Proteobacteria comprises a large and
varied group of bacteria, including many pathogens but also many of benefit to
humans, e.g., nitrogen-fixing bacteria crucial to agriculture. A class within
the Proteobacteria phylum, the Zetaproteobacteria, plays a key role in the
global iron cycle. All the Zetaproteobacteria that have been isolated to date
obtain energy by oxidizing iron. They are both abundant and very active in
marine environments with low concentrations of oxygen and with conditions that
fall between acid and basic pH, known as circumneutral pH (pH 6 to 8). In
addition to oxidizing iron, they also fix carbon, making them primary producers
(autotrophs) in marine habitats associated with high iron content, such as
hydrothermal vents, the oceanic crust and the deep marine subsurface. Yet
despite these important environmental roles, their physiology has not been
elucidated and requires further study. Conveniently, a Zetaproteobacteria
relative has been isolated that does not require iron for its growth and, by
comparison with the wild type, allows for identification of the proteins that
carry out iron oxidation. A group of bacteria from the Gammaproteobacteria
class, Thiomicrospira, obtains energy by oxidizing sulfur. Its genome has been
sequenced, making it possible to compare the physiology of iron and sulfur
oxidizers at the most basic level. Such analysis conducted during this
fellowship promises useful insights into the mechanisms of iron-oxidation across
different classes of the Proteobacteria phylum. Both of these types of bacteria
are potentially useful in a number of biotechnology applications, including
bioremediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals for the fellowship include
acquiring programming skills for bioinformatics, especially for analyzing next-
generation sequencing data and learning techniques in electromicrobiology, the
use of electrodes to enrich and isolate microorganisms. The Fellow serves as a
role model and mentor to undergraduate students at both host institutions and
collaborates with the Center for Dark Energy Biosphere Investigations via the
Community College Connections (CCC) program. The CCC program targets community
colleges in Los Angeles, CA and surrounding areas, to disseminate information
about environmental microbiology and how it links to other scientific fields
such as geology, chemistry, and oceanography.