* 1523869
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Lucy Tran, Tran                    Lucy
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Lucy Tran is
"Investigating the genetic and morphological outcomes of the colonization of new
environments." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
California, Berkeley, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Erica Bree Rosenblum.

Dispersal has important consequences for species on short and long-term
timescales. Over ecological time, the dispersal ability of a species influences
its geographic distribution. Over evolutionary time, differences in the
dispersal ability of species manifest as disparities in the species' diversity.
Therefore, dispersal links factors and processes that typically operate on
opposing timescales. The fellowship research uses historical museum specimens
that were collected across a gradient in time and space in conjunction with
genomic and morphological tools to identify specific changes in phenotype that
are associated with dispersal into new environments. It promises to advance
understanding of the ways in which processes that vary in space and time
influence how species respond to new environments encountered during dispersal.
The study species is the nine-banded armadillo, which is currently undergoing a
northward range expansion. Specimens from the mammal collections of the
Louisiana State University Museum of Natural Science, Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum
of Natural History, Museum of Southwestern Biology, and the Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology at Berkeley are being used in the research.

Training goals include enhancing skills in population genomics to conduct
research at the intersection between micro- and macroevolution and to address
nuanced macroevolutionary questions. Educational outreach is through programs at
UC Berkeley and with the larger community that increase the awareness of STEM
undergraduate programs among underrepresented students. Public outreach is to
stakeholders in the regions where nine-banded armadillos occur and are expanding
their range. Results promise a genomic framework for the management of the nine-
banded armadillo, which is considered a nuisance species in parts of its U.S.
distribution.