* 1523930
* A Global Geography of Internal-Wave Strain and Mixing from WOCE CTD Hydrography
* GEO,OCE
* 11/16/2014,03/31/2017
* Eric Kunze, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2017
* USD 638,417.00

Internal-wave strain and internal-wave-driven turbulent mixing for the global
ocean will be mapped using the WOCE (World Ocean Circulation Experiment)
hydrographic data set of more than 18,000 CTD (Conductivity, Temperature and
Depth) profiles. Diapycnal diffusivities will be estimated using a strain-only
version of a fine-scale parameterization which has been found to agree with the
shear-and-strain version to within a factor of 2. The proposed work represents a
more than 5-fold expansion in coverage. These mixing predictions will be
compared with those from density-overturn analysis being conducted by Luther and
Decloedt (2010) on the same data set. Refinements to the fine-scale
parameterization will be made based on recent advances and
insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project expands on previous work which used
shear and strain from ~3500 Lowered ADCP (Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler)and
CTD profiles. That work found that (i) most of the ocean was characterized by
small diffusivities consistent with direct but sparse microstructure
measurements, and (ii) turbulence was extremely heterogeneous, with hotspots
associated with abrupt topography. Sampling was sufficient to infer global-
average diapycnal velocities as a function of depth and latitude from the
vertical advective-diffusive equation. However, much of the ocean was
undersampled and statistics were inadequate to characterize the meridional
overturning circulation by individual basin. The proposed analysis will provide
a much more comprehensive geography of ocean mixing. Inferences of the
thermohaline circulation basin-by-basin will test if the bulk of the overturning
occurs in the Indian Ocean as inverse budgets suggest. With higher vertical
resolution, finer binning of internal wave strain will be possible. Concerns
that the scaling falls short near strong forcing will be addressed by comparison
with density-overturn analysis of the same data set. It remains to be seen
whether ocean mixing is dominated by weak widespread internal-wave-driven mixing
or very intense hotspots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying and understanding of
ocean mixing remains one of the most vexing problems in physical oceanography.
Its correct parameterization in general circulation models (GCMs) is critical to
correctly reproducing a wide range of features on timescales of months to
millennia, linking it not just to the circulation but also weather prediction,
biogeochemical cycles and longterm climate. As a member of the Climate Processes
Team on Representing Internal-Wave Driven Mixing in Global Ocean Models, the PI
is working closely with numerical modelers to improve sub-grid-scale
parameterizations for internal-wave-driven turbulent mixing in GCMs. As with the
earlier work, the PI will be available to help other researchers with their
implementations of the fine-scale parameterization in other data sets.
Predictions from this work will be publicly available to the community. The PI
will work with outreach resources at APL-U of Washington to better educate the
general public in the roles of waves and mixing in physical oceanography.