* 1523296
* EAGER: A Stochastic Approach for Radiative Forcing Studies Involving Black Carbon Aging/Life Cycle and Mountain Snow
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2017
* Kuo-Nan Liou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

The project will use a stochastic approach based on probabilistic process to
unlock the mystery of multiple internal mixing of uncoated black carbon (BC or
soot) aggregates and coated BC core-shell spherical structures in the
atmosphere, their associated role in cloud and precipitation processes, and the
interaction of BC wet and dry depositions with surface snow layers. The
fundamental principles of aerosol and cloud physics (deterministic process)
cannot be applied to quantifying multiple internal mixing of uncoated/coated BC
in snowflakes since many possibilities exist due to random collision and
coalescence events. The subject has never been addressed in the literature.
However, it is critically important in the understanding of snow albedo
reduction over mountains in connection with the BC deposition from the
atmosphere.

Intellectual Merit: The research and subsequent results will for the first time
provide models and datasets necessary to address a number of unsolved issues
engendering new physical insights about the effects of atmospheric BC (uncoated
aggregates and coated core-shell sphere) on cloud formation and precipitation
processes and the consequence of wet and dry depositions of BC particles in
forms of snowflakes and graupels onto 3-D and intense snow topography.

Broader Impacts: The research efforts will add a new dimension to
parameterization of BC-snow processes in regional and global climate models. The
research will have a significant impact on a broad range of climate and
atmospheric sciences, providing interactive BC-snow parameterization datasets
based on the stochastic principle for reducing uncertainties in the projection
and prediction of surface temperature and water resources over mountainous areas
by means of computer models.