* 1523467
* RCN: DIMACS/Simons Collaboration in Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2015,04/30/2020
* Richard Karp, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Cryptography is one of the most important tools in securing data, communication,
and cyberinfrastructure. Driven by ever-increasing amounts of data and the
associated computational demands, organizations and individuals are outsourcing
storage and computation to "the cloud." As our e-mail, medical, financial, and
other personal information increasingly reside in systems outside of our direct
control and are of increasing value to attackers, the need to simultaneously
guarantee privacy, availability of data, and correctness of computations is
paramount. This digital reality poses complex challenges to cryptography and
requires a paradigm shift in our goals and mode of thinking. This research
coordination network, led by DIMACS and the Simons Institute for the Theory of
Computing, will bring together cryptographers and others to depart from the
traditional goals of cryptography, namely a relatively narrow focus on secure
and authenticated communication, and significantly advance the state of the art
toward systems that are simultaneously highly efficient, highly secure, and
highly functional. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals for this RCN project
include bringing researchers together to facilitate and catalyze our
understanding of: what primitives and performance can be obtained from specific
intractability assumptions; fundamental tradeoffs and impossibility results; and
how best to drive adoption by system designers and implementers of more secure
technologies and practices. The project will start with an intensive Summer 2015
program at the Simons Institute to launch the collaboration and build momentum,
followed by a two-year "special focus" led by DIMACS that will sustain the
project through Summer 2017 and expand it to include more people and more
topics. The project will enable both foundational advances in cryptography and
practical advances in its usability, providing improved security, flexibility,
and efficiency. These advances have the ability to positively impact society by
improving: the robustness of our national cyber infrastructure and cyber-
connected physical infrastructure; the security of commercial applications in
banking, health care, manufacturing, media, and more; and the extent to which
individuals can have control over and confidence in protection of their personal
data. Participants will be diverse across a variety of dimensions, including
women and other under-represented groups; a mix of junior and senior
participants; people from other disciplines and other areas of computer science
beyond cryptography; and both industry and academic participants.