* 1523285
* Student Support at the North American Association for Computational Linguistics Workshop on Computational Methods for Analysis of Narrative
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Anna Feldman, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2016
* USD 6,000.00

The main goal of the CLfL 2015 workshop is to strengthen research in the field
of Natural Language Processing (NLP) by bringing together researchers working on
computational approaches to narrative. Narrative data differ from texts in more
technical expository genres strongly enough that NLP methods might not be
directly applicable. The analysis of narrative poses new, interesting problems.
The readers treat texts as a form of creative expression, and they expect more
than the typical information-seeking tools. For example, a person may be
interested in reading recommendations, analyzing narrative of a certain period
or sub-genre or finding examples of certain narrative devices. The workshop is
held in conjunction with NAACL 2015 conference, in Denver, Colorado. This award
subsidizes travel and accommodation expenses for students actively participating
in the workshop. These travel grants support geographic and other minorities by
giving them an opportunity to exchange ideas, get into contact with key persons
in the field, and gain invaluable feedback from the senior
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop contributes to the maintenance
and development of a research community in computational linguistics for
narrative, with a geographical focus on North America. The workshop strengthens
research in individual, punctual efforts on different aspects of computational
approaches to narrative by bringing together people from both computer science
and humanities. It also fosters collaboration between theoreticians and
practitioners working in academic or industrial settings, across disciplines.