* 1523442
* Origin & Eruptive History of Quaternary Volcanism in Nosy Be and Itasy-Ankaratra, Madagascar
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Elisabeth Widom, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,001.00

Madagascar, the fourth largest island in the world, has experienced a complex
history related to continent assembly and breakup, associated with a prolonged
history of volcanism. Despite growing evidence for young volcanism in
Madagascar, as well as highly active tectonics and associated seismicity, there
has been very limited study of the recent volcanism. Nosy Be, a popular tourist
destination, is considered to be the youngest of the volcanic fields in northern
Madagascar, and is characterized by active geothermal systems and seismic
activity with earthquakes as large as Richter magnitude 6. The Istasy-Ankaratra
region, located in very close proximity to the capital city, Antananarivo, has
been active as recently as 8,500 years ago and has a history of explosive
volcanism, and should therefore be considered a volcanically active and
potentially hazardous area. This study will utilize geochemical techniques to
evaluate the sources and causes of volcanism in these two volcanic regions, and
will establish baseline age data for evaluating the prevalence of recent
volcanism - and likelihood of future volcanism - in these regions.

Fundamental questions still remain about the cause(s) and source(s) of recent
volcanism in Madagascar, as well as the likelihood of future eruptive activity.
Key questions range widely in scope and include: Does the ancient, metasomatized
subcontinental lithospheric mantle contribute significantly as a magma source,
either in situ or as isolated blocks destabilized during events associated with
the assembly and/or subsequent rifting of Gondwana?; What are the relative roles
of Indian MORB mantle versus other potential asthenospheric sources in the
Quaternary volcanism?; and How prevalent is Pleistocene and Holocene volcanism
in Madgascar, and what are the recurrence intervals and potential hazards
associated with this recent volcanism? This project will involve comprehensive
field sampling of mafic lavas and mantle xenoliths, radiometric dating (Ar-Ar
and 14C), and geochemical and isotopic analyses (Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf-Os and U-series
disequilibria) of the youngest Quaternary eruptive products in these volcanic
regions in order to resolve the nature and age of the underlying lithospheric
mantle, to distinguish between lithospheric and asthenospheric mantle sources
contributing to the Quaternary magmatism, and to provide constraints on the
scope and frequency of recent eruptive events.