* 1523450
* AISL Workshop Series: Understanding the Challenges to Achieving Best Practice in Afterschool Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Charles Hutchison, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2016
* USD 49,981.00

Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC), will hold three two-day workshops (in
New Jersey, Kansas, and California) for regional and state-level leaders in
afterschool science education in more than 20 states who have been associated
with the National Partnerships for After School Science (NPASS), Design It! and
Explore It! afterschool science initiatives. The workshops will be designed to
strengthen ties among current and prospective members of the NPASS network and
to identify issues for future research for the after school field at large aimed
at increasing understanding of how afterschool science programs succeed or fail.
Despite the current absence of centralized support to maintain or expand this
network, many of its members continue to offer NPASS and NPASS-like programming
in their states. The workshops will bring together some of the most experienced
leaders in the NPASS network as well as experienced advocates and leaders of
afterschool science from beyond the network. The project builds on 15 years of
prior work conducted by EDC that developed afterschool science and engineering
curricula that was nationally disseminated via the NPASS network and train-the-
trainer workshops. The project will support the overall strategy of the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program to enhance learning in informal
environments through the funding of innovative resources through a variety of
settings. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and
engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and
assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.

The regional workshops will be designed to: (1) enable leaders of the NPASS
network to re-establish ties and renew their understanding of and commitment to
best practices and critical elements of afterschool science; (2) gather
information about common obstacles to implementation of these practices and
about when, where, and why adaptations to these best practices occur, and what
they (the practitioners) believe to be the impact on program quality; and (3)
identify questions for further research. The findings from these workshops will
be broadly disseminated to the field via a report summarizing the proceedings
and findings from the workshop, including a revised NPASS statement of critical
structural and pedagogical elements on practices critical to successful
afterschool science programming.