* 1523374
* EAGER: Models, analytics, and algorithms for data driven applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2015,09/30/2017
* Zhengdao Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 09/30/2017
* USD 180,000.00

Data driven applications are becoming increasingly prevalent as our ability to
collect data continue to increase and the cost continues to decrease. Examples
of such applications include social networks (twitter, facebook, etc.),
bioinformatics (gene regulatory networks, genomic sequence analysis), and
environmental monitoring using wireless sensor networks. As more
data&lt;br/&gt;become available, how to convert data to actionable information
to guide decision is a pending problem that will have many applications. In
addition to being "big", the data and underlying phenomena also exhibit time-
variations which add to the&lt;br/&gt;difficulty of gleaning useful information
from data. To cope with these challenges, this project will develop an flexible
algorithmic framework using Dynamic Bayesian Networks, which can sufficiently
describe the physical reality, and at the &lt;br/&gt;same time are expressive
enough to allow for machine based learning, optimization, inference and
adaptation to dynamical &lt;br/&gt;data. Such a computational framework can
assimilate data continuously, adaptively, and reduce the data to information
in&lt;br/&gt;a format that is logical, intuitive, and amenable to human
interactions.Such features are particularly needed for large-
scale,&lt;br/&gt;data-intensive engineering systems and networks such as
structural health monitoring, surveillance and disease discovery
&lt;br/&gt;using gene regulatory networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will build on existing work on graphical models and explore the
largely open area of learning dynamical graphical models based on measured data.
Algorithms will be developed based on convex optimization formulation for
online&lt;br/&gt;adaptation of the graphical models. Partially known structural
information, and issues with noisy, incomplete, corrupted, &lt;br/&gt;or missing
data will be examined. The proposed research will advance the status of the art
of learning from dynamical data,&lt;br/&gt;and explore the many under-explored
connections between signal processing, and information theory,
statistics,&lt;br/&gt;and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The proposed research will develop generic models and analytical tools for data
based applications. &lt;br/&gt;It will also generate low-complexity algorithms
that can be adapted to a large number of applications such as&lt;br/&gt;wireless
sensor networks, gene-regulatory networks, and genomic sequence analysis. The
research will allow data&lt;br/&gt;that are made available through digital
technologies to be converted to information automatically by
computers,&lt;br/&gt;which can then be understood and acted upon by humans. The
educationalgoal of this proposed project is to efficientl&lt;br/&gt;integrate
research with educational activities and to train both undergraduate and
graduate students in interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;areas to produce next-
generation engineers. Efforts will be made to invite women, underpresented, and
minority undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students to participate in the proposed
research.