* 1523767
* NRI: Learning to Plan for New Robot Manipulation Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Tomas Lozano-Perez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 900,000.00

Robots have great potential societal benefits, especially working with humans in
tasks such as manufacturing, disaster relief and elder care. Robots are however
very difficult to program to perform new tasks: non-programmers can teach
relatively stereotyped action sequences and expert programmers can generate more
elaborate action strategies through long programming and debugging processes.
Part of the difficulty stems from trying to teach the robot at the level of
actions, since the actions to achieve a desired effect depend strongly on
details of the environment. Instead, this project focuses on teaching the robot
models of the environment. The robot can then use these models to plan its
actions automatically. This approach leads to more adaptable behavior. Models
are also easier to extend and re-use than action sequences, thereby reducing the
burden for teaching subsequent tasks. The project involves a thorough
integration of research and education. Graduate and undergraduate students are
involved in all aspects of the research. Furthermore, the research in this
project will become part of an undergraduate subject on robot algorithms at
MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop techniques to teach a robot
to perform long-horizon tasks in complex, uncertain domains, in a way that
equips the robot with knowledge it can re-use and re-combine with previous
knowledge to solve not just the task it was taught, but a broad array of
additional tasks. Furthermore, the robot will be aware of its own knowledge and
lack of knowledge, and will be able to plan to take actions, including
performing experiments and asking humans for further information, to improve its
own knowledge about how to behave in its environment. The project will develop a
set of machine learning tools that will allow humans to, relatively quickly and
straightforwardly, teach the basic ideas of a new domain to the robot, and then
enable to robot to continue to improve its knowledge as it gains experience in
the domain. This project will build on a new hierarchical framework for
integrating robot motion planning, symbolic planning, purposive perception and
decision-theoretic reasoning. The framework, as it stands, supports planning and
execution to achieve pick-and-place tasks in complex domains that may require
moving objects out of the way, using real, noisy, robot perception and
actuation. However, it requires a specification of the domain it is to operate
in. In our existing implementation, the domain description was written by hand,
by experts, through a long period of trial-and-error. The concrete objective of
the project is to develop methods enabling a robot to learn to perform high-
level tasks in new domains by acquiring new domain models through human-provided
examples and advice. These methods will be evaluated in three domains using a
Willow Garage PR2 mobile manipulation robot. The overriding objective will be to
develop methods that apply broadly and can be used to instruct robots to perform
a wide variety of tasks.