* 1523736
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Arian Avalos, Avalos                  Arian
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Ari√°n Avalos is "Genomic analyses of aggression in the honey bee."
The host institution for this fellowship is the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Gene E. Robinson. Honey bees play
a crucial role in agriculture and ecosystems in general and their substantial
loss in recent years is of enormous concern in the U.S. and worldwide. Honey
bees also offer a unique system for describing and understanding the genetic
architecture of complex behavioral traits such as aggression. It is widely
thought that variation in complex behavioral traits is influenced by the effects
of many genes, so identifying specific targets has proven to be difficult. This
study addresses this challenge by taking advantage of qualities inherent to
honey bee (Apis mellifera sp.) populations and identifies the genetic basis for
aggressive behavior using whole genome association methods. Colonies of honey
bees exist in populations with distinct levels of aggression; European derived
populations (EHB) have low levels of aggression and Africanized populations
(AHB) have high levels of aggression. Recently a population of gentle
Africanized bees (gAHB) was discovered in Puerto Rico. These hybrid bees have
low levels of aggression while retaining all other Africanized traits and are
being used to identify and describe novel gene and gene networks involved in the
regulation and expression of aggressive behavior. The fellowship provides
training in population genomics and neuroethology; further training goals
include developing skills in whole genome association and novel gene-specific
analyses methods. The Fellow serves as a role model to other individuals from
under-represented groups by participating in minority-oriented conferences and
organizing symposia that highlight the contributions to biology from under-
represented groups. As a form of personal outreach the Fellow is establishing
working relationships with existing University-sponsored programs such as Upward
Bound to assure participation of high-school minority students.