* 1523857
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Teresa Feo, Feo                     Teresa         J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Teresa Feo is "The
development and evolution of unusual branching patterns in feathers." The host
institution for this fellowship is the Smithsonian Institution National Museum
of Natural History, and the sponsoring scientists are Helen James and Carla
Dove.

Understanding the evolution of complex organisms requires knowledge of their
development, the processes that build adult organisms from single cells each
generation. The evolution of developmental processes has lead to the incredible
morphological diversity seen in nature. The field of evolutionary developmental
biology, referred to as evo-devo, gives biologists new tools and approaches for
exploring both evolution and development. Feathers are a model system in evo-
devo due to their stunning morphological diversity and their accessibility to
experimental manipulation. Theoretical models and experimental investigations
have provided an understanding of basic branching in feathers, whose diversity
plays important roles in flight and mating behavior. However the development of
unusual feathers with highly modified branching patterns is unknown. The
fellowship research investigates the evolution, morphology, and development of
unusual feathers to advance knowledge of the development of morphological
diversity in a model system. It relies on existing avian collections at the
Smithsonian Institution, which is the third largest collection in the world and
represents 80% of the known avian species.

Training objectives during the fellowship include learning and applying
phylogenetic comparative methods and reaction-diffusion modeling as well as
acquiring technical skills including electron microscopy, museum specimen
preparation, and high-resolution computed tomography (CT) methods for feathers.
Educational outreach takes advantage of existing outreach and internship
programs at the Smithsonian for recruiting students to collections-based
scientific research. Many birds with unusual feathers, such as the birds of
paradise, are very charismatic with broad public appeal. The fellowship
incorporates biology, mathematical modeling, and computer science to make new
discoveries about these charismatic birds and is an ideal platform for educating
the public about the interrelations of STEM fields. Public outreach emphasizes
the relevance of combining science, technology, engineering, and mathematics to
better understand the beauty and diversity of nature.