* 1523546
* NeTS: Small: Low Latency Scheduling for Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Devavrat Shah, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

A data center is the backbone of any modern computational infrastructure.
Therefore, it is of utmost importance to operate data center at high resource
utilization and low latency to build a high-performance computation system. The
primary goal of this project is to develop such a data
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, the data center architecture has been
inspired by congestion control in the Internet, where decisions are made at the
end-points in a distributed manner. This has led to robust, scalable
architecture for data center, but suffers from high latency and low resource
utilization. In contrast to the Internet congestion control, scheduling in a
switch ? core of modern high-bandwidth Internet router ? fundamentally relies on
the ability to exercise centralized control. Over the past two decades, much
progress has been made in the context of switch scheduling resulting into
algorithm with high resource utilization and extremely low latency. Therefore,
by applying design principles from switch scheduling, there is a potential to
achieve data center architecture that has high resource utilization and low
latency. In summary, there is a massive opportunity for developing extremely
low-latency, high-performance scheduling architecture for data center by
deriving design principles from Internet routers rather than Internet congestion
control. This is precisely the focal point of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two major challenges in achieving this goal.
First, developing an implementable and high-performance solution for switch
scheduling. The existing theoretically optimal solutions, recently developed by
PI, are too complex to implement. Therefore, developing a simple implementation
of such a solution is required. This project will achieve this goal by utilizing
randomization (a la Markov Chain Monte Carlo) and mean-field approximations from
spin glass theory in Statistical Physics. Second, transforming a scheduling
algorithm for a switch to a scheduling algorithm for data center is challenging.
This project shall develop an emulation framework that will allow for such a
transformation in a seamless manner. This will be achieved by utilizing
connections between flow-level scheduling with packet-level scheduling inspired
by reversible queuing networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project will advance the design and analysis of implementable scheduling
algorithms for communication networks. Intellectually, this will advance theory
of randomized approximation algorithm, approximation techniques from statistical
physics and emulation approaches from queuing network. The successful outcome of
this project will suggest that it is better to architect a data center using
principles behind the design of classical telephone network and ATM network
rather than that of Internet congestion control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The successful outcome of this project will pave way for the
development of low latency and efficient data centers. This, in turn, will allow
for developing computational infrastructures that were not feasible before.
Given the central importance of high-performance computational infrastructure
across disciplines, successful outcome of this project will have a broad impact.
This work will be of interest to currently vibrant networking industry where
start-ups and big organizations alike are trying to develop the next generation
data center riding on the software defined networking philosophy. In a sense,
this work will provide a path to achieve their end goal. The proposed research
will be disseminated to the community via publications in journals, conferences
and workshops. The research outcome is also likely to be integrated in the
graduate networking course that PI regularly teaches at MIT.