* 1523572
* STARSS: Small: Trapdoor Computational Fuzzy Extractors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Srini Devadas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 266,667.00

Fuzzy extractors convert biometric data into reproducible uniform random
strings, and make it possible to apply cryptographic techniques for biometric
security. They are used to encrypt and authenticate user data with keys derived
from biometric inputs. This research investigates how hardware security
primitives can have provable cryptographic properties, a connection which is
largely lacking in currently available hardware primitives. The development of
such computational fuzzy extractors could result in substantially more efficient
and reliable key extractors which may be better received by industry and other
stakeholders, due to their improved efficiency and well-established security
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational fuzzy extractors derive keys
from biometric sources including silicon biometric sources, and their security
is based on the difficulty of problems such as Learning Parity With Noise (LPN).
Existing computational fuzzy extractors require exponential time to extract keys
when the bits generated by the biometric source contain a constant fraction of
errors. The project explores the concept of a noise-avoiding trapdoor that
results in a computational fuzzy extractor that can correct errors in polynomial
time in a constant fraction of the bits generated by the biometric source. The
security assumption is exactly the assumption of computational hardness of LPN.
This approach remains secure under weaker assumptions about biometric data than
previous schemes which assumed uniform distributions of biometric data. The
project introduces high-school students to research in applied cryptography and
security through the MIT PRIMES high-school outreach program.