* 1523949
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Adrienne Mora, Mora                    Adrienne       B
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Adrienne B. Mora is "Effects of parasites on predator-prey
interactions in estuarine ecosystems." The host institution for this fellowship
is University of California, Davis, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Andrew
Sih.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Important ecological principles have been elucidated
by studying interactions between predators and prey. Increasingly it is
necessary to study not only their presence or absence and interactions but also
behavioral effects on them and their shared ecosystem. By definition, parasites
are detrimental to their host organisms but, viewed on a larger scale, for
example, the whole ecosystem in which they reside, their effects may be more
complex and varied than previously thought. The California killifish is an
abundant, ecologically important fish found in Southern California estuaries and
is naturally infected by parasitic worms. When so infected, the killifish
exhibit more "conspicuous" behaviors including swimming higher in the water,
which may draw the attention of predators. These behavioral changes are thought
to influence transmission of the parasites to birds who are the final hosts,
where the worm life cycle is completed. It has been determined that infected
killifish are 10 to 30 times more likely than uninfected killifish to be eaten
by birds. The fellowship research investigates the novel hypothesis that, in
addition to behavioral changes, parasitized killifish have increased energy
demands and these combined effects may result in higher food consumption,
stronger competition with other fish for prey, and higher predation rates by
other major predators in the communities and estuaries. Accordingly parasites
may significantly impact estuarine ecosystems by changing the relationships
between killifish and their prey, competitors, and predators.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Training goals include acquiring quantitative skills in statistical
and digital video analysis, expertise in ecological theory, and career
advancement skills including teaching experience in the General Ecology course
after attending workshops at the UC Davis Center for Excellence in Teaching and
Learning. The plan to broaden participation includes serving as a role model and
mentoring undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to apply for funding through
one of several science programs at UC Davis so they can successfully execute a
research project and present project results at a symposium and, if possible, a
national conference. Research results are being incorporated into curriculum
materials for outreach events at schools in underserved areas in Yolo County and
exhibits for the general public at a local museum that teach concepts of food
web ecology, animal behavior, and host-parasite relationships.