* 1523579
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Examining the Design and Use of Internet of Things Technology in Public Life
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Daniela Rosner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2019
* USD 249,968.00

The goal of this research is to advance an empirical and systematic
understanding of the design and use of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies for
enabling, organizing, and monitoring collective social activities. The IoT is
the ubiquitous system of objects imbued with computational capacity, connected
to and communicating with one another. A key result of this work will be a
comprehensive set of design guidelines for creating IoT technologies that can be
used by anyone, that will be disseminated through a series of products and
public engagement strategies targeting community stakeholders and more general
audiences in media venues. Such guidelines are commonly understood as high-level
heuristics that people can take up and apply to their work to generate effective
designs. By embodying the guidelines in the design of novel prototypes that
enable public life, this project will help people more easily participate in
public life at varying scales. Lastly, by evaluating the strengths and
limitations of these prototypes in collective design reviews, it will generate
methodological insights that may be adopted and extended by other researchers in
the fields of human-centered computing, science and technology studies, and
design.

This empirical design research will provide insight into how the social-
technical configurations of IoT products and services might contribute to more
understanding of, and participation in, the networks of interaction that
comprise our public lives. In particular, leveraging "tracing" as both a design
tactic and a novel capacity of IoT, the research will demonstrate and explain
how the technical connectedness that characterizes IoT might be communicated in
ways that foster a greater sense of social connectedness. Traces are marks that
indicate the passing of some other phenomenon, for example data generated as a
by-product of people's online activity. Charting traces in the engineering and
use of information technology may produce an understanding of the complex
networks of actors, structures, and processes within our public life that leads
to new possibilities for action, insight and engagement. As a design tactic,
traces can serve to foster a greater sense of the connectedness of socio-
technical systems. Thus, this research will discover and codify new design
guidelines for successful IoT design for public life. Additionally, it will
develop an innovative fusion of research methods, combining the prototyping of
IoT technologies with external design reviews from both design experts and
community members to validate those prototypes.