* 1523843
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Michael Rosario, Rosario                 Michael        V
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups underrepresented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Michael Rosario is "From slow stretches to impulsive impacts: does
tendon function change with stretch speed?" The host institution for this
fellowship is Brown University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Thomas
Roberts. The mechanics of how springs work are intuitive; the more you stretch a
spring, the more energy you store. Although this explanation describes the
general principles of energy storage, it ignores a fundamental fact: the
majority of biological structures are sensitive to stretch speed. Furthermore,
at slow stretch speeds, a structure that is sensitive to stretch speed
dissipates more energy than a structure that isn't. The fellowship research
specifically focuses on frog tendons and is determining whether stretch speed
affects tendon mechanics enough to play a significant role in tendon function.
First, it tests whether sensitivity to stretch speed of frog tendons differs
between those used for jumping and those used for landing. Because energy
dissipation is directly related to stretch speed sensitivity, lower sensitivity
in the jumping tendons (to maximize energy available for movement) is expected
than in the landing tendons (to maximize energy dissipated to the environment).
The second test is whether a single tendon has the ability to modulate its
function via rate of muscle contraction. If stretch speed sensitivity provides a
mechanism for context-dependent function, the expected result is that tendon
stiffness varies between fast and slow muscle contractions. The results test the
prediction that while fast contractions stiffen the tendon, thereby facilitating
quick transmission of muscle force, slow contractions reduce tendon stiffness
and permit deformation as well as energy storage. An understanding of
biomechanical mechanisms has numerous applications in biology and engineering.
Training goals include acquiring expertise in both classical skills and modern
developments in muscle-tendon physiology. Educational outreach is being provided
to undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty
members through computer programming tutorials conducted both at the host
institution and online and by forming local and online working groups to discuss
topics in scientific computing. The online programming tutorials allow
researchers across the country to hone their own computational skills and seek
to inspire other biologists to develop a computational mindset in their own
research. Special efforts are being made to include undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in these activities.