* 1523051
* EDU: Collaborative: Cybersecurity for Middle School students at Museums: An Informal Learning Approach
* EDU,DGE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2018
* Michelle Maranowski, Tech Museum of Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 11/30/2018
* USD 100,000.00

This project will focus on the topic of Cybersecurity for Middle School Students
at Museums in a joint effort between the University at Buffalo (UB) and the Tech
Museum of Innovation (The Tech), San Jose. The project will span multiple
disciplines ranging from computer science and information systems to forensics
and law. The participants shall pay particular attention to concepts and
conceptual understanding of cybersecurity. The project will involve the design,
development, assessment and refinement of interactive and hands-on experiences
in a museum setting, with follow-up workshops targeting middle school students.
Given the wide-spread use of the Internet, cybercrime is on the rise and
cybersecurity is a much needed component in any STEM curriculum. Exposing
students to learning situations through exhibits is a form of informal learning,
and the follow-up workshops complement this type of learning with a less
informal and more in-depth coverage of the material. The Tech's Smart Museum
infrastructure will also support data analysis in order to evaluate the
educational efficacy and engagement of the hands-on museum experiences and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership between UB and The Tech will:
(a) develop and assess interactive museum exhibits on cybersecurity, and (b)
develop and deliver targeted workshops to middle school students. The main
objective for the exhibits will be to increase awareness of cybersecurity among
a school audience. The main objective for the workshop series will be to build
conceptual understanding and subject interest among young students who may
otherwise not be exposed to the content. In an effort to help break down the
perceived barriers to entry often associated with STEM fields and careers,
various object lessons, demonstrations, puzzles, and examples will be
extensively utilized. A detailed assessment of student learning and engagement
throughout the workshop sessions will be conducted. Also, students in the
Information Assurance Scholarship Program and the CyberCorps Program at UB will
be involved in various aspects of the proposed project.