* 1523275
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: Establishing A Wild Resource Isotopic Baseline For Behavioral Reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Joan Coltrain, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,741.00

Under the direction of Dr. Joan Coltrain Mr. Michael Lewis will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. These consist of isotope values derived from present
day plants located on the Cedar Mesa in southeast Utah. With this information it
will be possible to gain insight into the diet of prehistoric farmers on the
Colorado Plateau. The goal of the research is to use isotopic data derived from
human skeletal material to reconstruct individuals' diets and then gain insight
into group social organization. This project translates sex-based differences in
human bone chemistry into distinct dietary differences, clarifying the economic
roles of men and women in prehistoric society. While the data to be collected
will be used to reconstruct the past, the information will also have relevance
for understanding water, soil and plant interactions in the desert west, and
will contribute to developing strategies for responsibly balancing preservation,
recreation and economic development on the Colorado Plateau.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has four components. First, the investigators
will analyze modern flora collected on Cedar Mesa, southeast Utah in 2014.
Sampling locations will be selected to determine the extent to which
environmental variation can influence isotope ratios within a single species.
Second, bone collagen from faunal specimens from archaeological sites on Cedar
Mesa will be obtained, extracted and analyzed. This will permit researchers to
estimate the isotopic values of lean muscle consumed by prehistoric hunters.
Third, pit-roasting of banana yucca "hearts", an important component of Cedar
Mesa prehistoric diet, will be simulated under controlled conditions, permitting
the isotopic comparison of the edible portion of the heart with the composition
of yucca fibers which are often recovered archaeologically. Finally, the above
plant and animal will then combined with published data on human burials from
the Cedar Mesa area to reconstruct diet. This will permit researchers to
determine the relative contributions of plant and animal foods in a cross gender
comparison. Results will be published to the scientific community and presented
to the public through local educational outreach.