* 1523549
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015 (PRFB)
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Derek Caetano-Anolles, Caetano-Anolles         Derek
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2018
* USD 250,760.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Derek Caetano-Anollés is "Genetic framework for mouse facial
structure under selective pressures." The host institution for this fellowship
is the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology in Plön, Germany, and the
sponsoring scientist is Diethard Tautz. This fellowship is funded jointly with
the Office of International Science and Engineering. Forming international
collaborations is not only beneficial to the young scientist who conducts
research at the foreign location but is also in the U.S. national interest
because that experience in a world-class research organization exposes the next
generation of science leaders to the best the host country has to offer in terms
of state-of-the-art research and the promises of continuing collaborations that
will continue to strengthen U.S. science in the future

The fellowship research is identifying genes that are responsible for
controlling skull shape and facial structure of mice during their development,
and how those features are impacted by evolutionary and selection pressures. It
seeks to validate the functions of these genes, laying the groundwork for future
work that will not only lead to a better understanding of mouse developmental
genetics in regards to face structure but develop a finely-tuned set of software
and techniques that can then be used to look at various anatomical systems in
other organism models as well. This line of research has very exciting prospects
for its potential to predict facial morphology from genetic information. The
technology being developed is being used to gain the means and knowledge to
better understand the fundamental evolutionary forces that shape cranial change
in response to environmental and food adaptations.

Training goals include gaining expertise in genetics, husbandry and genomics in
mice, and in the CRISPR/Cas genome editing system and its transformative
applications to genome biology. Educational outreach to undergraduates and
graduate students is through mentoring and serving as a role model and conducted
at the Institute for Evolutionary Biology and the University of Kiel.