* 1523568
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Kristina Cammen, Cammen                  Kristina       M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Dr. Kristina Cammen
is "Evolutionary ecology of population decline and rebound in pinniped species
in the Northwest Atlantic." The host institutions for this fellowship are the
University of Maine, Orono and St. Mary's University, and the sponsoring
scientists are Dr. Michael Kinnison and Dr. Timothy Frasier.

Many species today have been broadly shaped by a shared history of population
decline followed, in some cases, by subsequent recovery. Evolutionary theories
predict that these periods of bottleneck and exponential growth will result in
the reduction and expansion of genetic diversity, respectively; however, these
hypotheses have rarely been tested in natural populations. Past limitations to
empirical assessment have been largely due to the difficulties of sampling
across appropriate temporal and spatial scales, but these limitations can be
addressed with the use of long-term biological collections and archaeological
samples. Through access to such sample collections from the NOAA Northeast
Fisheries Science Center, the University of Maine, Dalhousie University, and St.
Mary's University, the fellowship research study documents the genomic signature
of population decline, growth, and expansion in gray and harbor seals in the
Northwest Atlantic. Historically, harbor and gray seals were largely extirpated
from US waters in this region, but within the past several decades both species
have rapidly rebounded and expanded. Recently developed genomic approaches,
e.g., RAD sequencing, are being used to investigate change in both neutral and
adaptive genetic markers, representing complementary evolutionary forces of
drift and selection, which may respond in different directions and at different
time lags to demographic shifts. In addition, analyses of adaptive markers may
facilitate the identification of new candidate genes related to dispersal across
populations and evolutionary rescue within populations. This research is
particularly relevant within the context of rising ocean temperature that may
further alter population abundance and range in the future.

Training goals for the fellowship have a particular focus on further developing
analytical, bioinformatics, and laboratory skills to advance the development of
the Fellow's career and research agenda in ecological and evolutionary genomics.
In addition, educational outreach is dedicated to broadening the participation
of women in STEM and building scientific and leadership skills in K-12 and
undergraduate students by providing hands-on research experiences and developing
and distributing case study teaching materials that incorporate the proposed
research process and outcomes.