* 1523434
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Bradley Dickerson, Dickerson               Bradley        H
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Bradley Dickerson is ?The mechanics and control of a biological
gyroscope." The host institution for this fellowship is the California Institute
of Technology, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Michael Dickinson.

The aerial agility of insects is remarkable, especially if considering the
biomechanical and physiological challenges associated with their small size. In
flies, these maneuvers are initiated by the visual system and ended by
gyroscopic organs called halteres. The halteres are small, dumbbell-shaped
structures located behind the forewings that are evolutionarily derived from the
wings. Like the wings, the halteres are flapping structures contolled by a small
set of muscles. However, while the importance of the halteres in flight control
is long known, the role of these tiny steering muscles during flight maneuvers
remains unclear. The research aims to discover the principles flies use to
control motion of the haltere and in turn their aerial maneuvers. It promises to
aid the development of micro air vehicles able to navigate complicated aerial
environments.

Through studying the expression of a genetically-encoded calcium sensor in the
fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the Fellow is observing haltere steering
muscle activity during tethered flight maneuvers. Newly developed computational
techniques are being employed to reveal if muscle activation patterns reflect
the muscles acting independently or in context-dependent groups. A more complete
understanding of the haltere?s motor control from these experiments provides
insight as to how insects can perform elegant behaviors using a limited set of
muscles and expands our knowledge of the general principles of motor control.
Moreover, the research addresses how hard-wired reflexes are modified by the
nervous system to produce voluntary behaviors. The Fellow mentors and serves as
a role model for African-American and other underrepresented undergraduate
students. Further educational outreach includes presentations to school groups
through the Caltech Classroom Connection, the use of online multimedia to
disseminate a podcast discussing current topics in science, and the development
of informal presentations targeted at teenage audiences.