* 1523237
* Workshop to Expand the SMLC Roadmap and Action Plan on Integrated Sensor, Control and Platform Modeling for Smart and Digital Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,12/31/2015
* Thomas Edgar, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 12/31/2015
* USD 40,000.00

PI: Davis, James F.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1523237&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
October 2014, the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
(PCAST) released the report of the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership (AMP) 2.0
Committee entitled, "Advancing U.S. Advance Manufacturing". The report motivates
next generation advanced manufacturing focusing on enabling innovation, securing
the talent pipeline and improving the business climate for U.S. growth and
competitiveness. The report further identifies and recommends the alignment of
efforts and resources to address next generation advanced manufacturing IT
infrastructure technologies critical to U.S. competitiveness, encompassing
growth, dynamic performance, energy and material usage, environmental
sustainability and zero incidents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced Sensing,
Control and Platforms for Manufacturing (ASCPM) and Visualization, Informatics
and Digital Manufacturing Technologies (VIDM) were established as comprehensive
technology priorities. This workshop will emphasize the real-time sensing,
control, platform and human systems models and cyber technologies, i.e. ASCPM,
important to the actual manufacturing process and how these are mutually linked
with digital design and manufacturing, i.e. VIDM. The workshop will bring
together research and industrial experts from a cross section of continuous,
batch, discrete and hybrid manufacturing structure interests who are also
involved in the application of real-time enterprise smart and digital
manufacturing technologies including real-time process management and control,
simulation and modeling and data analysis and supply chain management, product
and production design and optimization, An important objective is to understand
how these interlinked cyber technologies are appropriately balanced and
integrated for process and discrete product industry applications with a view
toward next generation manufacturing technology trends. Invited speakers with
expertise in advanced sensor, control, platform, automation and design systems
across manufacturing structures will set the stage for a workshop that will
develop priorities about the intersection of these technologies from research,
development and delivery viewpoints. The workshop will focus on ASCPM and VIDM
modeling, and summarize SM Platform integration and scaling of modeling and
operational deployment to stimulate thinking within and across the areas of
Smart and Manufacturing. The workshop will motivate next generation advanced
manufacturing that focuses on enabling innovation, securing the talent pipeline
and improving the business climate for U.S. growth and competitiveness through
uncovering how these interlinked cyber technologies are appropriately balanced
and integrated for process and discrete product industry applications.