* 1523078
* EXP: Collaborative Research: A Personalized Storyteller Companion to Promote Preschooler Language Skills
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Stephanie Gottwald, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 108,906.00

Early language ability, including vocabulary skills and oral language knowledge
during preschool, is an important predictor of children's academic success in
subsequent school years. Social robots that can engage children as personalized
learning companions hold great promise in augmenting the learning experience of
children with parents and teachers. The ultimate goal is to foster the
development, learning and promotion of academic achievements and the well-being
of children. Such robots offer unique opportunities of guided, personalized and
controlled social interaction during the delivery of a desired curriculum. They
can play, learn and engage with children in the real world -- physically,
socially and emotively. This research project is developing and evaluating an
autonomous personalized social robot tutor-companion that can engage preschool
children in storytelling activities during a long-term interaction. The research
goal is to assess the impact that such an interaction may have on children's
language skills development. The project advances the fields of autonomous
storytelling generation and analysis, as well as the interaction between
autonomous social robots and preschool children to promote learning. Its broader
impact is to develop an effective technology that augments the preschool setting
that promotes children's language development in a personalized and socially
engaging way.

This research project develops and assesses the efficacy of an autonomous,
personalized social robot that engages as a learning companion on the language
development of pre-school children in the context of storytelling tasks. For
this purpose, the research project develops a novel automatic story analysis
tool, and a new personalized story generation algorithm, that pushes the
envelope of current understanding of free-form storytelling and how fosters the
development of early language skills in pre-school aged children. Additionally,
the research develops of a fully autonomous social robot that interacts with
preschool children in the real-life environment of a preschool. A 9-month
longitudinal study at multiple preschool sites is carried out to evaluate the
impact of long-term interaction with the storytelling robot on children's
engagement and language skill development. The research aims to increase the
current understanding of the impact of longitudinal interaction with social
robot on children's language development. Ultimately, this can inspire new tools
and practices for early pre-literacy and language education (as well as other
domains such as STEM) in the home, classroom, and beyond.