* 1523350
* CSEDI Collaborative Research:    Application of Siderophile Elements to Early Earth Processes and Mantle Mixing
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Linda Elkins-Tanton, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,081.00

Siderophile elements are those chemical elements with a strong preference for
metal compared to silicates. For the Earth, the abundances of these elements
were strongly affected by segregation of the metallic core, and also likely
affected by processes that occurred exclusively in the silicate portion of the
early Earth (mantle and crust). For this project, we will conduct collaborative,
synergistic research combining observations of siderophile element
concentrations and isotopic compositions, with geodynamic modeling to study the
origin and evolution of chemical heterogeneities in Earth's early mantle. The
outcome of this work will be an improved understanding of the global processes
that led to the establishment of siderophile element abundances in the mantle,
as well as provide new insights to the differentiation and mixing histories of
the mantle. One specific task will be to examine the petrologic and chronologic
extents of 182W isotopic anomalies in terrestrial rocks. As the decay product of
the short-lived 182Hf (tÂ½ = 9 million years), variations in 182W likely reflect
processes that occurred within the mantle during the first 30 million years of
Earth history. Both ancient rocks, such as komatiites for which we have already
identified isotopic anomalies, and modern rocks, such as mid-ocean ridge
basalts, oceanic peridotites, and ocean island basalts will be examined.
Complementary to this work, we will model large-scale processes, such as magma
ocean crystallization, with the potential to generate mantle domains
characterized by the elemental abundances and fractionations necessary to
produce the observed isotopic variances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve serious contributions from undergraduate participants at the University
of Maryland (UMd). As such, some of the research proposed here will help to
indoctrinate budding scientists in the methods used in isotopic geochemistry and
geodynamic modeling, as well as the presentation of results. The project will
also involve postdocs at both institutions. The collaborative nature of the
proposal, as well as the close proximity of the UMd and Carnegie Institution for
Science, will allow frequent, direct interactions involving both geochemical
data acquisition and geodynamic modeling of the results for the PI?s and
postdocs working on this project.