* 1523879
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Margaret Byron, Byron                   Margaret       L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Margaret Byron is "How comb jellyfish swim and navigate in ocean
turbulence." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
California Irvine, with secondary support to be provided by Stanford University;
the sponsoring scientists are Matthew J. McHenry (UCI) and John O. Dabiri
(Stanford). Ctenophores, commonly called comb jellyfish, are widespread in the
earth's oceans and play an important role in the marine food chain. They are
also the largest organisms that swim using cilia, a type of locomotion which is
normally reserved for much smaller organisms and animals, in both fresh and salt
water. Only a few centimeters in size, ctenophores live in a complex and
turbulent environment, full of gusts and eddies that dwarf them in size. Despite
their relatively simple propulsion system, ctenophores are very agile and
maneuverable, retaining impressive control over their orientation and position
in the midst of these chaotic surroundings. This research uses high-speed
cameras and flow visualization techniques to study how ctenophores move in
response to turbulent gusts, showing how they adapt their behavior to the
surrounding flow. This will provide clues to their preferred habitats,
population dynamics, and ecological roles. In addition to the basic knowledge of
locomotion being gained, a better understanding of the principles of ciliated
locomotion promises to aid improvements in locomotion and navigation in small
underwater robots, important platforms for exploration and discovery in the
aquatic environment.

This research at the interface of biology and engineering affords the Fellow the
opportunity to enhance her background in engineering with training in biology
and career advancement opportunties in both fields. The joint sponsorship and
interdisciplinary setting provide a foundation for an eventual independent
research program at the intersection of fluid dynamics and aquatic animal
locomotion. Educational outreach includes supervising and mentoring
undergraduate research assistants recruited from programs serving
underrepresented minorities. The students are deeply involved in the project,
including experiments, analysis, and the presentation and publication of
results. The results are being made available to the Monterey Bay Aquarium,
which provides animals and experimental facilities for the research, and are
being incorporated into programs and educational displays for the general public
and school groups. As a further effort to engage the public with biology, ocean
science, fluid dynamics, and biomechanics research in general, the Fellow is
curating an online repository of research results and other relevant work as
well as engaging the public via social media and other web-based tools.