* 1523178
* RUI:  Brown Carbon Aerosol Production in Polluted Environments:  The Effects of Oxidants, SO2, and Sunlight on Aqueous-Phase Aldehyde Reactivity
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* David De Haan, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 366,635.00

This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project is investigating the
formation of brown carbon in the atmosphere. The identification of important
photochemical sources of brown carbon are important because light-absorbing
particles in the atmosphere (black and brown carbon) are the second largest
anthropogenic driver of climate change, after CO2 emissions. At least 20 diverse
undergraduate students will participate in this research as part of this
project, making it more likely that they will choose careers in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the research are: (1) to characterize
aqueous-phase browning processes in droplets and in aerosol particles, with and
without light and/or oxidants, (2) to measure the effect of dissolved SO2 on
aldehyde partitioning and aerosol-phase products, (3) to determine the
atmospheric significance of these reactions, and (4) to mentor and train a
diverse cohort of undergraduate students, especially freshmen and sophomores, in
atmospheric chemical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brown carbon formation will
be quantified using cavity-attenuated phaseshift single-scattering albedo (CAPS-
ssa) spectroscopy on evaporating droplets and aging aerosol particles with and
without added aqueous-phase oxidants in a lab chamber, in rooftop photochemistry
experiments, and at the CESAM cloud chamber at University of Paris East at
Creteil.