* 1523817
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Margarita Lopez-Uribe, Lopez-Uribe             Margarita      M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2017
* USD 45,561.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Margarita M. López-Uribe is "The evolutionary consequences of
sociality for immune systems." The host institution for this fellowship is North
Carolina State University, and the sponsoring scientists are Robert R. Dunn,
David R. Tarpy, and Steven D. Frank.

Social living poses challenges for individual fitness because of a greater risk
of disease transmission in crowded environments. Despite this challenge,
sociality is evolutionarily successful, occurring not only in humans but also in
the most abundant and diverse group of organisms on earth, the social insects.
Evolutionary theory predicts that the immune systems of social organisms should
be strongly shaped by the risk of social disease transmission. Two competing
hypotheses predict the evolutionary consequences of group living on immune
systems. The social group hypothesis (SGH) posits that the higher risk of
disease transmission in social species will lead to the presence of more diverse
disease communities and stronger individual immune systems in social species
than in solitary ones. In contrast, the relaxed selection hypothesis (RSH)
proposes that social species have evolved behavioral immune defenses that lower
disease risk within the group, resulting in a less diverse pathogen community
and reduced immunity at the individual level. The fellowship research tests
these hypotheses using a comparative phylogenetic approach across multiple
solitary and social bee species to investigate the evolutionary mechanisms that
benefit insect societies in view of the expected costs of group living. Insights
gained from bees may also be applicable to other social groupings where large
population density may be shaping immune systems and host-pathogen dynamics,
including in humans.

Training goals focus on increasing expertise in bioinformatics, immunological
assays, and comparative phylogenetics. Career advancement activities and
educational outreach overlap by developing a new course at the host institution,
enrolling in pedagogical workshops, and creating lesson plans for elementary and
middle school classrooms. Public outreach includes disseminating information
about native bee fauna and their environmental threats to wider audiences in two
ways: 1) by conducting native bee pollinator workshops; and 2) by working with
the "Students Discover" program to develop classroom lessons about public health
and the spread of diseases. Workshops and lesson plans are both in English and
Spanish, to be inclusive of Hispanic communities.