* 1523861
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Christine Gault, Gault                   Christine      M
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2018
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2015. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Christine Gault is "Identifying freezing tolerance genes
in the perennial grass genus Tripsacum as a step towards developing freezing-
tolerant maize." The host institutions for the fellowship are Cornell University
and Michigan State University, and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Edward
Buckler and Dr. Michael Thomashow.

The fellowship will enable Christine Gault to gain experience in quantitative
genetics and plant physiology. To broaden scientific participation in students
of all ages, Christine will mentor undergraduate students in hypothesis-based
research projects. She will also develop educational tools in the form of data
nuggets, a standardized format that allows K-12 and undergraduate students to
analyze real data in the classroom.

Maize (corn) is the most widely planted, economically important grain crop in
the United States. Cold temperatures limit its growing season length because
maize cannot survive prolonged freezing temperatures. A freezing-tolerant maize
line would produce more grain due to an extended growing season while providing
longer periods of soil cover to reduce water run-off and soil erosion. However,
it is unknown which genes or genic regions could be introduced into maize to
make it cold tolerant. The goal of this project is to identify such genes in a
freeze-tolerant species that is closely related to maize.

The perennial grass genus Tripsacum is very closely related to maize, and some
members can survive freezing stress. This research will identify genes that
confer freezing tolerance in Tripsacum grasses. First, comparative genomic and
transcriptomic analyses will reveal how cold-related gene families have changed
since maize and Tripsacum diverged. Second, cold-induced gene expression and
phytohormonal changes will be measured in freezing-tolerant and freezing-
sensitive Tripsacum plants. Finally, a quantitative trait locus mapping approach
will identify freezing tolerance genes in a diverse population. Understanding
the genetic basis for freezing tolerance in Tripsacum will enable the
development of freezing tolerant maize lines. RNA-seq data will be deposited in
the NCBI sequence read archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra).