* 1523614
* The neural mechanisms of duration on contrast perception in natural vision
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Stephen Macknik, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 648,806.00

The visibility of an object is determined by its contrast against the
background. But there is another critical factor in contrast perception that is
less well understood: the object's duration. Eye movements, motion of the object
in the world, and lighting that changes over time, such as flicker in artificial
lighting, all act to vary the amount of time that the object shines photons onto
the photoreceptors of the retina. Psychological experiments showed that the
apparent contrast, the salience of the object against its background, is highest
when an object is presented for ~60-~90 milliseconds and reduced if the object
is presented for too short or too long a duration. Dr. Stephen Macknik and his
colleagues at the Barrow Neurological Institute will investigate the neural
physiological processes underlying these temporal effects by recording
electrical activity of single neurons from the visual cortex. This project will
provide the empirical data leading to a mechanistic account of how these
temporal effects occur. Understanding the neural mechanisms that determine
optimal duration of object presentation may allow the discovery of the optimal
flickering rate in the artificial lighting. It is possible that temporal
dynamics in lighting that is different from what is used in today's flickering
lighting can support optimal perception and at the same time save power. That
is, if visual lighting is optimized to human perception, less electrical current
could be used in lighting devices to achieve the same amount of apparent
contrast as in current "unoptimized" artificial lighting dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the neural mechanisms associated with
optimal stimulus durations, the investigators will record from the ON versus OFF
neurons in the primary visual cortex (area V1) that increase and decrease their
firing rates in response to light increments and decrements respectively. They
will test the hypothesis that the interplay between these two types of neurons
will explain the variations in perceived contrast associated with different
stimulus durations. To ensure that the findings are applicable to real world
scenarios such as lighting in the office and home, the investigators will use
not only carefully controlled visual stimuli (Objective 1) but also visual
stimuli from natural scenes (Objective 2). Finally, the investigators will
determine how higher level cognitive functions, specifically attention,
modulates the interactions between both single ON and OFF neurons and
populations of ON and OFF neurons (Objective 3). Contrast perception is
fundamental to all vision, normal or diseased. Yet the large body of scientific
literature has mainly focused on contrast across visual space and little is
known about how contrast perception vary with stimulus duration. The current
project fills this major knowledge gap by taking the temporal aspect of contrast
perception into consideration and suggesting new roles for the well studied ON
and OFF neurons.