* 1523295
* Exploring Innovation Frontiers Initiative
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Charles Evans, Council on Competitiveness
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 10/31/2017
* USD 463,233.00

This project aims to understand the over-the-horizon, transformative innovation
models that will drive U.S. competitiveness in the coming decades. Focusing on
new innovation models is of critical importance to national prosperity and
economic security, as innovation is the primary driver of productivity and,
thus, an effective vehicle to increase the U.S. standard of living. With
increasing global, innovation-based competition and rising challenges in the
U.S. innovation system, practitioners and stakeholders are facing difficult
questions about how individuals, teams, communities and national institutions of
knowledge creation and innovation will transform to support current and future
U.S. innovation. Through progressive dialogue series, this project will help 1)
craft a transformational innovation action agenda with national and regional
stakeholders to position the U.S. as a global innovation leader for decades to
come; 2) catalyze a larger movement to enhance U.S. competitiveness and economic
growth by accelerating knowledge creation and the translation of science and
engineering research into market reality; and 3) expand and improve public and
private sector engagement by providing the opportunities for potential partners
around the country to connect and collaborate.

This project will provide an analysis that will synthesize and disseminate
broadly the experiential knowledge of active innovation practitioners. The
methodology is a series of expert dialogues across the U.S. underpinned by best-
in-class reports and initiatives making the competitiveness case for
strengthening innovation ecosystems. These dialogues will convene a diverse and
representative mix of innovation leaders from industry, entrepreneurial
community, academia, national laboratories and research institutions, and other
stakeholders. The information will provide academicians with directions for
future research in innovation, business leaders and strategists with insights to
inform future business models, and policymakers with knowledge to enact public
policies that create a supportive environment for sustained innovation-driven
growth.