* 1523115
* EDU: Collaborative: Enhancing Education in Genetic Privacy with Integration of Research in Computer Science and Bioinformatics
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Xintao Wu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,564.00

The era of personal genomics, where genetic information is ubiquitously
available for research, clinical practice or personal curiosity, is quickly
approaching. At the same time, there is a growing concern of genetic privacy and
the existing educational resources are focused mostly on legal, regulatory or
ethical issues in personal genomics. There is a substantial gap in educating
genetic privacy and this project sets the following goals: (1) build the
education framework for genetic privacy protection; (2) design genetic privacy
course modules to be used in Computer Science or Bioinformatics; and (3) develop
hands-on projects on privacy infringement and protection.

The project provides a comprehensive set of education strategies in genetic
privacy that are integrated with interdisciplinary research in the areas of data
privacy and genetics/genomics. The integrative education framework for
protecting genetic privacy for both genomic study participants and regular
individuals with personal genomes available will utilize differential privacy
and Bayesian network based attack modeling techniques. The course modules will
include topics on genomic data analysis, genetic privacy breaching techniques,
ethics, regulations, laws and pertinent techniques about genetic privacy
protection. The project will develop a set of course projects that can be
customized for the targeted audience.

The project will develop and propagate open standards, technical guidelines, and
education opportunities to promote the share and openness of genomic data for
social good. A public web portal will serve as a hub for sharing tools,
documentation, course materials, and tutorials. Through outreach to high school
students and general public, the project expects to increase awareness of issues
related to genetic privacy in managing and interpreting personal genomes.