* 1523641
* OCE-RIG: Identifying the role of ocean circulation in polar climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Kyle Armour, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 96,329.00

The high-latitudes have changed substantially over recent decades: the Arctic
has warmed faster than anywhere else on Earth, concurrent with a rapid decline
of its sea-ice cover, while the Southern Ocean has largely cooled and its sea-
ice cover has modestly expanded. The dynamics giving rise to these observed
changes are not yet understood - as evidenced in the large spread of past and
future polar climate changes simulated by our state-of-the-art global climate
models. Yet, improved understanding of the changing polar oceans is critical to
both polar and global climate predictability. This study aims to establish the
relative roles of, and interactions between, the oceans, atmosphere and
cryosphere in polar climate change and identify the key processes at work. A
further goal of the project is to introduce an audience of under-represented
high-school students to the key role of the ocean in our changing climate.

A major challenge to studying high-latitude climate change is the inherently
coupled nature of the governing system dynamics. For instance, oceanic changes
around Antarctica have been driven by a combination of factors, such as
greenhouse gas forcing, increased freshwater input, and changes in surface winds
due to stratospheric ozone depletion; the effects of each of these drivers have
been further shaped by the background ocean circulation on which they act,
making it difficult to attribute the primary causes of observed - or even
simulated - polar climate changes, and precluding confident polar climate
prediction over the coming century. This study seeks overcomes these challenges
through numerical simulation with an oceanic general circulation model driven at
the ocean surface by these distinct climate forcings - applied separately and
together. This approach allows us to identify the key role of polar ocean
circulation in setting the response to greenhouse gas forcing, and reveals that
distinct circulations of the polar oceans have given rise to their contrasting
changes over recent decades - with the Arctic warming at a far greater pace than
the Southern Ocean due to differences in meridional ocean heat transport
changes. The study further examines the response to the full range of climate
forcings - including fresh water flux changes and variations in both large-scale
and regional surface winds - allowing us to identify the role of the background
ocean circulation in mediating the response to each. Furthermore, by driving the
ocean model with climatological surface boundary conditions unique to different
comprehensive coupled global climate models, we assess the influence of distinct
background ocean conditions in the large spread of polar climate projections
simulated across those coupled models.

A major challenge to studying high-latitude climate change is the inherently
coupled nature of the governing system dynamics. For instance, oceanic changes
around Antarctica have been driven by a combination of factors, such as
greenhouse gas forcing, increased freshwater input, and changes in surface winds
due to stratospheric ozone depletion; the effects of each of these drivers have
been further shaped by the background ocean circulation on which they act,
making it difficult to attribute the primary causes of observed - or even
simulated - polar climate changes, and precluding confident polar climate
prediction over the coming century. This study seeks overcomes these challenges
through numerical simulation with an oceanic general circulation model driven at
the ocean surface by these distinct climate forcings - applied separately and
together. This approach allows us to identify the key role of polar ocean
circulation in setting the response to greenhouse gas forcing, and reveals that
distinct circulations of the polar oceans have given rise to their contrasting
changes over recent decades - with the Arctic warming at a far greater pace than
the Southern Ocean due to differences in meridional ocean heat transport
changes. The study further examines the response to the full range of climate
forcings - including fresh water flux changes and variations in both large-scale
and regional surface winds - allowing us to identify the role of the background
ocean circulation in mediating the response to each. Furthermore, by driving the
ocean model with climatological surface boundary conditions unique to different
comprehensive coupled global climate models, we assess the influence of distinct
background ocean conditions in the large spread of polar climate projections
simulated across those coupled models.