* 1523757
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Micaela Martinez, Martinez-Bakker         Micaela        E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

_____________________________________

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Micaela Martinez-Bakker is "Effects of maternal antibodies on
offspring survival and health." The host institution for this fellowship is
Princeton University, and the sponsoring scientists are Andrea Graham and C.
Jessica Metcalf.

Maternal antibodies are passed from mothers to offspring through the placenta,
colostrum, and during lactation and are believed to be important for protecting
newborns from pathogens. The fellowship research investigates how maternal
antibodies affect the outcome of early-life infections and seeks to explore the
ecology of infectious disease by determining if maternal antibodies mitigate the
risk of population-level disease outbreaks, with results being applicable to
wildlife and human populations. Maternal antibodies passed from mothers to
offspring are specific to the pathogens to which the mother was exposed. It is
hypothesized that, since mothers and their offspring are exposed to similar
pathogens, natural selection favors the evolution of maternal antibodies and
improves offspring survival in the presence of those pathogens. In addition to
effects on individual offspring, maternal antibodies could modify the propensity
for disease outbreaks across populations and at large geographic scales. To
address the evolutionary and ecological role of maternal antibodies in mammals,
the research focuses on two study systems: helminth infections in wildlife, and
measles and rubella virus infections in children (well-established systems for
the study of the ecology of infectious diseases). These model systems are
selected as helminths and viruses engage different subsets of the immune system;
therefore, studying them in parallel will reveal generalities about how maternal
antibodies impact overall infectious disease morbidity and mortality.
Mathematical disease transmission models are being developed to track maternal
antibodies in populations and determine if maternal antibodies improve offspring
survival and reduce disease morbidity. In addition to elucidating new ecological
aspects of immunity, results may provide tools for policy makers and scientists
to develop strategies for treating helminth infections in wildlife and livestock
populations and improve infant vaccination schedules. Combating infection in
humans, wildlife, and livestock reduces suffering and death and is an endeavor
at the intersection of science and society.

Training goals and career advancement activities are preparing the Fellow for a
research career at the interface of disease ecology and evolutionary biology
with immediate real-world applications. Educational outreach is being directed
toward under-represented groups with emphasis on ethnic and socioeconomic-status
minorities in science. The Fellow is helping build pathways to STEM for people
from underprivileged backgrounds by volunteering with The Last Mile Code.7370
(https://thelastmile.org/) which teaches inmates in San Quentin Prison how to do
computer programming and data visualization using python, html, and java so that
they may be competitive for employment upon release.