* 1523027
* Comparison of the Melt Distribution in Natural Analogues to Experimentally Produced Microstructures
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Gordana Garapic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2017
* USD 131,059.00

The generation of melt in the Earth's shallow mantle, and the segregation and
eruption of this melt at the Earth's surface as basalt is the main process by
which the Earth continues to evolve. During melting low melting point components
are separated from more refractory components, which remain behind in the
mantle. The low melting point components transported to the surface with the
basaltic melt include volatiles such as water and CO2. Together with the process
of subduction, this exchange of the interior with the surface has shaped the
composition of the atmosphere over the life of the Earth. This process also
constitutes the deepest part of the plumbing systems of volcanoes in a range of
tectonic settings. Understanding deep melt migration is therefore an integral
part of understanding the dynamics of volcanoes.

Processes in the mantle such as the generation of melt can not be observed
directly, but are interrogated experimentally as well as by studying natural
occurrences of mantle rocks at the Earth's surface. The natural rocks that will
be examined for this project are relatively rare in terms of their
microstructure and composition. Preliminary observations indicate that a
basaltic melt froze in place in rocks of mantle origin, but with an interstitial
melt geometry normally observed only in experiments. Thus these rocks form an
important link between experiments, direct observations in the field and
indirect methods of observation such as seismic imaging of partially molten
regions. This project is intended to help validate the application of
experimental results on small samples at upper mantle conditions to the
different scales in space and time of natural systems, leading to a better
understanding the process of melt generation and transport. To this end we will
examine thin sections of olivine-rich troctolites by optical and scanning
electron microscopy, and collect electron-backscatter diffraction maps. Together
these maps and images will be processed in the same way that images from
experimentally produced samples are processed to quantify the melt distribution
on the grain scale. Additional analysis by microprobe and laser-ablation mass
spectrometry will help illuminate the processes that formed the microstructures.