* 1523470
* I-Corps:  Low-cost Real-time E. coli Bacteria Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2015
* Junhong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 09/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

E. coli bacteria are among the most prevalent pathogens that exist widely in the
environment and can spread quickly and easily through water or food at an
appropriate temperature. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has
recommended the use of E. coli in fresh water as an indicator organism.
Therefore, water quality monitoring for infectious organisms is a core
requirement for managing such a key natural resource and requires accurate and
accessible detection technologies to ensure continuous quality control and early
warning capabilities for users to minimize negative impacts. There are several
methods used for bacteria detection, e.g., culture and colony counting method,
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and electrochemical methods. However, none of
the existing methods is suitable for large-scale, real-time, in-situ detection
of E. coli. Therefore, a fast, sensitive, selective, and cost-effective method
or sensing platform is urgently needed for E. coli bacteria detection for
continuous water quality monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team proposes to
develop a graphene-gold nanoparticle-based Escherichia coli (E. coli) test kit
for rapid detection of E. coli bacteria in water. This novel nanomaterial-based
sensor has superior performance over the conventional E. coli detection methods,
e.g., spectroscopic and electrochemical methods, which are unsuitable for large-
scale, real-time, in-situ detection. In the proposed project, the team will
refine the handheld meter and the test strip, validate the test kit with real
water samples in collaboration with authoritative water technology validation
agents (e.g. Milwaukee Water Works or MWW and Battelle), and develop a prototype
handheld meter for proof-of concept demonstration. In addition, the team will
work with key strategic partners for the sensor product development and
commercialization.