* 1523263
* The Fourth Symposium on Industrial Ecology for Young Professionals (SIEYP IV)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Marian Chertow, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 49,775.00

1523263 (Chertow)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is in partial support of the
fourth Symposium on Industrial Ecology for Young Professionals (SIEYP IV), to be
held in Surrey, UK on July 11, 2015. SIEYP IV is to be held in connection and
immediately following the biannual International Society for Industrial Ecology
(ISIE) conference, and is planned, organized, and attended by students and young
professionals. It aims at promoting communication among graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers in industrial ecology (IE) about their research,
ideas, and experiences. This project is organized by the Student Chapter of the
International Society for Industrial Ecology in an effort to encourage and
financially support participation by U.S.-based students and post-doctoral
researchers in the symposium and the ISIE 2015 Conference immediately preceding
it. Members of groups underrepresented in IE are especially encouraged to apply.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The symposium will enable young professionals from around
the world to establish an international network of industrial ecology
researchers for ongoing exchange and future collaborations in topics such as
life cycle assessment, industrial symbiosis, eco-design, material flow and stock
analysis, environmentally extended input output analysis, and sustainable
consumption. The theme of SIEYP IV will be "Envisioning Future Agendas in
Industrial Ecology". During the past decades, industrial ecology has developed
and matured in terms of its knowledge structure and content, theoretical
foundations, analytical methods and tools, and its applications in real-world
practices. It is thus the right time to ask where the discipline has been and
where it is going, in order to drive it towards an unfolding new era. SIEYP IV
will provide this opportunity for international students and young
professionals- the next generation of industrial ecologists- to share and learn
from each other, collectively reflecting upon the evolution of the discipline
and envisioning its future agendas. It echoes the theme and focus of the ISIE
2015 Conference, which is aimed at "Taking Stock of Industrial Ecology".