* 1523410
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Stephen Greiman, Greiman                 Stephen        E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Dr. Stephen E.
Greiman is "Explorations of parasite and microbe biodiversity in shrews across a
dynamic contact zone in the arctic." The host institution for this fellowship is
the University of New Mexico, and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Joseph A.
Cook and Dr. Eric P. Hoberg.

The Museum of Southwestern Biology is a premier research collection with its
collection of whole fixed small mammals. These specimens have preserved
gastrointestinal tracts, including parasites, permitting study of host and
pathogens in different locations and time periods. Using next generation
sequencing (NGS) technologies, the fellowship research uses metagenomics to
examine community structure and diversity of a complex assemblage of
macroparasites (parasitic worms or helminths) and microbes (bacteria and
viruses) within two small vertebrate hosts (shrew species) across an extensive
zone where these species contact each in northern Alaska. Hybridization is
common and occurs when two related species that were once isolated come into
contact, often due to changing environments, and successfully reproduce. The
offspring are hybrids and often can persist and, through selection over
succeeding generations, become increasingly adapted in the novel environment.
Parasites are known to reduce the fitness of their host organisms, and
differences in the levels of parasitism and parasite community structure between
the hybrid and parent species could play a role in the eventual persistence or
success over time for potentially divergent lineages of the hosts. New
metagenomic methods are being developed for use in preserved specimens from
collections; as these samples are irreplaceable, sustainable use requires
special techniques.

Training goals include developing expertise in bioinformatics, NGS technologies,
museum curation and collection management. Educational outreach to
undergraduates includes developing, as part of the Aim-UP! program, an on-line
module for evolution and parasitology courses based on the dynamics of parasites
in hybrid zones.