* 1523500
* Quantifying the Effect of Vapor Wall Deposition on Chamber-Derived Yields of Secondary Organic Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* John Seinfeld, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 524,889.00

This research is focused on the study of secondary organic aerosol (SOA), very
small particles condensed from the gas phase, in environmental chambers and the
effects of gas and particle deposition onto the chamber walls. Modeling studies
generally utilize fundamental data from environmental chambers in predicting
ambient aerosol concentrations in the atmosphere. Currently a discrepancy exists
between model predictions and atmospheric measurements of SOA. The reanalysis of
historical chamber experiments indicates that prior reported SOA yields may have
been underpredicted. The information from this research is critical for
understanding aerosol-induced health effects and contributions to global aerosol
radiative forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work includes: (1)
Measurements of the wall deposition rates of individual organic species on the
Teflon walls of a chamber and correlation of those rates to molecular properties
of the species; (2) Chamber experiments with a wide range of important biogenic
and anthropogenic volatile organic compounds in which the competition between
vapor transport to particles and the walls is modulated; and (3) Development of
a comprehensive model of chamber vapor dynamics that allows quantitative
assessment from data on individual species of the impact of vapor wall
deposition and extrapolation to atmospheric "wall-less" conditions.