* 1523871
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Adam Pritchard, Pritchard               Adam           C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Adam Pritchard is
"Using fossil skeletons and modern reptile muscles to study flying and running
in extinct reptiles." The host institution for this fellowship is Yale
University, and the sponsoring scientists are Bhart-Anjan Bhullar and Jacques
Gauthier.

The fellowship research is developing musculoskeletal models for extinct reptile
groups, the ancestors of crocodiles and the flying reptilian pterosaurs, to
reflect the changes in muscle function and anatomy over a period of more than
150 million years. This is done by first developing new three-dimensional
musculoskeletal models of modern reptile groups (crocodiles and lizards) and
birds, using specimens at the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History. Because
these modern animals are related evolutionarily to the extinct animals, the
modern anatomical models allow interpretation of the impressions of muscles on
extinct reptile skeletons and changes in muscle anatomy, leading to changes in
locomotion in the fossil record. Fossil samples come from collections at Yale
University, the University of Kansas, the University of Texas at Austin, the
American Museum of Natural History, and the Natural History Museum of Denmark.

Training goals include combined training in modern reptile biology and
paleontology. The models are being made available over the internet, accessible
to anyone addressing further questions about muscular anatomy in modern and
fossil reptiles. They also are useful teaching tools for anatomy instructors
leading dissection labs and ecologists seeking to understand how environmental
changes might correlate with anatomical changes in animal groups. Educational
and public outreach also include using the models to train volunteers, both from
Yale's undergraduate population and through the EVOLUTIONS after school program.
Biological and paleontological collections are critical to the success of the
research and training, but very few in the public understand the reasons behind
such holdings. The exhibits at the Peabody Museum and the Fellow's own Past Time
podcast series provide a window into an active paleobiology project.