* 1523759
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Delbert Green, Green                   Delbert        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2018
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Delbert A. Green II is "Molecular genetic basis of migration in
the Monarch butterfly." The host institution for this fellowship is the
University of Chicago, and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Marcus Kronforst
(primary) and Dr. Steven Reppert (The University of Massachusetts Medical
School). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migration is a behavioral adaptation that has
evolved in diverse taxa, from bacteria to humans, and is a successful and
complex strategy for surviving in heterogeneous environments. Current knowledge
suggests that there is no single explanataion of how migration works and
elucidating the mechanisms requires integrating studies of behavior, physiology,
and morphology. Although many species-specific migration adaptations have been
described without the emergence of a single mechanism, there are some features
of animal migrations that are nearly universal. The evolutionary conservation of
these traits suggests that a common mechanism may underlie animal migrations.
The monarch butterfly, one of America's treasured migrators, presents an
excellent model for researching the mechanism of animal migration. This research
seeks to uncover the molecular genetic basis of monarch migration using a
combination of behavioral, developmental, genetic/genomic, and biochemical
studies. The fellowship also affords the opportunity for scientific training for
the Fellow with a focus on experimental techniques to study various aspects of
monarch biology, including development, behavior, anatomy, and physiology as
well as next-generation sequencing data generation and analysis. New tools for
conducting functional genetics studies in monarchs are being developed. Coupled
with existing knowledge of monarch natural history and ecology, the research
promises to produce a comprehensive model for understanding complex trait
evolution. Exploring environmental and genetic determinants of migration
promises critical new insights relevant to monarch conservation strategies.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major goal of this project is to broaden participation
of under-represented groups in biology through educational outreach by training
and mentoring undergraduate students as a role model. Additionally, a novel
pilot program to engage high school and middle school students in studies of
monarch biology is being developed to provide technical preparation in STEM
subjects and promote community-centered science engagement. The pilot program
complements ongoing efforts to enhance existing programs for monarch
conservation and learning about monarchs in particular but also to generate
enthusiasm for and success in STEM fields for under-represented groups.