* 1523746
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Alisha Quandt, Quandt                  Catherine      A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to C. Alisha Quandt is
"Fungal community variation associated with the digestive tracts of a large
collection of predatory, marine snails." The host institution for this
fellowship is the University of Michigan (UM), and the sponsoring scientist is
Timothy Y. James.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research into vertebrate microbiomes has
led to the discovery of previously unidentified fungal and bacterial communities
that are not only beneficial to their multicellular hosts, but in some cases,
essential. Studies of microbial communities associated with invertebrates,
however, are rare but offer an important opportunity for discovery. The
fellowship research seeks to use existing collections of Conus, a well-studied
genus of predatory marine snails, to characterize their fungal gut communities
and their functional profile to determine if these are correlated with host
genetics, diet, or geographical distribution. Data are being collected from
preserved specimens about the fungal communities associated with marine
mollusks. Mollusca, one of the largest animal phyla, can have broad geographic
ranges and several mollusks have become invasive throughout the world, sometimes
with devastating economic and ecological effects; yet little is known about
their microbial communities. This pioneering study is made possible by the
existing collection and promises a breadth and depth of sampling never before
conducted on any mollusk genus as well as the first culture-independent study of
fungi associated with mollusks. Results have the potential to unearth not only
several new species of fungi, but possibly undescribed lineages, and increase
understanding of the functional capabilities of the fungal communities
associated with mollusks, possibly linking Conus diet with functional
characteristics of the microbiome. A connection between microbiome and diet may
explain how mollusks are able to thrive in newly invaded habitats. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Training goals and career advance activities include gaining skills
in new experimental systems and management skills, including both research and
museum collection management. Educational outreach includes undergraduate
students through funding from the UM Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program
(UROP) program and 4th to 6th grade girls through the Females Excelling More in
Math Engineering and the Sciences (FEMMES) program at UM at after school
education events.