* 1523909
* Collaborative Research: Fold Form, Strain, and Mechanics at the Whaleback Anticline: New Approaches to a Classic Field Locality
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Juliet Crider, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 159,757.00

Folded rock layers are among the most fundamental, instructive and charismatic
geologic structures. Folds are studied to investigate mountain building, to
understand the engineering properties of rock, to predict the underground
movement of water or hydrocarbons, and to give insight into the fundamental
processes of folding itself. These applications rely on the accurate
interpretation of rock deformation within a fold. Various conceptual and
mathematical models predict fold-related deformation. To assess the capabilities
of such predictive models, data from natural examples are required. This can be
challenging, because most geologic folds at Earth's surface are only partially
exposed, with major portions of the fold either buried underground or eroded
away. The Whaleback Anticline in Bear Valley, east-central Pennsylvania, is a
unique locale where a complete large-scale fold is exposed; strip mining for
coal early in the last century revealed it in exquisite detail. This outstanding
exposure permits observation of the complete three-dimensional form of the
folded surface and provides a highly detailed record of deformation across the
fold. This project will use cutting-edge digital imaging techniques and
traditional geologic fieldwork to produce a comprehensive data set against which
to test hypotheses about folding. In addition to the scientific goals of the
project, the research is contributing to achievement of societally relevant
outcomes in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education, including the development of a diverse, globally competitive
STEM workforce through graduate and undergraduate student training; the
development of research infrastructure of three universities; the broadening of
participation of underrepresented groups in science; and increased public
scientific literacy and public engagement with science and technology. The
Whaleback Anticline is an important educational field trip location for dozens
of university geology departments throughout the eastern United States, and it
is a well-used recreation site for the local community. As part of this proposed
project we will preserve, expand and curate geological observations from the
Whaleback, for use by researchers, educators and the community.

Deformation associated with folding is recorded by distributed strain and
discrete secondary structures. These features are of fundamental importance to
understanding mechanisms and sequence of fold evolution and are of practical
importance as records and hosts for fluid migration in and around folds.
Incomplete data from natural examples limits the ability to evaluate geometric
and physics-based models of folding. Recent advances in digital imaging and
analysis now make it possible to produce quantitative three-dimensional
descriptions of noncylindrical folds and evaluate the relationships of these
forms to the distribution and evolution of fold-related strain. This project has
the following objectives: 1) to produce a high-resolution digital surface model
of an iconic fold, the Whaleback Anticline in Bear Valley, east-central
Pennsylvania; 2) to document the spatial variability of strain around the fold
with new observations of grain-scale strain, anisotropy of magnetic
susceptibility, and detailed mapping of mesoscale structures in the folded
layer; 3) to test the hypothesis that surface curvature controls the spatial
variation and style of observed strain around a fold; 4) to evaluate
stratigraphic and rheological influences on fold strain, through finite element
analysis; 5) to demonstrate the utility of structure-from-motion photogrammetry
as a tool for structural geology research and 6) to produce educational
resources that will preserve and expand access to a world-class field locality
and engage the local community.