* 1523741
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Megan Jensen, Jensen                  Megan          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Megan Jensen is
"Whale baleen: form, function, and filtration." The host institution for this
fellowship is Stanford University, and the sponsoring scientist is Jeremy
Goldbogen.

Baleen whales are among the largest animals that have ever lived, and many of
these oceanic predators achieve extreme body sizes despite filter-feeding solely
on tiny organisms like krill. Baleen consists of plates that hang down from the
roof of the mouth and fray on the interior edge; the resultant mat of fringe
separates prey from the water. This feeding mechanism is thought to be highly
efficient, but the fluid dynamics of baleen filtration are poorly understood.
This project challenges the long-standing hypothesis of how baleen filters
seawater using specimens from the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of
Natural History. In addition to increasing and perhaps correcting current theory
of a fundamental life process in whales, some of which are endangered, the
research results are likely to increase public awareness of marine resources and
ocean conservation. The filtration mechanism used by baleen whales could have
applications for industrial flexible meshes and filters inspired by baleen. This
fellowship directly supports the Fellow's career goals of becoming a leader in
bio-inspired research using biomimetic approaches to illuminate ecological and
evolutionary principles and teaching the next generation of biologists to use
approaches from engineering. The research engages several students from a local
high school as lab assistants, giving them hands-on research experience before
they apply to college.

Baleen specimens from the four living families of baleen whales are being
studied using CT scans to generate 3-dimensional print models of baleen for flow
tank experiments. These baleen models are being used to determine the
mechanism(s) of baleen filtration, measure prey capture efficiencies, and
estimate optimal filtration speeds. Identifying potential differences in
filtration mechanisms and efficiencies in different evolutionary lineages of
baleen whales is needed to understand how baleen's unique feeding mechanism
evolved in cetaceans and may illuminate the feeding processes that support the
largest animals on the planet. This project requires collaborations with
researchers at multiple institutions in a number of fields, including marine
mammal ecology, morphology, biomechanics, and fluid dynamics. The research
integrates the Fellow's background in fluid dynamics and ocean engineering with
new techniques, including making morphological measurements from museum
collections and using 3D-printed models for research.