* 1523866
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Seema Sheth, Sheth                   Seema          N
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Seema Sheth is
"Relationships among climatic tolerance, trait evolution, and diversification in
the California flora." The host institution for this fellowship is the
University of California, Berkeley, and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. David
Ackerly and Bruce Baldwin.

Certain geographic areas and evolutionary lineages harbor a greater number of
species than others, yet the causes of such variation remain poorly understood.
Lineages containing species with broad climatic tolerances may exhibit rapid
trait and climatic niche evolution, which in turn could accelerate the
accumulation of species via high speciation, low extinction, or both. The
fellowship research assesses the relationships among diversification rates,
rates of morphological and climatic niche evolution, and climatic tolerance to
better understand the origins of plant diversity in the California Floristic
Province, a botanically diverse region in temperate North America. Although the
relationships among diversification rates, trait evolution, and climatic
tolerances have been widely studied in animals, there have been fewer
assessments in plants, largely due to limitations in the quality and
availability of data. The California Floristic Province provides a unique
opportunity to examine these relationships in a well-studied set of plant
lineages, thereby improving our understanding of the origins of plant diversity
and the limits to evolution in deep time.

Spatial and phylogenetic analyses based on morphological and geographic data
derived from herbarium specimens housed at the University and Jepson Herbaria
are being used to shed light on the processes shaping geographic patterns of
biodiversity, thus improving our ability to prioritize lineages and areas of
conservation concern, forecast vulnerabilities to environmental change, and
devise management strategies that preserve evolutionary history and unique
genetic diversity. Training goals include gaining expertise in macroevolutionary
and phylogenetic methods, performing open and reproducible scientific research,
and managing and analyzing large datasets. Broader impacts include mentoring
undergraduate students from historically underrepresented groups and
dissemination of results to federal and state agencies that manage protected
areas in California and similar ecosystems.