* 1523590
* 2015 Physical Metallurgy GRC: Frontiers in Physical Metallurgy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Anthony Rollett, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2016
* USD 10,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The 2015 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Physical Metallurgy reviews the current state of knowledge with respect to key
aspects of the discipline. The presenters, discussion leaders, poster presenters
and other participants debate the state of the art and which problems are most
deserving of the researchers in the field. The GRC format emphasizes equal parts
presentation and discussion, with only 22 talks altogether and active leadership
of the discussion, which maximizes the opportunities for young researchers to
learn about new ideas and problems. The presenters and discussion leaders have
been selected based on their leadership in their respective areas and for their
capacity for thought-provoking lectures. We anticipate that the conference
attendance is close to the maximum of 200, of which approximately 40 % are
expected to be students and postdocs. Therefore the educational impact on young
researchers is substantial. We expect about 10 % to be assistant professors i.e.
academics at an early career stage. The technical topics include 3D printing of
metals, image analysis and data science. The 3D printing of metals is a prime
example of a new and potentially disruptive technology that also has the
potential to open up new lines of research in physical metallurgy because of its
novel processing characteristics. Therefore the technical impact of the meeting
is likely to be high because of the unusual mix of
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The 2015 Gordon
Research Conference on Physical Metallurgy examines the future of the
discipline. Revolutionary new high-resolution experimental tools are emerging
that permit multi-modal characterization in all three spatial dimensions as well
as time. At the same time, theory is maturing and modeling/simulation methods to
test it are advancing at a tremendous pace. These are tools that allow us to
address a key issue, which is 'How to exploit materials for best effect'?
Accordingly, the topics that are addressed in order to understand where the
current frontiers in Physical Metallurgy lie include: nucleation of
precipitation, dislocations, damage; deterministic versus statistical modeling,
e.g. fatigue cracking; microstructural design on the 5-1000 nm size scale;
studies and modeling of ductility - as a proxy for failure; science behind
modern processing techniques (rapid prototyping, interface bonding, plasma
sintering); designing metastable structures, e.g. metallic glasses,
nanostructures, layered composites and coatings; advanced microscopy and image
analysis; and additive manufacturing (3D printing). As is the tradition of the
Gordon Research Conferences, the meeting is founded on several fundamental
pillars, namely to explore the frontiers of the discipline, to foster debate on
the future of Physical Metallurgy, to present unpublished and speculative work,
and to engage world-class speakers. Junior researchers i.e. postdocs and
students are encouraged to attend because a large fraction of the available time
is devoted to discussion and debate. To emphasize this point, the time devoted
to talks is roughly equal to the time for discussion and presenters are strongly
encouraged to discuss current, unpublished work, based on strict rules that bar
citation or quotation from the meeting. In summary, this meeting offers a unique
opportunity to learn about new developments and trends in Physical Metallurgy.