* 1523362
* RAPID: Empowering the Citizen Scientist in the Fight Against Ebolaviruses
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2015,03/31/2016
* David Baker, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. David Baker for a project to engage the Foldit community
in a collaborative citizen science effort to address the ongoing Ebola outbreak
in West Africa. Foldit is a game-based protein design platform that engages
gamers drawn from the community at large. This project involves collaboration
among the Foldit game-based scientific community, The University of Washington's
Institute for Protein Design (IPD), and The University of Washington's Center
for Game Science, to improve and tailor the Foldit design platform in order to
arrive at proteins that bind and neutralize the Ebola glycoprotein. The project
will collectively harness the expertise of computer scientists and protein
design experts in collaboration with the constantly growing citizen scientist
community to arrive at totally novel functional proteins in an efficient and
rapid manner. The proposed research will deliver critical insight into the
structure and binding modes of potential anti-Ebola therapeutics; development of
these anti-Ebola binders will be extremely valuable both for academic and
industrial communities. The work will also significantly expand and broaden the
citizen scientist community focused on discovering anti-viral therapeutics for
Ebola. In addition to advancing development of anti-Ebola therapeutics, this
project will continue to educate the public at large about Ebola, its
epidemiology and current research efforts underway to combat this virus.

This project sets out to improve the Foldit game-based scientific environment in
the direction of rapid and direct collaboration among the Foldit community, The
University of Washington's Institute for Protein Design (IPD) and The University
of Washington's Center for Game Science. The project will use Foldit puzzle
challenges to facilitate the design of novel anti-viral proteins that bind to
the surface glycoproteins of Ebolaviruses, and will experimentally test these
binders for in vitro efficacy in collaborator laboratories. The approaches
involve (a) customizing the Foldit protein design platform for Ebola studies,
(b) engaging the Foldit citizen scientist community with anti-Ebola directed
protein design challenges, (c) refining the anti-Ebola Foldit player designs,
(d) preparing synthetic genes and manufacturing anti-Ebola proteins with the
designed proteins and (e) testing the optimized anti-Ebola proteins prepared, in
cell-based studies and animal models. The project will enlist the knowledge of a
broad cadre of experts in the design of novel protein binders targeting Ebola
and will utilize the Foldit platform to continually educate the public about
project progress and more broadly about the virus itself with regular updates
and feedback on the work.