* 1523586
* Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Eduardo Blanco, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2018
* USD 6,000.00

This award provides student support for a one-day workshop entitled "Extra-
Propositional Aspects of Meaning (ExProM) in Computational Linguistics", to be
held collocated with NAACL in Denver on June 5, 2015. Computational semantics
has grown significantly in the last decade, but extra-propositional aspects of
meaning such as modality, negation and attribution are much less studied:
annotations, models and tools are still in their early stages. This workshop
brings together students and established researchers interested in defining
theoretical frameworks, modelling and implementing real systems to process
ExProM, as well analyzing the impact of ExProM in natural language processing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extra-propositional meaning is ubiquitous
across domains and genres: it is found in scientific texts, news, social media
posts, etc. Humans do not always (want to) say (the whole) truth, and
propositional meaning alone disregards significant meaning encoded in everyday
texts. The workshop encourages submissions on the following topics (the list is
by no means complete): negation: verbal/non-verbal, analytic/synthetic,
clausal/subclausal and ordinary/metalinguistic, scope and focus detection;
modality: defining and annotating types; factuality: determining factuality
changes within and across documents; veridicity and veridicality: measuring
author commitment; attribution and perspectives: determining who says what and
their purpose; irony and sarcasm; integrating ExProM in the NLP pipeline; and
ExProM for NLP applications. The workshop covers these phenomena without
targeting any specific domain, and encourages submissions of novel theoretical
frameworks and tasks, as well as empirical results on known or novel corpora.
Preliminary ideas and results that may lead to active discussion during the
event are encouraged. The workshop's format fosters interaction between students
and senior researchers, and includes an invited speaker.