* 1523112
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Insight Into Community Identity Development In Southeast Asia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Michelle Eusebio, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 16,730.00

Southeast Asian countries, such as Vietnam, Indonesia, and the Philippines, are
renowned for their culinary diversity. Yet little is known about the early
development and variation of these cuisines, which potentially have their
origins more than 2000 years ago. An understanding of culinary practice is
relevant not only to understanding subsistence practices but also to gaining
insight into the formation of stable and unified social and political groups.
Shared practices provide an important "glue" which bind societies together and
archaeology provides a means to set such interactions within an extended
chronological context. Findings of this research will be incorporated into
exhibits at Long An Provincial Museum (Vietnam), Siwalima Museum (Eastern
Indonesia), and the Burke Museum (University of Washington).

Under the guidance of Dr. John Krigbaum and in collaboration with colleagues
from Australian National University, University of Washington, Southern
Institute for Sustainable Development (Vietnam), and Long An Provincial Museum
(Vietnam), Michelle S. Eusebio will conduct organic residue analysis on sampled
pottery vessels from two Neolithic and two Metal Age sites situated along the
tributaries of the Mekong River in southern Vietnam. Data collected will
facilitate identification of different types of food (plant, terrestrial animal
and aquatic food resources) that were prepared and/or served on recovered
pottery. In combination with technofunctional analysis to infer form and
function of this pottery, the results will provide complementary evidence of
plant and animal resources exploited as food, and inform understanding of the
variation, change, and continuity between cuisines. This research will address
the questions: Do culinary practices reflect the available food resources and/or
culturally conditioned practices in prehistoric Southeast Asia? What are the
community identities of these people who occupied these sites based on their
shared culinary practices? To aid in the interpretation of the Vietnamese
prehistoric data, she will analyze pottery samples from a Neolithic coastal site
in eastern Indonesia to provide an outgroup comparison. Ms. Eusebio will also
construct a modern Southeast Asian reference collection of organic residues
based on experimental and ethnographic pottery samples with known cooking
histories and she will isotopically quantify oils and fats from economically
important and endemic species of flora and fauna. This project is the first
microregional and diachronic survey of food residues from Vietnam, focused on
the preparation and presentation of food rather than simply its acquisition.
Research findings will demonstrate that prehistoric Southeast Asia provides an
ideal spatial and temporal benchmark for comparison to other regions with
respect to diversity of cuisines and correlations with social identity. The
recovery of food residues in prehistoric pottery used by different communities
of people in southern Vietnam will contribute to our detailed knowledge of the
history and development of regional cuisines.