* 1523733
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Emily Josephs, Josephs                 Emily          B
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2018
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2015. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Emily Josephs is "Polygenic adaptation in regulatory
networks" The host institution for the fellowship is the University of
California, Davis and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Graham Coop, Jeffrey
Ross-Ibarra, and Julin Maloof.

Domestication of wild plants has produced the diversity of crop plants available
today. During crop breeding, ancestral wild genomes gradually changed as
domestication specific traits were selected. The process is a type of genome
adaptation similar to natural selection. This project investigates genome
adaptation in two crop species, maize and tomato, by comparing gene regulatory
changes between the crops and their wild relatives. Expression of genes will be
compared and bioinformatics methods will be developed to assess and compare
genome change. The information will uncover key regulatory networks that are at
the foundation of breeding programs and in the long run could provide new tools
for genome-assisted breeding strategies. Workshops at high schools, public
presentations and research experiences for undergraduates will expose diverse
audiences to basic knowledge about agriculture from a genomic perspective.

Understanding the genetic basis of adaptation has been a longstanding goal of
researchers studying evolution through natural and domestication selection.
Polygenic adaptation, which is thought to be particularly important for
domestication, is difficult to detect with current population genetic methods.
This research will develop methods to detect coordinated changes in gene
expression systematically across regulatory networks due to polygenic
adaptation. These methods will be applied to two systems: domestication in
maize, using publicly available data, and environmental adaptation in wild
tomatoes, using gene expression data that will be generated as part of the
research. The raw tomato gene expression data generated will be available on
NCBI's Sequence Read Archive and processed data will be archived on the Dryad
Digital Repository. The scripts used to conduct analyses will be made available
for use by other researchers on GitHub.