* 1523960
* CSR: Small: Surviving Cybersecurity and Privacy Threats in Wearable Mobile Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Murtuza Jadliwala, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2018
* USD 403,044.00

Smart wearable devices, such as smart watches, are very popular and fast
replacing their traditional non-smart counterparts. By means of various high-
precision on-board sensors, these devices capture rich contextual information
about the wearer and his environment to enable several new and useful
applications. However, this diverse set of on-board sensors also provides an
additional attack surface. Access to these sensors, if not controlled
appropriately, can be used as a side-channel by an adversary keen on obtaining
private and sensitive information belonging to the wearer. Moreover, active
misuse detection and resistance of these wearable device sensors is not
straightforward. There is currently a lack of understanding of the various side-
channel security vulnerabilities that are possible due to wearable devices and
there is an urgent need to study the means for continuously protecting against
them. The research in this project addresses this very timely topic.

The goal of this research is twofold: first, to demonstrate that wearable
devices enable novel side-channel security and privacy threats, and second, to
design continuous authentication techniques and adaptive access control
mechanisms to survive these threats. Specifically, this research will evaluate
private data inference and wearer tracking threats in wearable devices that
utilize unprotected sensors as side-channels. This will be accomplished by
designing appropriate learning-based classification and prediction mechanisms
that can be used by an adversary for inferring sensitive data. On the protection
front, this project will develop a multi-sensor activity and identity
classification framework. This framework will leverage rich contextual sensor
data (e.g., fine-grained movements, application usage and critical body
parameters) to enable continuous identification and authentication of legitimate
wearers and their activities.

By studying security and privacy preferences of a diverse population of users,
this research will develop usable activity-based access control tools for this
new wearable device paradigm. A significant research thrust of this project is
to develop adaptive data-sharing mechanisms for dynamically regulating access to
sensor data based on the wearers' security preferences, current context and
perceived threats. Such mechanisms will serve as a good middle-ground between
giving full access (no security) and making manual decisions for each access
(poor usability). This project involves industry collaborators to facilitate
adoption of research outcomes into the future design and development of wearable
devices. Research results, including proof-of-concept applications, will be
publicly available to allow dissemination, early industry adoption and
integration with curricula.