* 1523632
* Toward a Broader Understanding of Gender Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kristina Olson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 497,711.00

Gender is perhaps the most fundamental social category -both in how we classify
and think about other people and in how we define ourselves. Gender plays a
central role in human experience throughout the lifespan and especially during
childhood. A great deal of research has explored how children begin to
understand what gender is and learn which gender typical behaviors, preferences
and attitudes are indicated by societal stereotypes of gender roles. Several
theories exist to explain the development of gender understanding, from
toddlers' ability to identify their own gender to older children's and
adolescents' ability to incorporate gender into their own self-concepts.
Although the study of gender development has been central to developmental
psychology for decades, nearly all research has focused on children who
experience "typical" gender development. The goal of this project is investigate
how culture, biology, and cognition interact to explain the development of
gender understanding by exploring both typical and atypical gender experiences
in childhood.

This project is based on the premise that understanding the full range of
variability in children's gender experiences is necessary to achieve a complete
understanding of gender development. Specifically, this research focuses on
three major research questions: (1) What is the role of social input in gender
development? (2) Is an understanding that gender is stable across time necessary
to develop more complex understandings of gender, such as gender stereotypes?,
and (3) Do children with less common gender identities show patterns of gender
development similar to those of children with more common gender identities? To
answer these questions the researchers will present children with a battery of
gender development measures including implicit and explicit measures, relying on
both parental and child report, and will compare responses among those with both
typical and atypical gender identities. The investigators predict that current
models of gender development will not adequately describe gender development
across all children, and anticipate that these findings will yield insights into
how to revise these theories to better explain gender cognition and behavior in
all children.