* 1523096
* EDU: Developing Security Education Materials for Future Advanced Manufacturing Engineering Workforce
* EHR,DGE
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Weichao Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,977.00

The cyber security of advanced manufacturing systems (AMS) has raised
significant interest amongst both the general public and researchers. However,
corresponding education programs fall behind in many aspects. Limited curriculum
or hands-on learning resources are available for security education in AMS,
especially exercises that cover the complete manufacturing cycle. This project
will try to bridge the gap by developing an experiment platform dedicated to
security education for AMS, and designing a suite of course modules and hands-on
projects upon it. The research achievements will provide a new method to train
qualified workforce to fill tens of thousands of open positions in this
traditional yet fast evolving industry and improve the sustainability and
security of future cyber-physical systems. Minority and under-represented
students will benefit from the project. Two community colleges have shown a
great interest in and support for this project.

The team will develop an experiment platform for AMS by implementing new modules
for equipment reservation, command transmission, and sensing data collection
upon the Remote Automation Management Project (RAMP) system. This platform
covers both cyber and physical systems underpinning modern manufacturing
operations. Three course modules and four hands-on projects on infrastructure
and data security in AMS will then be developed for knowledge learning and skill
training. Special efforts have been planned for the evaluation and dissemination
of the proposed experiment platform and educational materials. Rigorous
evaluation plans will be carried out by experienced evaluators to assess the
objectives and achievements of each phase of the project. The new instructional
materials will be implemented in four courses at UNC Charlotte. Through
collaborations with local community colleges, the NSF STARS Alliance, NSF REU
site, and NSF SFS Scholarship program, the researchers will reach out to both
high school and undergraduate students through summer camps and presentations.