* 1523264
* Direct Proteomic Investigation Of Variable Dairying Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Christina Warinner, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 188,158.00

The goal of this collaborative and multidisciplinary project is to answer
fundamental questions about the origins and spread of dairying. Today, global
annual milk production is nearly 700 million metric tons, or enough for every
human on earth to consume one pint of milk every day. Dairy is a critical part
of the world's agricultural economy, and it is consumed on every continent. This
is remarkable given the fact that the majority of the world's population is
lactose intolerant. Humans are the only mammals that consume milk past infancy,
and the utilization of milk by adults has required significant technological,
cultural, and genetic adaptations to overcome lactose indigestibility. These
adaptations, developed in prehistory, mark a major and lasting shift in human
dietary ecology. Recently, dairy has become the subject of popular controversy,
with some arguing that its consumption is unnatural and potentially harmful,
while others emphasize the health benefits of its nutrient profile and probiotic
potential. Archaeological investigations of early dairying can make a
significant contribution to this public debate by clarifying the role and
context of dairying in human diets over the past 10,000 years. However, many
critical questions regarding the origins and spread of dairy remain poorly
understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Christina Warinner and Dr. Cecil M. Lewis,
Jr., of the University of Oklahoma, together with colleagues in the UK, Germany,
and South Africa, will apply advanced proteomics techniques using tandem mass-
spectrometry to identify animal milk protein in dental calculus (tartar) in
order to document dairy consumption during key time periods in strategic
geographic locations. The research will focus on Neolithic and Bronze Age
populations in the Near East, Anatolia, and Europe, and will answer specific
questions regarding the emergence, scale, nature, and spread of dairying
economies in prehistoric populations. Specifically, the project will directly
test and refine hypotheses regarding the origins and spread of Neolithic
dairying, resolve ongoing debates about the scale of dairying before the rise of
genetic adaptations for lactose tolerance, and determine the relative importance
of sheep, goats, and cattle in early dairying economies. Bringing together a
team of archaeologists, biologists, proteomics experts, and health
professionals, this research will build international collaborations between
multiple academic institutions and museums, create and enhance an international
research and training network for graduate students, and contribute to public
science education through public talks, lectures, and exhibits on the role of
dairy in human prehistory. The results of the research will be published in
peer-reviewed journals, and the data generated by the project will be made
publically available for future use in open-access online data repositories.