* 1523269
* Collaborative Research; The Role Of Fuelwood Resources In A Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* William Marquardt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 28,289.00

As today's climate fluctuates and severe weather events occur more frequently,
sustainability of resources is a prominent concern, not just of scientists but
also of government leaders and the public. Humans have adjusted to climate
changes in the past. Why have some of these adjustments been more resilient and
sustainable than others? Archaeologists are uniquely positioned to provide
insights on sustainability because their studies provide information over many
centuries. In some cases, archaeological data permit tracking of the development
of human societies from small-scale egalitarian groups to large-scale socially
and politically complex societies. Inherent to this transition is reliance on
and the sustainability of natural resources, including the development of food
storage economies. The long-term trajectory of natural resource use and
management in this context is pivotal. Dr. Lee Newsom of the Pennsylvania State
University, along with colleagues at the Florida Museum of Natural History, will
undertake archaeological research on coastal fisher-gatherer-hunter societies
that lived in southern Florida for several millennia. The research emphasizes
the role of fuelwood resources as a means to preserve surplus food in an
emerging storage economy. This research will examine the influence of a past
society on forest resources. Insights into the legacy effects of sustained wood
use on the modern forest landscape/seascape, and generally the influence of
humans on coastal environments, will be of interest to other academic
disciplines and to planners. Mangrove forests are endangered world-wide and this
investigation will further inform ecologists about their resilience at the edge
of their range. Modern management and conservation of coastal forest resources
can benefit from the long-term record, as policy makers consider further habitat
disruption and loss from coastal development, sea level rise, and global change.

The project focuses on the Calusa Indians and their predecessors in southern
Florida, using ethnohistoric records and especially archaeological evidence. The
research team will test the hypothesis that the development of a food storage
economy was a critical factor underlying cultural complexity, and that fuelwoods
from coastal mangrove forests were an indispensable and sustainable natural
resource inherent to this process. The team will undertake intensive wood-
anatomical analysis of charcoal excavated from archaeological sites in the
Calusa core area along the southwest coast, emphasizing the characteristics of
the fuel supply, the influence of environmental perturbations on the
availability of wood, and the role of human agency and influence over local
forest resources. Basic wood data collection will include taxonomic assignments,
observations on anatomical variation, age, growth form, and growth rate. The
research will incorporate modern forest ecological data and experimental methods
to establish the hypothetical limitations of the fuel supply. Relevant
paleoecological and archaeological data will provide temporal and cultural
resolution. All data can be compared in order to test hypotheses on the effects
of sustained fuelwood selection and use, the impact of natural disruptions to
the fuel supply, and the potential for management.