* 1523025
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Archaeological Investigation of Erosion and its Effect on Social Processes in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Kathryn Catlin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2017
* USD 28,273.00

This award supports a Doctoral Dissertation Improvement project to investigate
the relationship between erosion and economic inequality over the
environmentally and socially dynamic first 500 years of Norse settlement in
Hegranes, Skagafjörður, Iceland. The agricultural practices of the first
settlers of Iceland, ca. 870 CE, caused widespread deforestation and soil
erosion. Erosion moves sediments from one place to another, and can lead to
either landscape degradation or augmentation. On Hegranes small abandoned farms
lie near large successful farms that still operate today, and eroded areas are
interspersed with productive grassland. This patchwork landscape allows
investigation of erosion as related to farmstead abandonment and the development
of social inequality. This research has implication for understanding how
coupled human and environmental systems today might affect processes of social
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will use tephrochronology to
compare the settlement sequence of small farms with associated environmental
sequences of soil erosion and landscape change. The goal is to explore changes
in number and distribution of small household farms, document processes of
erosion, and investigate whether social reorganization of the landscape
corresponds to increases in erosion. Larger, more powerful households likely
benefited from abandonment of small farms, and this project will suggest how
abandonment was managed to their advantage. This work will contribute to
discussions about social and political consequences of human-initiated
environmental change, focusing on unequal power relations between households
that facilitate environmental degradation and social inequality.