* 1523036
* Interplay Between Superconductivity and Charge Order in Near-Critical Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Andrey Chubukov, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 317,867.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education in condensed matter physics, in the subfield of high
temperature superconductivity. At sufficiently low temperature, high temperature
superconductors become superconducting, a cooperative state of electrons that
exhibits distinctly different properties from those of ordinary conductors like
copper. Among them is the ability to conduct electricity without dissipation.
This theoretical investigation is inspired by experimental discoveries over the
last few years indicating that the highest temperature at which
superconductivity appears is often the largest near a boundary between other
kinds of electronic states for which the electrons self organize to display
periodic arrangements of either electron magnetism or electron charges. The
understanding of how the competition among distinctly different tendencies for
electrons to self-organize might enhance the tendency for superconductivity is
important in developing a fundamental understanding of the origin of high
temperature superconductivity. It may also contribute to developing the
capability to design new superconducting materials which exhibit
superconductivity at higher temperatures and have properties that make them
suitable for practical applications. This award supports a detailed study of
what causes charge and magnetic orders to compete and how superconductivity
gains from this competition. This project supports specialized training of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in an active area of research, as
well as community discussions of the science that enables high temperature
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports theoretical research and
education in the field of strongly correlated electron systems. The research is
focused on two fundamental issues related to the pseudo gap in systems of
fermions tuned to a quantum-critical point: 1. the competition between d-wave
superconductivity and competing non-superconducting orders, and 2. the analysis
of superconducting fluctuations when superconductivity emerges from a quantum-
critical regime and the normal state is very different from that of a Fermi
liquid. The PI will investigate two competing orders: incommensurate charge
density wave order and incommensurate pair density wave order. The latter can be
considered as superconductivity with a non-zero total momentum of a pair. The PI
and his research team will analyze the stability of competing orders, ordering
patterns, and whether critical fluctuations of competing orders give an
additional boost to superconductivity leading to transition temperatures above
the corresponding quantum-critical points. In the analysis of superconducting
fluctuations, the PI and his team will study in detail the effects of
longitudinal fluctuations of a superconducting order parameter in a situation
when superconductivity emerges from a quantum-critical regime in which a pairing
potential couples incoherent fermions. The goal of this study is to go beyond
conventional Eliashberg-type theories to obtain the full Luttinger-Ward
functional, and analyze the profile of fluctuations away from the minimum and
check the existence of an intermediate temperature range where the gap is
already developed, but gap fluctuations keep fermions incoherent and prevent a
true superconducting order to develop. In this temperature range the system will
display the pseudogap behavior. &lt;br/&gt;The interplay between
superconductivity and competing orders is a pervasive theme in the study of
classes of exotic superconductors, such as the heavy fermion, cuprate,
ruthenate, Fe-pnictide, organic and molecular superconductors. Magnetism and
superconductivity are antithetical in elemental superconductors, but in exotic
superconductors magnetism may enhance the tendency toward superconductivity. The
analysis of the full phase diagram of quantum-critical metals may help advance
understanding of the key ingredients required for high- temperature
superconductivity in correlated electron systems.