* 1523697
* Archean continental weathering: Revisiting the Sr isotope seawater curve
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Aaron Satkoski, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 218,697.00

This award to the University of Wisconsin Madison will help us understand the
early Earth and the chemical characteristics of Earth's early oceans. It is
interdisciplinary, and could turn over old and ill-constrained paradigms. This
proposal will address some very important questions from the Archaean, earlier
than 2-1/2 billion years ago: when did plate tectonics begin, how quickly was
continental crust built up, did it occur in episodes, how did this affect
evolution of life, and how did the emerging continents and their on-board life
affect ocean chemistry and the appearance and setting of banded iron formations?
Sets of K-12 educational material developed by specialists will be disseminated
through the NSF-funded Portal to the Public, and the research results will be
used to design and develop illustrations of 'Archean Worlds,' which will be
incorporated into tours of the Madison Geology
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will provide fundamental
constraints on the starting date for plate tectonics and the role of lateral
tectonic processes. The enhanced understanding of Archean carbonates will bear
directly upon the development of banded iron formations, the chief source of
iron ore. This work will constrain Archaean topography and hypsometry (the Flat
Earth/Water World scenarios). The proponents will refine the existing overly
simplistic 87Sr/86Sr Archean seawater curve by looking at seven suites of
extremely well characterized marine carbonates. This is a serious attempt at
understanding the residence time of Sr in Archaean seawater, and how this may
have changed due to changes in the mantle and continental sources. Any new
seawater 87Sr/86Sr curve for the Archaean would have a truly transformative
effect on our understanding of Archean geochemistry by helping to settle the
controversy on whether iron formations and carbonates in the Archean were
deposited in restricted basins vs. open ocean, as well as constraining Archaean
subareal weathering fluxes of silicic continental material. The project will
also use REE+Y systematics to deal with the origin and extent of hydrothermal
input vs. continental weathering as well as the oxidation state of Archaean
seawater, and perform work on the same samples with C, O, Mg, Fe, and Mo
isotopes with funding from NASA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is a NSF-NASA
inter-agency collaboration on Early Earth.