* 1523355
* Positive Empirical Models of Election Frauds
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Walter Mebane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 648,424.00

Election forensics describes a growing body of work devoted to using statistical
methods to try to determine whether the results of an election are accurate:
whether the results are the collective choice implied by citizens' intentions
given the election rules. We propose to improve a model of election frauds that
positively describes what a fraudulent election looks like and supports using
eligible voter and vote counts to estimate the amount of fraud occurring in a
particular election. Our goal is to be able to estimate the incidence and
magnitudes of any frauds that occur, in a variety of election systems. We will
use a Bayesian approach that provides a rigorous and explicit way to use and
express evidence-based beliefs about the integrity of an election outcome.
Ideally we would like to recover what the election results would have been in
the absence of frauds. The principal challenge is whether it is possible to
distinguish frauds from the effects of the kinds of strategic behavior that are
intrinsic to political activity and are not frauds. To pin down whether the
model is responding to strategies or frauds we will supplement the vote count
data that are the primary basis for statistical analysis with information from
postelection complaint processes and election observer reports. The public in
general (and specifically election monitoring organizations) will benefit from
having a reliable and flexible tool that can be used to help confirm the
accuracy or inaccuracy of election results. The proposed research will improve
the Election Forensics Toolkit currently being produced for the United States
Agency for International Development. Software and data will be made available
and will be usable independent of the Toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will
generalize and improve the positive empirical model of election frauds
introduced by Klimek, Yegorov, Hanel and Thurner (PNAS 2012). We will generalize
the original model specification to suit a variety of election systems and to
account for voting and registration suppression and spoiling ballots. We will
replace the simulation methodology Klimek, et al. (2012) originally proposed
with statistical estimation using Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods (an
Expectation-Maximization algorithm may also work in simple cases). The
statistical models feature finite mixtures of irregular parametric distributions
with, in general, an unknown number of components, hence methods such as
reversible jump MCMC are of interest. Not only will a Bayesian approach provide
sound estimates for the distributions of parameters that represent the
configurations and magnitudes of frauds, but such an approach will allow the
analysis of one election to learn in a systematic and principled way from the
analysis of other elections: for example, posterior distributions from analysis
of data from one election can be used to inform the prior distributions applied
when analyzing a later election. We will study how well the models adapt to
systems with various election rules, using polling station (or precinct) data
from a diverse array of elections. We will examine whether the estimates respond
to frauds and not to strategic behavior. We will study how the estimates relate
to and perhaps can be systematically informed by auxiliary information such as
officially filed postelection complaints.