* 1523830
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015 (PRFB)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Melissa Kemp, Kemp                    Melissa        E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2018
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Melissa Kemp is "Evaluating the impact of environmental change the
diversity and distribution of Anolis lizards in Puerto Rico using
paleontological data." The host institution for this fellowship is Harvard
University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jonathan Losos. The research uses
Anolis lizards to investigate the role environmental change plays in shaping
diversity and species distributions through time and by location. Anoles are
used in this study as many aspects of their ecology and behavior are well-
studied; and this genus of lizards contains many species that show both adaptive
radiation (diversifying into new forms as their environment changes) and
convergent evolution (similarities appearing under different conditions). These
properties and their global prevalence make them ideal study organisms for this
study to determine how well they have persisted and diversified in response to
past changes in environments. By integrating paleontological data with
historical and present-day ecological data, this research seeks to identify
ecological factors that correlate with the presence/absence of species and
evaluate range shifts, extinction, and environmental change over the past 20,000
years. Expected scientific contributions include the augmentation of the
Caribbean fossil record with new excavations and models of how species ranges
may be impacted by future global phenomena.

Training goals include developing expertise in species distribution modeling,
Geographic Information Systems, and ecological surveying. The research provides
an opportunity to develop long-term research collaborations with Latin American
scientists; train and mentor high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in the U.S. and Puerto Rico; and develop bilingual
educational material to introduce underserved K-12 students in the U.S. and
Puerto Rico to evolutionary biology. In order to achieve these goals, the Fellow
is partnering with educators in the Boston area as well as in Puerto Rico.
Public outreach includes publication of a spatiotemporal map to illustrate the
diversity and distribution of Puerto Rican anoles over time.