* 1523380
* Organizing the 22nd GENI Engineering Conference (GEC-SC2015) Networking Event
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2015,07/31/2015
* Donald DuRousseau, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2015
* USD 200,449.00

This project supports the four-day and 22nd edition of the GENI Engineering
Conference (GEC), including organizing and hosting the demo session, to be held
March 23-26, 2015, at the George Washington University and at a nearby
conference hotel. The Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) is a
virtual instrument that is rapidly becoming operational across the United States
and that is designed to address three issues:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Science
Issues: We cannot currently understand or predict the behavior of complex,
large-scale networks.&lt;br/&gt;2) Society Issues: We increasingly rely on the
Internet but are unsure we can trust its security, privacy or
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;3) Innovation Issues: Pre-GENI, substantial barriers
existed to at-scale experimentation with new Internet architectures, services,
and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GENI addresses these issues via scale
(from federation) and support for two kinds of experiments: 1) controlled and
repeatable experiments, which will greatly help improve our scientific
understanding of complex, large-scale networks; and 2) long-running trials of
experimental services that engage large numbers of human participants. In
addition to the original motivation for GENI, an understanding has grown that
virtualized, federated software-defined infrastructures, of which GENI is a
first example, are a key technology for building the next generation of the
Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEC meetings and demo sessions have long
provided graduate students with both an opportunity to demonstrate and explain
their work to the GENI community prior to formal publication. GEC 22 will
provide an opportunity to reach out to a larger community to show and explain
the possibilities of GENI and the technology it enables, both for computer
science experimentation and for public-benefit
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four-day conference will be held in
Arlington, Virginia. The demo night event will be held at the George Washington
University's Science and Engineering Hall (Foggy Bottom Campus).