* 1523293
* Collaborative Research: Demographic catchments, interregional exchange and political complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Charles Stanish, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 55,376.00

Dr. Charles S. Stanish, of the University of California at Los Angeles, and Dr.
Kelly J. Knudson, of Arizona State University, along with colleagues in Peru and
the United States, will undertake research to study the development of complex
societies and to investigate the role of ritual feasting events in the
development and expansion of complex societies. Understanding how complex groups
emerge is an enduring anthropological question, both in past and present
societies. It is also relevant in a 21st Century context in which boundaries and
the very existence of multiple state societies are in flux. In addition to its
scholarly merits, the broader impacts of this project include 1) social and
economic impacts in the El Carmen region of Peru, 2) contributions to the
education and research infrastructure in North and South America, and 3) the
creation of a more diverse and inclusive scientific community through
educational and training opportunities for students in the United States and
Peru. Drs. Stanish and Knudson and their research team will examine the role of
ritual feasting events in political development and expansion. The research will
be conducted in the Chincha Valley of Peru, where a complex polity called
Paracas flourished around 800-200 BCE. The researchers will excavate an
archaeological site in southern Peru, a sunken court complex that was likely
built to host visitors from distant areas. They will then use techniques from
chemistry and geology to determine the origins of the humans buried in the
sunken courts and in the objects, such as plant and animal remains, found there.
By determining the geologic origins of the human and animal remains found in the
sunken court archaeological sites, the researchers will test the hypothesis that
major feasting events were used in the past to integrate different communities
and were a vital part of the development of sociopolitical complexity.