* 1523232
* Migration And Its Effect On The Maintenance Of Complex Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* J. Heath Anderson, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 338,593.00

Dr. J. Heath Anderson, of the Minnesota State University - Mankato, and his team
of collaborators at Florida State University, Luther College, and the Instituto
Nacional de Antropologia e Historia of Mexico, are conducting archaeological
research to investigate the role immigration played in the collapse and
regeneration of complex societies such as states and empires. Archaeology
investigates a broad range of environmental, economic, social, and ideological
dimensions of human behavior at time scales much greater than several
generations. As such, it is particularly useful for producing reliable knowledge
about past civilizations that serves to contextualize the present-day problems
U.S. citizens confront in their roles as participants in public discourse and
the democratic process. The present project investigates questions regarding how
people interact under a number of conditions all too familiar to the present
day, such as: How do incoming immigrant populations negotiate the use of
ecological and economic resources? What kinds of social and ethnic differences
form as a result of this process? How do people overcome those differences to
form a cohesive government? In the course of investigating these questions, the
project also builds and maintains national and international collaborative
relationships, provide training for undergraduate and graduate students,
safeguard ancient remains under threat of destruction, and involve local
populations in the investigation and preservation of cultural patrimony that has
global significance. Project results are shared with the public in several ways,
including their integration into undergraduate and graduate coursework,
publication in peer-reviewed journals, creation of publicly accessible online
database, and public outreach in the form of lectures and articles in popular
print and online formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Anderson and his research
team undertake a program of topographic mapping, archaeological excavation, and
analysis of artifacts and human remains to address research questions related to
migration and interaction between communities. Specifically, the project
addresses broad questions of general relevance in anthropology related to the
difficulties in distinguishing between movement of ideas and the migration of
populations. The research is conducted in the Tula Region, located in central
Mexico, which was incorporated into Mesoamerica's first empire until its
collapse ca. AD 550. After four centuries, it became the epicenter of
regeneration of complex society as the seat of power for the Toltec state. The
four centuries leading up to this regeneration are the focus of the present
project, when new populations began to inhabit the region. By analyzing isotopes
in human bone, trace elements in ceramic and lithic artifacts, and cultural
details such as cuisine, iconography, construction methods, and the manufacture
of ceramic vessels, the research team can distinguish between the movement of
ideas and the movement of people. This is vital in order to illuminate the
magnitude of population movement and the social and economic ties and ethnic
identities of these incoming populations. Most crucially, the project
investigates how these relationships changed in order to weld autonomous
communities into a cohesive government in the form of the Toltec state.