* 1523389
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Social Process And The Built Urban Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Laura Harrison, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 25,162.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the social mechanisms
that characterize urbanism within a precise chronological framework, in order to
improve understanding of urban dynamics in the past and present. While the
formal properties of early cities are well understood, the complex and
compelling question of how urban spaces transform social identities remains
unanswered. Given the growing importance of cities in contemporary societies
worldwide - over half of the world's population is projected to live in urban
areas by 2050 - understanding the mutually constituting relationship between
cities and their inhabitants is increasingly critical. Furthermore, reliable
chronological frameworks are essential for the development of social mechanism
analogs that connect ancient and modern city life. Archaeology is in a unique
position to improve understanding of these issues because its chronological
focus can reveal the timing and tempo of change, while its anthropological
perspective highlights the recursive relationship between identity and the built
environment across multiple scales. Within this context, this project will
establish the absolute chronology of Seyitömer Höyük, which lies within the
poorly understood inland western Anatolia region, during the final centuries of
the third millennium BCE. In addition, it will demonstrate how architectural
remains from this early urban settlement express deeply rooted configurational
principles that govern culture-space interactions in complex societies. Further
underlining the importance of this research is Seyitömer Höyük's imminent
destruction: it is located on top of a 12 million ton coal reserve and will be
completely destroyed in 2016 when the coal company moves forward with their
plans to extract this valuable resource.

This research project hypothesizes that (1) the Early Bronze Age III period at
Seyitömer Höyük spanned 250 years (Phase B lasted from 2250-2150 BCE and Phase A
lasted from 2150-2000 BCE), and (2) architecture was used to varying degrees as
an instrument of power and authority by elites, while non-elites used
architecture to establish boundaries that allowed them to resist elite influence
and maintain a degree of autonomy. The first hypothesis is evaluated with a
Bayesian statistical analysis of 32 radiocarbon dates that bracket construction,
occupation, and destruction events, which will provide insight into horizons of
localized building activity and allow for cross-regional comparisons. The second
hypothesis is evaluated with an integrated approach to architecture and social
organization, which combines space syntax analysis, a nonverbal communication
approach, and an urban spatial arrangement index, in order to reveal how the
built environment is essential in structuring interpersonal relations by
affecting patterns of movement, interaction, and behavior. This study will
generate new data about the chronology and architecture of the Early Bronze Age
III period from a threatened archaeological site. In addition, as a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to
enable a promising doctoral student to establish an independent research career.