* 1523973
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Movements and the Politics of Intangible Heritage
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Vincent Crapanzano, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2017
* USD 12,599.00

Throughout the world, communities suffering from socioeconomic inequalities and
discrimination join social movements to voice their concerns. Recently, social
scientists have observed a new phenomenon: these social movements are deploying
the symbolic power of specific cultural practices for their organizing goals
while, at the same time, the governments against which they are organizing are
seeking recognition from UNESCO for the same practices as Intangible Cultural
Heritage (ICH). This convergence of political strategizing and nation building
from above and social mobilization from below raises new questions about the
role of culture in human society and the nature of contemporary political
systems.

City University of New York doctoral student Laura B. Carter, supervised by Dr.
Vincent B. Crapanzano, will undertake research on these questions. She has
chosen to conduct the research in France and in the French overseas territory of
Guadeloupe, where a recent UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage designation
provides an apt site for investigating both ends of this process. In Guadeloupe,
she will collect data through participant observation, interviews, and oral
histories in two separate regions, in order to document and analyze how
practitioners and cultural stewards create, maintain, and vary the heritage
tradition. In France (with non-NSF funding support), she will investigate
changes in France's cultural policies and how they produced the Intangible
Cultural Heritage nomination. Findings from this research will further social
scientific understanding of the workings of social movements, the multiple
meanings of heritage projects, and the changing nature of political forms in the
contemporary world.