* 1523664
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2018
* Sarah Lawson, Lawson                  Sarah          P
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2018
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Broadening Participation. The fellowship supports a research and training
plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow and a plan to broaden participation of
groups under-represented in science. The title of the research plan for this
fellowship to Sarah P. Lawson is "Ecological causes and genetic effects of
social plasticity in the small carpenter bee across a latitudinal gradient." The
host institution for this fellowship is the University of New Hampshire, and the
sponsoring scientist is Sandra Rehan.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An important
research topic in animal behavior and evolution is the shift from solitary to
social living. Both ecological and genetic differences are thought to play
important roles in this transition. Facultatively social organisms are at the
transition of solitary to social groups and thus offer a unique opportunity to
compare the ecological and evolutionary pressures involved in the onset of
social behavior. The small carpenter bees, genus Ceratina (Hymenoptera: Apidae)
exhibit a range of behaviors, including maternal care, division of labor, mutual
tolerance and kin discrimination, which are often posited as emergent properties
of highly social groups, making them an excellent experimental system for this
research. In some Ceratina species, these behaviors and the resulting level of
sociality vary both between and within populations across a latitudinal
gradient. The long-term goal of the research is to determine the social
plasticity across a latitudinal gradient in one such Ceratina species, C.
calcarata, with the overall objective of providing a unique system for comparing
social group dynamics across populations. These bees are native pollinators and
the research results promise important information for local
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship also provides new opportunities
for postdoctoral training within and outside the laboratory. Broader impacts
include: 1) scientific and leadership training for a member of an
underrepresented minority who will gain invaluable field experience working with
an emerging model organism for the study of social evolution in a novel
environment as well as new techniques in the field of genomics and comparative
social evolution; 2) educational outreach through the University of New
Hampshire Women in Science Organization by organizing a hands-on lab for
students from the local middle school; and 3) collaboration with the Seacoast
Science Center to develop a program to encourage girls to explore STEM careers.