* 1523859
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Kristin Brzeski, Brzeski                 Kristin        E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Kristin E. Brzeski
is "How range expansion influences genetic change and disease susceptibility in
coyotes." The host institution is Princeton University, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Bridgett vonHoldt.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
animals adapt during range expansion is critical to predict how they may respond
to a changing environment and how to assess and manage their interactions with
native species. Assessing how animals, i.e., hosts, and pathogens interact
during range expansion is especially important because an animal's basic biology
can be shaped by efforts to detect and defeat disease. Coyotes (Canis latrans)
are an ideal species to evaluate issues of range expansion because they recently
expanded their range eastward in the U.S. and are interacting with native
species, such as endangered red wolves, and information is needed on coyote
pathogens, which may affect other species. The fellowship research evaluates the
genetic and immunological consequences of range expansion. Few studies have
evaluated adaptive evolution or host-pathogen dynamics in expanding populations,
thus the research promises to provide novel insights into important evolutionary
and ecological processes. Specifically, the effects of range expansion are being
studied by evaluating 1) coyote genetic variation in their historic and expanded
range and 2) host-pathogen dynamics at the coyote expansion front. Genetic and
serum samples are provided by the following museums and collections: Denver
Museum of Natural Science; Oklahoma Museum of Natural History; Louisiana State
University Museum of Natural Science; New York State Museum; and the Red Wolf
Recovery Programs Archival Data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training goals include
gaining expertise in genomic and bioinformatics techniques. The fellowship
research has value for conservation efforts and wildlife management as coyotes
have become highly visible animals and are often considered pests. Thus factors
influencing their biology, such as population structure and adaption, are of
general interest and can be used to educate the public and inform management
actions. This is especially true regarding pathogen data because coyotes and
domestic dogs can interact and share diseases, putting pets at risk. Public
outreach includes partnerships with conservation organizations and publishing in
nontechnical magazines to enhance the public's knowledge of current science
discoveries. Educational outreach involves mentoring undergraduate students.