* 1523455
* I-Corps:  Development of a Business Model for a Rapid Screening Test for PFCs
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Graham Peaslee, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Per- and polyfluorinated compounds (PFCs) in consumer products have come under
increasing scrutiny recently, because of their persistence in the environment
and their ability to bioaccumulate. Clearly, this is an emerging chemical class
of concern, and efforts have begun to monitor its prevalence in both the
environment and in human exposure pathways. Generally PFCs are used in stain- or
water-resistant applications, such as outdoor clothing, food packaging, and non-
stick coatings on carpets and upholstery, although new PFCs are becoming
prevalent in cosmetics and low-odor paints. Current analytical methods for
measuring PFCs involve solvent extraction, liquid chromatography and tandem mass
spectrometry for about 70 different known PFC telomers. These tests are costly
(on the order of $1000 per sample in commercial testing labs. This project
proposes a novel method that has been developed for screening for the presence
of PFCs in a rapid, non-destructive way that can be used to measure the total
fluorine present in any type of solid sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's
proposed method (Particle-Induced Gamma-ray Emission) has been demonstrated to
detect total fluorine content on a variety of matrices (food-wrapping papers,
textiles, carpets, etc.) at nearly 1/20th of the cost. This effort represents
the commercialization of an analytical method in nuclear physics applied to
consumer products and environmental samples. The adaption of analytical methods
to best serve a commercial role in society is the primary intellectual merit of
this proposal. The model developed here will be as unique as the analytical
method already developed, and may serve as a model for future spin-off
technologies. The proposed tool can revolutionize the testing industry with
respect to testing for PFCs in consumer products and environmental samples.
Optimizing this model will allow for the best price reduction in analytical
costs for PFC detection, and will allow more manufacturers, retailers,
regulatory agencies and consumer groups to test for PFCs that represent a risk
to human health.