* 1523990
* ContaSed2015: Support for U.S. Participants in an International Conference on Environmental Chemistry, Toxicology, and Engineering of Contaminated Sediments, Switzerland
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Patrick Ferguson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 02/29/2016
* USD 10,000.00

CBET 1523990&lt;br/&gt;Ferguson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ContaSed2015:
Support for U.S. Participants in an International Conference on Environmental
Chemistry, Toxicology, and Engineering of Contaminated Sediments,
Switzerland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Conference aims at providing the most
intellectually stimulating forum possible for top international experts as well
as junior researchers from different scientific disciplines to discuss and
present the most recent and topical results and novel approaches regarding the
analysis, assessment and remediation of contaminated sediment. Recent sediments
are major sinks for chemical contaminants in aquatic ecosystems and are
extremely important in the fate of pollutants in the environment. The ecological
relevance of sediment quality is widely acknowledged, but approached differently
in various scientific fields. Sediments govern the biogeochemical cycle of
pollutants and nutrients and play a key role for the bioavailability of
hazardous pollutants and the resulting toxic effects. In addition,
biodegradation of organic pollutants in aquatic sediments is of major relevance
in risk assessment. As archives of contaminants, dated sediments represent
historic records of trends in environmental pollution. The participation of U.S.
researchers at the conference will be essential in order to ensure that the
implications of contaminated sediments on U.S. environmental policy, health, and
society are fully represented in this important forum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
topics to be addressed at the 2015 Conference will include: a) sedimentary
archives and historical trends; b) reconstruction of changing pollutant loads
into aquatic ecosystems and identifying their drivers; c) transformation
processes and degradation products of sediment contaminants; d) porewater
partitioning of chemicals and bioavailability of hazardous substances and
pathogens; e) role of sediment-water interface processes on biogeochemistry and
pollutant dynamics; as well as, f) in-situ and ex-situ remediation techniques of
contaminated sediments. The conference will cover studies about legacy and
emerging organic micropollutants, heavy metals, virus and microbes, as well as
engineered nanomaterials. Recent advances in environmental chemistry,
ecotoxicology and engineering will be presented and discussed among participants
from fundamental and applied scientific research, experts in risk assessment and
regulators from public authorities. In particular, it is envisioned that the
conference will include a discussion at the end wherein stakeholders (including
international experts and conference attendees) will identify some "grand
challenge" research questions for addressing contaminated sediments and their
impacts on societies and economies both nationally and internationally.