* 1523617
* Partnership for Research and Education in Nanomaterials between Pennsylvania State University (PSU) and North Carolina Central University (NCCU)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Branislav Vlahovic, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2021
* USD 3,677,000.00

****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This Partnership for Research and
Education in Nanomaterials between North Carolina Central University (NCCU), a
historically black university, and the Pennsylvania State University (PSU) MRSEC
seeks to robustly increase the participation and success of underrepresented
minority students in material science. To recruit and train students well
equipped to address future challenges in this emerging field, this partnership
will integrate a) recruiting strategies that increase the awareness and appeal
of material science careers by highlighting the central role of the discipline
in the 21st century; b) an innovative peer mentoring "Penn Pal" program which
will pair minority participants in the MRSEC program with NCCU student
participants in PREM; c) productive student research experiences at the
frontiers of material science closely mentored by both NCCU and MRSEC faculty;
and (d) providing participating students with the educational skills necessary
to enhance their competitiveness and continued success in materials related
graduate programs. Collaborative research with PSU will help NCCU develop
sustainable, competitive materials science research programs to continue student
training beyond this grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The three research thrusts at the core of this
partnership between NCCU and the Penn State Center for Nanoscale Science are: 1)
charge transport in individual and coupled semiconductor nanostructures, with
the goal of developing advanced optoelectronic devices, 2) new plasmonic
materials for optical filter and sensor applications, 3) functionalized 2D
materials for spintronic and electronic applications. This partnership also
supports expansion of research at NCCU in new directions through seed projects
focused on development of nanoscale patterned ferroics and perovskite based
multiferroic materials. Each of the three major thrusts and the seed projects
listed above have established partnerships with IRGs and seed projects at PSU.
Potential outcomes of this research include: uncovering new phenomena in coupled
nanoscale semiconductor and metal oxide systems, development of novel
nanoparticles and nanostructured thin films for optical applications, creating a
new generation of carbon based electronic and spintronic devices, and developing
nanostructured ferroic materials with tunable coercivities. These projects will
form the foundation of a sustainable materials science research program at NCCU.
The combined resources of NCCU and the PSU Center for Nanoscale Science will be
leveraged to fully prepare NCCU students for careers in material science through
a comprehensive, sequential program that will expand the pool of students
interested in materials science and recruit talented students from this pool;
integrate students into a tightly knit, multidisciplinary materials science
community with classroom and laboratory components tailored for all academic
levels; engage students in closely mentored, productive research experiences at
PSU.