* 1523273
* RAPID: Cultural Dimensions of Ebola Virus Transmission in Guinea, West Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* Sally Lahm, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2016
* USD 99,721.00

Historically, outbreaks of Ebola Virus in human populations have been linked to
exposure to infected wildlife and generally limited to isolated rural areas in
East Africa. In contrast, the current Ebola Virus outbreak in West Africa, which
began in December 2013, has evolved into a more complex, larger, and multi-
country epidemic. Furthermore, international travel and medical relief efforts
have brought a few cases of Ebola Virus infection to both the United States and
Europe. In the past, social scientists have found that to be effective, disease
control efforts must be grounded in understanding local cultural beliefs because
they underlie indigenous medical practice and influence comprehension of public
health education messages. Given these earlier findings, the recent spread of
Ebola Virus disease suggests the need for more attention to the social and
cultural dimensions of disease transmission. The research funded by this award
responds to this need. Results will provide critical practical information for
current health education efforts, contribute to improved disease transmission
theory, and also help the United States prepare for future global epidemics of
infectious diseases. Informed by Cultural Dimensions of Disease Causation
Theory, this research bridges cultural anthropology, biomedical anthropology,
and epidemiological outbreak response practices aligned with Western medicine.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sally Lahm and Dr. Amira Roess, both of Georgetown
University, will survey and interview a sample of residents and health care
workers in 72 selected communities throughout Guinea, the origin country of the
current epidemic. Dr. Lahm's previous research, during four Ebola Virus
epidemics in another part of Africa, found that the effectiveness of emergency
public health education and social mobilization efforts was determined in part
by local theories of disease causation, socioeconomic and political factors,
traditional subsistence and foraging practices, and religion. The researchers
will test the theory that the same is true in Guinea and may account in part for
the persistence of the current epidemic. Findings will help scientists who seek
to integrate cultural and bio-medical disease models of disease transmission.
The international research team will collect data on health education and social
mobilization activities, Ebola Virus knowledge, medical practices, communication
and transport systems, and health care seeking behavior. In addition, the
project will provide preliminary data on the distinct meanings of disease,
illness experience, and health from the viewpoint of several regional ethnic
groups in Guinea; the effects of gender on these perceptions; and how local
people understand Ebola as a phenomenon. Because of regional cultural
continuities, results will apply to areas beyond Guinea where Ebola virus and
other zoonotic infectious diseases are known to occur. To maximize broader
impacts, the project research will support the development of an online, open-
source map of Ebola response in study villages; the development of a teaching
module on the use of anthropological theory for designing health education
campaigns and for integration into primary and secondary school classrooms in
Africa and elsewhere; and the provision of policy recommendations to improve
public health education campaigns through integration of anthropological
research in West Africa, connecting government, non-governmental, international
and domestic actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in
response to the NSF 15-006 Dear Colleague Letter (DCL) on the Ebola Virus.