* 1523917
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Keisha Carlson, Carlson                 Keisha         D
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2018
* USD 216,000.00

This NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2015 supports a research and training plan in a host laboratory
for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in biology. The
title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Keisha Carlson is
"Molecular and Physiological Response of Tomato to Changes in Light Quality".
The host institutions for the fellowship are the University of Puget Sound and
the Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research and the sponsoring scientists
are Drs. Andreas Madlung, Carmen Catal√° and Lukas Mueller. Training objectives
include plant functional genomics, molecular genetics and physiology. Broader
impacts include providing research training internships in plant biology and
bioinformatics for students from Heritage University, a private minority serving
institution in Toppenish (WA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike animals, plants are
sessile organisms and cannot move to protect themselves from changing
environments. Instead, plants sense environmental cues, which initiate cellular
signaling responses resulting in developmental decisions, such as when to
germinate or produce fruit. This project will help to elucidate how a gene
family encoding a specific light receptor coordinates the response to light in
tomato, a model for economically and socially important food crop plants. The
research will be undertaken at the University of Puget Sound, a primarily
undergraduate institution where research mentoring of undergraduates is a
priority, thus allowing the Fellow to develop skills necessary to undertake an
academic career at a similar institution while furthering research relevant to
genome informed plant breeding for improved crop growth in changing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the perception of
red light and far red light by phytochromes (PHYs) which are encoded by a small
gene family. Red light cues via PHYs help plants to regulate photomorphogenesis,
flowering, and shade avoidance among other processes. Gene duplication followed
by selection during the evolution of the PHY gene family has led to different
functions and sensitivities of individual PHY genes across plant taxa. Three PHY
members in tomato have been studied genetically, but the roles of the remaining
two lesser-known PHYs (SlPHYE and SlPHYF) remain to be discovered. This project
aims to understand the role of each PHY gene, alone and in combination, in the
vital developmental responses to light. The project will generate new mutant
alleles in SlPHYE and SlPHYF using the CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing system. The
project will also use computational approaches to analyze gene expression
differences among single and multiple PHY mutants in different light conditions
by building transcriptional networks using RNA-seq data.