* 1523189
* Ethnographic Research on  Social Change and Native Alaskan Spirituality in the Upper Kuskokwim Region of Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* David Koester, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2017
* USD 11,528.00

The project investigates historical and contemporary forms of spirituality and
religion in Alaska's Upper Kuskokwim River region. The focus is on the
Athabascan village of Nikolai, where Russian Orthodoxy is the predominant
religious practice. Study of Nikolai's historical religious traditions and
villagers' traditional relations with the local environment will help to provide
a better understanding of not only their spiritual practices, but of the place
of human-environment relations in the study of religion and spirituality more
generally. The research provides a good base of comparison for others interested
in the study of religious movements in rural and indigenous contexts. At the
same time it contributes to knowledge of and appreciation for Athabascan
cultures and ways of life in the history of northern North America and of the
challenges villagers face today as they continue to encounter dramatic social
change. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to better understand
to meaning and significance of spirituality in the contemporary lives of this
Athabascan community. The community of focus is Nikolai in particular but
includes also the surrounding area where community members have relatives, and
travel for work, study, recreation, subsistence activities and visiting. The
research will be conducted through participation in community activities and
observations of practices and community events. Formal interviews will also be
conducted to answer specific questions about local history and practices.
Overarching questions are as follows: How have people of the Upper Kuskowkim
Region incorporated new and older spiritual and religious ideas and practices?
What ideas and practices are meaningful to different individuals and groups of
the region today? Why and how are their varying meanings established? The
proposed research project has strong comparative value to researchers of the
circumpolar areas influenced by Russian Orthodoxy, including Southeast Alaska,
Aleutian Islands, the Russian Far East and Siberia. Considering the well-
documented sudden resurgence of spirituality and religion in post-Soviet
regions, the proposed research provides a valuable comparative perspective for
researchers of indigenous societies in Siberia and Russian Far East.