* 1523666
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2015
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Andrew Furness, Furness                 Andrew         I
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2017
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2015, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports a research
and training plan for the Fellow to take transformative approaches to grand
challenges in biology that employ biological collections in highly innovative
ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Andrew Furness is
"The evolution of placentas in Poeciliid fishes: testing adaptive and conflict
hypotheses." The host institution for this fellowship is the University of
California -- Irvine, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. John Avise.

One of the grand challenges in the field of evolutionary biology is to explain
the evolution of complexity. The placenta, an intimate fusion of maternal and
fetal tissues for sustenance and physiological exchange, is a complex organ and
its origin invites explanation. Species in the live-bearing fish family
Poeciliidae have independently evolved placentas in numerous lineages of closely
related non-placental sister taxa. This unique biological situation provides an
opportunity to test alternative hypotheses regarding the conditions and
ecological factors favoring their evolution. Adaptive hypotheses posit various
maternal fitness advantages for placenta evolution, while the conflict
hypothesis posits placentas evolve as a byproduct of a self-reinforcing arms
race between maternal and fetal tissue over control of resource transfer. These
hypotheses make contrasting predictions regarding the life-history traits
associated with placentation and the ecological conditions where placentation is
expected to be favored. Beginning with assembling a species-level database on
reproductive mode, life-histories, and habitat for the family Poeciliidae, the
fellowship research includes deriving a robust evolutionary tree and uses
phylogenetic comparative methods to test the hypotheses. It uses the biological
collections of numerous U.S. museums including Scripps Institute of Oceanography
and the Los Angeles County Natural History Museum.

Research results promise a deeper understanding of the ultimate (evolutionary)
factors favoring placentation, which occurs not only in mammals and fish but
also sharks and rays, reptiles, and several groups of invertebrates. Poeciliid
fishes are model organisms for the study of natural and sexual selection and the
new database provides a useful basic biology resource to a large network of
scientists working on diverse research questions. Parts of the database that
contain information on species, geographic range, size, habitat, ecology, and
life-histories are valuable in terms of conservation and predictive modeling of
extinction risk, an important endeavor given that some of these live-bearing
species have limited geographic ranges now threatened by human encroachment and
habitat disturbance. Training objectives include molecular sequencing,
phylogenetic tree construction, statistical and comparative analyses, and
developing long-term collaborations with museum associates and scientists.
Educational outreach includes participation of undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds, and public outreach involves presentations at the museum
and creating a project website.