* 1524798
* Deciphering the Role of Deformation in Orogenic Evolution Through Multi-scale Structural Studies in a "Crustal Laboratory", Central Sierra Nevada, California
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Scott Paterson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 270,174.00

This project focuses on a multiscale investigation aimed at understanding
deformation processes associated with the development of the central Sierra
Nevada mountain range. The project involves geologic mapping and measurement of
deformation fabrics and the building of a data bases that records deformation
fabric, strain measurements. The fieldwork and digital database will be used to
better understand processes that contribute to the localization of deformation
in mountain belts during orogenic events. In addition to the scientific
objectives of the study, the project is contributing to socially and nationally
relevant goals, including the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
an important STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) discipline;
development of a digital data base in a geographic information system (GIS)
format that will be made available to the scientific community and the public;
development of an extensive, integrated digital field guide to the geology of
the region that can be used for teaching and research; and the development of
virtual field trips that will be publically available. Undergraduate student
training will involve participation in the university's UTR program, a
multidisciplinary, learner-centered research experience that includes field
studies followed by lab research, culminating in professional publications and
presentations. Efforts will be made in this program to broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups in the geosciences. The project involves
international collaboration with a scientist from Canada, and the project will
contribute to research infrastructure at the host institution. Results of the
research will be made available through peer-reviewed publications in the
scientific literature, presentations at professional society meetings, and
public outreach through lectures at schools and national parks. Samples will be
archived at the university, and digital data will be made available via
university servers and community databases. In addition, all data will be shared
with Yosemite National Park and other conservation area
personnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rheological heterogeneity in orogens over the
range of lithospheric observation scales leads to deformation partitioning of
tectonic boundary conditions throughout intervening scales, making it
unrealistic to apply single-scale models to connect small-scale structures to
tectonic scale processes and boundary conditions. The proposed research is a
multi-scale investigation aimed at connecting deformation processes, tectonics,
and orogenic evolution using a state of the art, self consistent Multi-Order
Power-Law Approach (MOPLA) which incorporates multi-scale deformation in its
formulation and provides a rigorous means for bridging small-scale studies to
tectonic-scale deformation conditions and processes. The relationship of
tectonics to orogenic evolution and the resulting multi-scale deformation will
be investigated by applying MOPLA to the data rich central Sierra Nevada where
extensive multi-scale structural, strain, and petrological data linked to
mapping and geochronology have been collected over several decades. These define
an apparent Mesozoic history of episodic deformation, plate motions, and
tectonic regimes that parallel episodic magmatism. A geographic information
system (GIS)-based synthesis of new and existing datasets will be created and
then integrated with MOPLA to construct and test multi-scale modeling
predictions. This work will test the hypothesis that intra-orogenic deformation
is partly controlled by evolving deformation partitioning that is further
modulated by the thermal effects and volume addition related to episodic
magmatism. This will be investigated through modeling to test four corollary,
interrelated hypotheses: (1) Structural variations observed in the central
Sierra Nevada at all scales often arise from time-dependent deformation
partitioning rather than shifting plate motions. (2) Magmatic fabric
orientations in central Sierra Nevada plutons represent local fabrics developed
in partitioned flow fields rather than distinct increments of the bulk
deformation field. (3) Episodic deformation is primarily driven by the effects
of episodic magmatism. (4) Intra-orogenic bulk shortening is accommodated
primarily by crustal thickening along broad, low strain domains rather than
motion along localized, high strain zones. As single scale structural studies
and plate motion reconstructions for older orogens are limited, forward modeling
of multi-scale deformation will lead to a better understanding of how to
integrate local observations to explore their regional significance.