* 1524725
* AGS-PRF: Reconstructing Late Pleistocene East African Hydroclimate from Triple Oxygen Isotopes: A Novel Multi-Proxy Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jessica Moerman, Moerman                 Jessica        W
* Fellowship Award
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 172,000.00

This AGS PostDoctoral Research Fellow (PRF) award supports efforts to generate a
~600,000-year-long record of equatorial East African hydroclimate and water
balance by analyzing a suite of carbonate isotope proxies from a well-dated
paleo-lake core. This dataset will allow the response of East African
hydroclimate to different orbital configurations and insolation regimes to be
examined over multiple precession and eccentricity cycles. The research
represents the first application of triple oxygen isotopes for paleoclimate
reconstruction from sedimentary carbonate. By combining triple oxygen isotopes,
recently shown to be sensitive recorders of evaporative processes, with more
traditional isotopic proxies, the researcher aims to isolate the influence of
evaporation on water balance.

Carbonate triple oxygen isotopes are a highly promising but yet-to-be exploited
tool for reconstructing past tropical hydroclimate. The proposed research will
advance fundamental knowledge of triple oxygen isotope variability in lake
carbonate archives and their utility as Precipitation-Evaporation (P-E) proxies.
These results will provide a possible roadmap for integrating triple oxygen
isotopes into investigations of past water balance in other arid regions where
evaporation is an important control. The data-model comparison between the
record generated in this project and isotope-equipped climate model simulations
will provide critical insight into the dynamics driving East African
hydroclimate variability, thus aiding the assessment of model performance and
improvement of future water availability projections in drought-sensitive areas.

The project involves interdisciplinary research combining methods and approaches
from the fields of isotope geochemistry, paleoclimatology, and climate dynamics.
The project also includes outreach and mentorship activities to underrepresented
STEM groups and public outreach to adult faith communities through: (1) the
NeXXt Scholars Program, which serves undergraduate women pursuing Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) majors; (2) the Johns Hopkins
University STEM Achievement in Baltimore Elementary Schools (SABES) program; and
(3) partnerships with the Evangelical Environmental Network and Young
Evangelicals for Climate Action.