* 1524800
* Collaborative Research:Faculty as Change Agents: Transforming Geoscience Education in Two-year Colleges
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Norlene Emerson, University of Wisconsin Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 370,036.00

Two-year colleges (2YCs) play crucial roles in meeting the Nation's geoscience
and STEM workforce needs and in increasing public scientific literacy.
Nationally, 2YCs enroll over 45% of all U.S. undergraduates and serve a large
number of women, minority, and first-generation college students. The 2YC
teaching environment is one of the most challenging as community colleges are
primarily open-access institutions that serve an extremely diverse student body;
teaching loads are heavy; there is an increasing use of adjunct faculty; and
support is limited for participation in faculty professional development
activities. The latter issue is particularly crucial since such activities are
widely recognized as the source for many innovative teaching methods shown to be
critically important for improving student learning. This faculty professional
development project will build a national network of self-sustaining local
communities of 2YC geoscience faculty and administrators who use evidence-based
strategies to improve all students' academic success and facilitate professional
pathways into the STEM workforce. A program of interconnected and mutually
supportive research and evaluation that is fully integrated in the project will
advance knowledge and understanding of the effectiveness of a professional
development model for full-time and adjunct geoscience and STEM faculty in 2YCs.

The project goals are to 1) implement high-impact evidence-based instructional
and co-curricular practices that support the academic success of all students
and promote professional pathways into geoscience; 2) build a sustainable
national network of 2YC leaders who catalyze change at multiple levels from
their courses to institutions in their local regions and within the community of
practice; and 3) investigate models of professional development for full-time
and adjunct 2YC geoscience faculty that promote the cycle of innovation, where
faculty learn from the research of others, make changes in their own practice,
and share what they have learned with the education community. The project's
professional development program will prepare two cohorts of 2YC geoscience
faculty teams to implement evidence-based instructional and co-curricular
practices at their institutions. The first cohort includes twenty-four (24)
full-time and adjunct faculty from seventeen (17) institutions in ten regions in
the United States. National workshops, virtual professional development
opportunities (e.g., journal clubs, webinars, implementation and discussion
groups), and on-line resources will support faculty in implementing changes on
their campus. Inclusion of administrators in the project will provide support
for systemic change at each institution. The faculty teams will expand the reach
of the project by engaging additional two-year and four-year institutions in
their regions using a combination of workshops and follow-on activities. Virtual
professional development opportunities will serve as a mechanism for increasing
the reach of the project and on-line resources will provide persistent resources
for the full geoscience and broader STEM communities. The project team
anticipates that six-hundred (600) full-time and adjunct 2YC faculty and fifty
(50) four-year college and university faculty will be engaged in professional
development activities over the course of the project and that the project will
impact an estimated 250,000 2YC students enrolled in geoscience courses.