* 1524878
* WSU - Student Success Through Evidence-based Pedagogies (WSU-SSTEP)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2021
* Robert Bruner, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,977,793.00

This is an institutional transformation project. It continues work initiated
under a planning grant from an earlier NSF program. The project supports a
commitment by this university to increasing substantially the use of evidence-
based teaching for foundational STEM courses. With this project, the core STEM
Departments and the University's administration plan to fully utilize evidence-
based teaching methods in lower division courses and study the impact on student
achievement. The implementation of this plan allows a test of impact on a
student body that is disproportionately non-traditional (50%) and comprised of
many underrepresented minority students (25%). Non-traditional and minority
students represent an increasing demographic nationwide and their needs must be
addressed in order to meet the goal of increasing the number of STEM degree
recipients. Heretofore, evidence-based teaching methods have been studied much
more extensively on campuses with traditional student populations. The planning
grant supported a self-assessment by STEM faculty instructors of their teaching,
aided by peer-mentor-led learning communities and departmental conversations on
teaching reforms. It initiated a set of pilot interventions in foundational STEM
courses in core STEM departments, using professional development workshops to
support faculty engagement with the initiative. A recently completed university-
wide strategic planning process pinpointed the importance of adopting evidence-
based teaching methods to improve student success. This team is well-positioned
to move to scale in developing evidenced-based teaching approaches for its STEM
courses, with priority given to the 26 foundational classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program supported by this grant will allow departments
to compete for course transformation grants. Successful projects will be
provided resources in the form of a pedagogical post-doc and faculty
professional development stipends to assist them in reformulating the class from
a lecture-based curriculum to one dominated by active-engagement methods.
Faculty involved in the concurrent projects will comprise a learning community
to discuss issues relating to the implementation of evidence-based teaching and
their reflections on student learning. Longitudinal tracking will follow
students through to graduation, to assess the impact on academic and career
trajectories of the students enrolled in the transformed courses. A large part
of the present project pertains to data collection and assessment of project
efforts. These data will be documented and shared to ensure that other
institutions can learn from this institutional transformation effort. Through
this program, students will experience engaged learning, and faculty, post-
doctoral fellows, and graduate students will be trained in modern evidence-based
teaching methods. These students and fellows will be able to bring their
training and experiences to other institutions and serve to build a national
pool of experienced teachers using engaging and effective teaching methods.