* 1524667
* AGS-PRF: The Role of Electric Fields in Plasma Structuring and Transport in the Mid- to High-Latitude Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Evan Thomas, Thomas                  Evan           G
* Fellowship Award
* Carrie E. Black
* 03/31/2018
* USD 172,000.00

The solar wind, a continuous stream of solar plasma and magnetic fields blowing
past the Earth, generates an electric field and causes a large-scale circulation
of plasma within the magnetosphere. Earth's magnetic field lines are "frozen"
into the plasma and thus are entrained in this convection. Of particular
interest, the feet of these convecting magnetic field lines thread the
ionosphere (a layer of charged particles in the Earth's upper atmosphere) at
high latitudes and set the ionospheric plasma into motion as well, forming
patterns of convection that change as the solar wind changes. At lower latitudes
the ionospheric plasma co-rotates with the Earth. Disturbances in the solar wind
associated with stormy space weather strengthen the convection in the
magnetosphere, which has the effect of expanding the convection pattern in the
ionosphere equatorward into regions where previously the ionospheric plasma was
co-rotating. This project aims at improving knowledge of the portion of the
expanded convection pattern in the mid-latitude region, where observations have
previously been sparse, using a set of newly built radars. This is crucial to
understanding space storms and their effects at Earth. The improved convection
patterns from this project will enable a broad spectrum of new research. This
geoscience postdoctoral fellowship will support the further training of an
early-career scientist. It will also ultimately result in more accurate space
weather models of value to society.

To accomplish its goals, this project will use the Super Dual Auroral Radar
Network (SuperDARN), which is a primary tool for constructing the high-latitude
convection pattern and its variability. Recently SuperDARN expanded its coverage
in the northern hemisphere by adding nine mid-latitude radars and three polar
cap radars to better resolve these sections of the convection pattern. The work
will use seven years of SuperDARN data from 2008 through 2014 in combination
with solar wind observations from the OMNI 2 database to produce an expanded and
improved model of the high-latitude convection pattern as it responds to solar
wind drivers.