* 1524176
* Rockwell Kent and Early 1930's Greenland: A Comparative View of Environmental, Social and Cultural Change in Contemporary Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2020
* Jette Rygaard, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2020
* USD 645,155.00

As the United State assumes chairmanship of the Arctic Council in 2015, it is
important to acknowledge the role the country and its citizens have played in
shaping understandings of the Arctic. Although attention is often placed on US
political and economic policy, individual Americans have also served to carry
ideas to the North and to bring knowledge of these remote regions back to the
United States and to a broader global audience. American artists, photographers
and writers that ventured to the Arctic in the first half of the 20th Century
captured some of the first widely seen images of Arctic landscapes and the
Peoples that inhabit the region, creating lasting representations of an area of
the world unknown to the majority of the public. These photographs, writing and
other visual materials continue to shape how the Arctic is understood today and
serve as lasting records of the changes the region and its Peoples have
experienced over the past 100 years. One such individual is Rockwell Kent, an
American artist and writer who resided in Greenland in the early 1930's and
produced an extensive collection of photographs, art, and literature about his
time in the country. Kent?s work and its contemporary influence illustrates the
connected history of United States and Greenland and the continued relationship
between the two counties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
combines anthropological, visual, and historical methodologies to approach how
social, cultural and environmental changes and continuities are constructed and
experienced in Greenland. The project centers around the work of Rockwell Kent
with Kent's photos and art used as a starting point to engage contemporary
community members in the study communities of Illorsuit, Sisimiut, Nuuk, and
Uummannaq and discuss how social, cultural and environmental changes as well as
continuities with the past are understood and defined. On a broader level, the
project will address issues of representation of the Arctic and Northern
populations. Historical photographs of the North have primarily been produced by
foreign explorers, artists, and travelers that entered the region for specific
purposes over limited periods of time. Yet, the visual products they left behind
are often utilized with far less criticism than their writings as resources for
constructing the history of the region and its Peoples. This project will
examine the role of historical photographs in the production of the past and the
present and their relationship to contemporary notions of social, cultural and
environmental change in the Arctic. Kent's works as well as his relationship
with Greenlanders will be examined through interviews with decedents, oral
histories, written correspondence between Kent and Greenlanders and Danes and
articles and letters-to-the-editor found in historic Greenlandic language
newspapers. This work will provide a clearer view of Kent, one of the few
Americans living and working in Greenland at the time, his relationship with the
country and its peoples, and insight into how Greenlanders viewed Kent and his
work in the 1930s. These findings will be discussed with community members and
photographic workshops will be held in each community with students to encourage
contemporary youth to produce their own representations of their communities.
Student photos will be displayed and discussed alongside Kent's original works
and contemporary documentary photographs by PI Defibaugh in community
exhibitions. The visual works will be utilized as vehicles to discuss
representations of Greenland, Inuit cultures, and constructions of continuity
and change, including environmental, social, and cultural shifts from the 1930s
to the present, a period of rapid transition not only in Greenland but across
the Arctic. Overall, this project will contribute to a greater understanding of
how visual media, produced in the past and in the present by both foreigners and
community members, become intertwined in the constructions of contemporary
Greenland and Greenlandic identities as well as contributing to our
understanding of historical and contemporary relationship between the United
States and Greenland. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In keeping with Arctic Social
Sciences Program initiatives, this project will provide a comparative study,
partnerships between researchers and develop educational and interactive
collaborations with community residents. Educational exchange and collaboration,
between community members, students and researchers, is the foundation for this
research. Workshops, held in each study community, will teach students
photographic techniques and allow them to produce their own images that will be
displayed and discussed, contributing to a locally produced record of ethnic and
regional identities in relation to environmental, cultural, and social change.
Public exhibitions and discussions of these contemporary photos, Kent's
historical works and the research process will also allow for further
collaborations between researchers from various disciplines and community
members through an interactive and multimedia forum, strengthening the
community's role in the research process and allowing multiple perspectives to
be expressed and explored. As a result, this project will provide significant
academic contributions and visual documentation of contemporary Greenland as
well as important public outreach and dissemination activities. The project will
further the development of interactive community-based participatory research
methodologies in the Arctic and will have a crucial student research training
and capacity-building aspect in the form of collaboration with researchers and
students from US institutions, Rochester Institute of Technology and Binghamton
University (SUNY) in New York, and Ilisimatusarfik (University of Greenland) in
Nuuk, Greenland.