* 1524755
* AGS-PRF: Probing the Relationship Between Radiation Belt Electron Precipitation and Electromagnetic Ion Cyclotron (EMIC) Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Lauren Blum, Blum                    Lauren         W
* Fellowship Award
* Carrie E. Black
* 02/28/2018
* USD 86,000.00

Just as in the ocean and the atmosphere, waves exist in space plasmas. In these
plasmas, where collisions between charged particles are rare, energy can be
transferred to a charged particle from a plasma wave (analogous to a surfer on
an ocean wave). As a result, plasma waves are a major means of transferring
energy from one charged particle population to another, and for energizing a
small portion of the population to very high energies. There are many types of
plasma waves. Microphysics tells us that plasma waves, called electromagnetic
ion cyclotron waves (EMIC), are able to scatter electrons formerly trapped in
the radiation belts into the atmosphere where they are lost. However, the
relative importance of EMIC waves to the global variability of the radiation
belts has been a subject of intense scientific debate for the past 50 years. The
main goal of the research is to resolve this debate by combining multi-point
conjugate measurements of particles and fields in space with electron
precipitation. The capability for making these measurements was recently
expanded by the Van Allen Probes and BARREL balloons missions. The grant will
support the further training and development of a promising female early-career
scientist. The resulting global maps of relativistic electron precipitation will
be useful to the broader space physics and aeronomy communities, to researchers
studying the chemistry of the middle atmosphere, and for space environment
applications, such as active mitigation techniques for both natural and
artificial radiation in space.

To address the open questions raised above, the methodology is to construct
large-scale maps of plasma and wave fields in space and correlated maps of high-
energy electrons precipitating into the atmosphere from multiple satellites both
at high- and low-Earth orbit. At issue is how long radiation belt electrons
actually travel through regions occupied by EMIC waves as they move along closed
drift path in the radiation belts. The longer they interact with the EMIC waves
the more likely they will be scattered out of their closed drift paths and be
lost. If the waves exist only in limited regions that are sparsely distributed
throughout the radiation belts, or turn on and off rapidly, their cumulative
effects may be insignificant. Comparing these maps not only provides information
about the global distribution of plasma waves but also about whether the
relationships between the mapped quantities are consistent with EMIC waves. Even
if these maps are not consistent with EMIC wave interactions with the energetic
particles and cold plasmas, they provide clues to, and place constraints on,
other mechanisms..