* 1524161
* Collaborative Research: Detailed Elemental Abundance Patterns in Early-Type Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2016
* Charles Conroy, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 09/30/2016
* USD 206,433.00

Many of the fundamental properties of galaxies are encoded in their spectral
energy distributions (SEDs). In principle, one can extract a variety of galaxy
properties, including the star formation history, chemical enrichment history,
dust content, elemental abundance pattern, and stellar initial mass function
(IMF) from SEDs. The method by which this information is extracted is known as
stellar population synthesis (SPS). SPS models have been employed to estimate
basic properties such as the star formation rate, metallicity, and total stellar
mass. This project will use the next generation SPS model, extensively
calibrated against data on individual stars and globular clusters, to make
predictions for the full SED shape (as opposed to a limited number of narrow
lines) as a function of individual abundance ratios, age, and the
IMF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use this model to measure for
the first time the detailed elemental abundance patterns and the low-mass IMF in
early-type galaxies over a wide range in galaxy mass. These quantities will
provide fundamental new insight into the formation and evolution of these
complex stellar systems. One noteworthy example is the measurement of the
abundances of s-process neutron capture elements, which is novel and will open
up new areas of extragalactic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, this
project will support a graduate student for three years to be trained in the
development and use of the next generation of SPS models. The team will also
write a pedagogical paper to explain in simple physical terms the trends
observed in synthetic spectral libraries.