* 1524311
* F and Cl in Peridotite Minerals: Analytical Development and Applications to Fluid Cycling in the Earth's Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Veronique Le Roux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2020
* USD 297,693.00

Oceanic plates are built in submarine magmatic centers called ridges. Over
millions of years, tectonic plates are pushed away from ridges and sink back
into the deep Earth via a process called subduction. From birth at a ridge to
recycling in a subduction trench, oceanic plates incorporate considerable
amounts of seawater, carried into the interior of the Earth during subduction.
The presence of fluids at depth dramatically modifies the physical and chemical
properties of rocks and trigger melting and formation of arc volcanoes above
subducting oceanic plates (e.g., Andes volcanic chain). Unraveling the pathways
of fluids inside the Earth is critical to understand how and where arc volcanoes
form; yet, elemental cycling of fluids in subduction zones remain poorly
understood. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will take advantage of state-of-
the-art micro-analytical facilities at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
to develop novel tracers of fluid pathways, fluorine and chlorine, in rocks that
were once equilibrated at depth in a subduction zone. In order to accomplish the
goals of this study, the team will be furthering the analytical methods to
analyze fluid tracers at very low concentrations. The ultimate goal is to
advance current analytical techniques and use the distribution of fluorine and
chlorine in rock minerals to track global fluid cycling in subduction zone
settings.