* 1524651
* AGS-PRF:  To what Extent are Jupiter's Magnetosphere and Aurora Influenced by the Solar Wind?
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Marissa Vogt, Vogt                    Marissa        F
* Fellowship Award
* Carrie E. Black
* 03/31/2018
* USD 172,000.00

The solar wind of charged particles and magnetic fields blowing outward from the
Sun interacts with Jupiter's magnetosphere, the region of space controlled by
its magnetic field. But does this interaction make a significant difference to
the Jovian magnetospheric dynamics as it does at Earth? Most believe that the
effects of any interaction with the solar wind are completely overwhelmed by the
effects of the rapid rotation of Jupiter's strong magnetic field and the
extended torus of heavy ions created by Io's volcanoes. This question continues
to be an area of active research and debate due in part to the lack of available
solar wind measurements near Jupiter's orbit. The study will use a model that
propagates solar wind conditions measured near Earth out to Jupiter in order to
estimate solar wind conditions there. The work will examine observations of
magnetic fields and particles within Jupiter's magnetosphere by the Galileo
spacecraft, and images of Jupiter's aurora taken by the Hubble Space Telescope,
to determine whether changes in these data may be statistically associated with
changes in the modeled solar wind conditions. The results of this work will add
to our knowledge of how planetary magnetospheres work, putting our understanding
of the Earth's magnetosphere into a broader context, and informing the study of
star-exoplanet interactions. This grant supports the training of a female
postdoctoral student. Results from the research and other recent advances in
space plasma physics will be presented to the public during the Boston
University Astronomy Department's weekly public open night at the campus
observatory while groups are waiting to use the telescopes. Additionally, the
proposer will mentor graduate students at Boston University through the Graduate
Women in Science and Engineering program.

Previous attempts have been made to model solar wind conditions at Jupiter based
on solar wind conditions near Earth but the success of this technique has so far
been limited by the large uncertainties in the arrival times of solar wind
disturbances. These uncertainties in turn make linking dynamical responses of
Jupiter's magnetosphere to particular solar wind disturbances problematic. The
innovation in this proposal is to use the observed compression of Jupiter's
magnetic field in response to the dynamic pressure changes in the solar wind to
refine the arrival time of disturbances in the solar wind and minimize
uncertainties in timing. The statistical correlation (or lack thereof) between
the arrival of solar wind disturbances and changes in Jupiter's magnetosphere
and aurora will test the importance of solar wind interactions. Of particular
importance, it will address whether quasi-periodic behavior observed in
Jupiter's magnetosphere might be controlled by the solar wind. This study will
also determine how Jupiter's main auroral emissions respond to changing solar
wind conditions, and compare findings to theories and models.