* 1524698
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Multipath TCP Side Channel Vulnerabilities and Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Alex Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 181,995.00

The objective of this project is to understand and strengthen the security of
Multipath TCP (MPTCP) - an IETF standardized suite of TCP extensions that allow
one MPTCP connection, consisting of multiple sub-connections between two hosts,
to use multiple paths simultaneously. Even though MPTCP has been gaining
momentum in being widely deployed, its security is yet to be well understood.
The project is expected to raise awareness of MPTCP security and ultimately
yield a foundation for MPTCP security. The study will further increase the
acceptance of MPTCP as an efficient, trustworthy, and next-generation transport
layer protocol, especially considering that the deployment of new protocols can
always be hindered by security concerns. The results will lead to development of
guidelines and specifications for MPTCP through standards organizations such as
IETF.

This project aims to gain an in-depth understanding of the implicit interaction
among sub-connections within an MPTCP connection, the information that can be
leaked or inferred through side channels by eavesdropping such interaction, and
the potential attacks on MPTCP by exploiting such leaked or inferred
information. The key insight is that the current MPTCP design inherently allows
an attacker eavesdropping on one path to learn information (e.g., throughput)
about the sub-connections along other paths. Such seemingly benign information
leakage allows an attacker to hijack the entire MPTCP connection. This project
considers three general threat models: on-path only attacker, host-assisted off-
path attacker, and host-assisted on-path attacker. Based on these threat models,
the PIs propose to study traffic offloading/onloading and sequence number
inference attacks. The PIs also plan to design and validate countermeasures and
defense mechanisms for MPTCP against such threats.