* 1524739
* Collaborative Research: Upgrading Learning for Teachers in Real Analysis
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Nicholas Wasserman, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 178,829.00

There is a critical need in undergraduate education to provide pre-service high
school mathematics teacher candidates with a substantial depth of mathematical
understanding linked to the mathematical knowledge for teaching necessary to
support their students developing knowledge, skills, and positive dispositions
in mathematics. To obtain certification to teach high school mathematics,
preservice and in-service teachers (PISTs) are required to complete a number of
courses in advanced mathematics. Yet research has shown that PISTs' experience
in advanced mathematics courses has a minimal effect on how they teach or on
their students' subsequent mathematics achievement. This Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education (IUSE) Engaged Student Learning--Level 1 project will address
this issue by introducing an alternative model to teaching advanced mathematics
to PISTs. This issue is investigated in the context of a Real Analysis course, a
course often required for certification to teach secondary mathematics. As
opposed to traditional Real Analysis courses, the transformative model in this
project situates the real analysis in the context of high school teaching and
makes explicit links between the real analysis content and pedagogical actions
that a PIST can take into a classroom setting. It also assesses PISTs both on
their understanding of real analysis and their ability to draw on their real
analysis knowledge to respond appropriately to classroom situations in secondary
mathematics. This change in instruction will be viewed as successful if the
PISTs can (i) prove important theorems in Real Analysis, (ii) use the content in
Real Analysis to answer questions about high school mathematics more thoroughly,
and (iii) use the content in Real Analysis to provide productive responses to
practical pedagogical situations. This new model of a Real Analysis course and
the associated research will contribute towards the National Science
Foundation's IUSE:EHR program's goal of supporting research and development
leading to and propagating interventions that improve the quality of STEM
graduates, including future teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
collaborative project, researchers from Rutgers University, Columbia University,
and Temple University will work together to design, implement, and assess the
innovative Real Analysis course for PISTs. In the project's model, PISTs are
first presented with an authentic classroom situation from high school
mathematics in which a teacher needs a deep understanding of mathematics to
respond appropriately. From the discussion that ensues, the class will "build up
from teaching practice" to tackle the underlying mathematical issues at play in
a real analysis context. After the work in real analysis resolves these
mathematical issues, PISTs "step down to practice" and are asked to revisit and
respond again to the original and analogous classroom situations. In the first
two years of the project, the instructional methods will be implemented using a
design-based research paradigm to assess and improve the quality of the
instruction. The third year of the project will be a quantitative comparison
study in which this instructional model is implemented at the three sites and
PISTs performance in these classes will be compared to PISTs who have completed
a traditionally taught capstone course that connects advanced mathematics to
high school mathematics at Rutgers University. If successful, the work in this
grant will illustrate the efficacy of a transformative model for teaching
advanced mathematics to PISTs, as well as provide further insight into the
professional (content) knowledge base for secondary teachers, so that
preparation and professional development can be designed as an intentional
sequence of mathematics content, and not just an arbitrary set of mathematics
courses.