* 1524244
* "Pre-conference symposium for the 23rd International Conference on Supersymmetry and Unification of Fundamental Interactions " in Tahoe City, California, August 23-29, 2015.
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2015,01/31/2016
* John Gunion, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 01/31/2016
* USD 7,500.00

SUSY 2015 (The 23rd International Conference on Supersymmetry and Unification of
Fundamental Interactions) is the primary yearly conference for the presentation
of ideas regarding new physics beyond the Standard Model (not just
supersymmetry) and experimental results relevant thereto. It covers not only
high energy physics but also related areas of cosmology and the early universe.
It attracts 300-400 top researchers (both theorists and experimentalists,
students through senior faculty) in all new physics areas. The conference lasts
for 6 days and includes both plenary talks (about 25 thirty-minute talks) and
seven daily parallel sessions (in combination containing of order 150 talks,
each being of order fifteen minutes). The conference is essential for all
researchers in the various fields to remain fully up-to-date with respect to the
progress made by and ideas being developed by other researchers in the many sub-
fields of relevance. It is the critical venue for dissemination of recent and
planned research. This symposium will take place for five days during the week
prior to SUSY 2015. It is a series of pedagogical talks by prominent physicists
working in areas covered by the SUSY 2015 Conference. It is designed to prepare
advanced graduate students and junior postdocs in the subject areas that will be
covered by the conference. Pre-SUSY symposia have been an important and much
needed component in the preparation of these young physicists for a productive
research career.

Society benefits in many direct and indirect ways from support of theoretical
and experimental physics in the areas on which the SUSY 2015 conference focuses.
The conference re-inforces and motivates the newest generations of physicists
pursuing research careers in this and related very highly sophisticated fields.
It is focused on ideas that potentially explain the most elementary particles
and most basic forces of nature. Such understanding has often yielded
substantial benefits to society. The developments in experimental techniques,
detectors and accelerators necessary for probing the particles and forces, have
frequently led to very substantial spinoffs. Many medical advances have resulted
from the very sophisticated detector and accelerator developments needed for the
field to progress. This pre-conference symposium will help educate graduate
students and postdocs in the areas covered by the conference, allowing them to
fully participate.