* 1524606
* Synchronic, Diachronic and Typological Description of Máku
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Raoul Zamponi, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2017
* USD 76,373.00

The goals of this project are: (1) to produce a description of Máku (a.k.a.
Máko), an extinct language isolate of the Amazon region of northern Brazil and
southern Venezuela, including a comprehensive overview of the phonology and
morphosyntax, (2) to highlight and disseminate the typological and theoretical
implications of the language based on this grammatical description, (3) to
investigate loanwords, language contact, and proposed remote genetic
relationships involving Máku, and (4) to provide for lasting curation of the
data and documentation which is accessible to scholars, linguists, and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current and projected loss of the
world's linguistic diversity affects our scientific understanding about
language, and reduces our ability to appreciate other cultures and languages.
These consequences make study Máku urgent because it is a language isolate with
no known relatives and has a profound lack of documentation, description, or
analysis. This project makes available in one central location, everything that
has been recorded of this extinct isolate including the many unusual and unique
traits found in this language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For example, it has been
stated that Máku has an evidentiality system, serial verbs, a contrast between
immediate and distant future and between recent and distant past, suffixed
negation, numeral classifiers, and three distinct verb classes based on subject
markers, whether prefixed, suffixed, or infixed (infixes are rare
crosslinguistically), a set of personal pronouns including four distinct forms
for "we", an unusual system of active-stative verb alignment, and the use of
/y/, a high front rounded vowel which is extremely rare in indigenous languages
of the Americas. This project describes these features and investigates them in
light of known linguistic characteristics in this area and in the world
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In ensuring access to the data on this little-
known linguistic isolate, this project will benefit both linguistics and other
disciplines which depend on language-related material (anthropology, history,
biology, geography). It will also benefit the general public interested in
cultural diversity, by enhancing accessibility to information of cultural, as
well as linguistic, significance. It will contribute to language typology and
linguistic theory through the investigation of the unusual linguistic traits
found in this language and contact linguistics through the identification and
description of a series of areal traits also observed in this language. The main
investigators on this project are Chris Rogers of Brigham Young University and
Raoul Zamponi of the Centro Interdipartimentale di Studi sull' America Indigena
(CISAI) of the University of Siena.