* 1524703
* RAPID: Development of Rapid In-Field Ebola Infection Screening Guided by Biomolecular Simulation and Collaborative Remote Visualization
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Klaus Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The researchers on this project seek to develop and improve software tools, that
will run on high-powered supercomputers, in order to find new antibody-like
agents for the Ebola virus that will signal the presence of Ebola in an infected
person. Once found, effective agents will be incorporated into a diagnostic tool
that will be used for rapid, non-invasive, inexpensive and accurate detection of
the virus in saliva. The goal is to develop a highly sensitive test that can be
used on patients who have not yet shown any symptoms. Results from this project
could save uninfected patients the emotional burden as well as the cost of the
currently imposed 3-week quarantine. Early detection may also greatly improve
the survival rate of Ebola patients. This critical piece of work will meet a key
and immediate need in the nation's Ebola response.

The project described in this proposal seeks to identify antibody-like proteins
with the desired dynamical properties using molecular dynamic simulations done
by the proposing team. These dynamical properties are at the atomic level, and
will be obtained by performing all-atom petascale MD computer simulations on
Blue Waters. The proposing team will serve as a key intermediary in the
experiment cycle. They will take potential antibodies developed by an ALB design
team at Pennsylvania State University, identify, through petascale simulations,
characterize the dynamics of the ALBs and optimize the conformational state
change, and provide these results to a bio-sensor laboratory at University of
California, Santa Barbara, who will design and build the tool. Since the
modelling and simulation will be a collaborative effort with scientists at both
ends, the proposing team will also build a remote visualization tool for
scientists to collaborate over the experimentation.