* 1524784
* OCE-RIG: Refining a Diatom-Based Sea Ice Proxy for the Bering Sea Using Water, Ice and Sediment Samples to Improve the Robustness of Sea Ice Reconstructions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Beth Caissie, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,776.00

As summer sea ice disappears from the Arctic, we strive to know if this has
happened in the past and if so, how often. Unfortunately, satellites have only
been tracking sea ice since 1979. In order to determine natural fluctuations in
sea ice, we need a much longer record. Sediments deposited below sea ice can
extend the record of sea ice by thousands to hundreds of thousands of years.
This project builds on work to develop a proxy for sea ice by looking at the
relationship between diatoms (algae) found in sea ice and in the sediments
below. This project will additionally attempt to increase and diversify
participation in the ocean sciences by introducing a group of high-achieving,
under-represented students from Iowa to the excitement of sea-ice research. The
investigator and students will spend a week collecting an ice core from a frozen
lake and analyzing it. The students will get to experience fieldwork and will
connect research done in remote, exotic locations to the their own
backyards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although long-term goals of the investigator are
to put modern changes in the Bering Sea in the context of the geological record,
the specific goals of this project are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Determine the spatial
patterns of diatoms living in sea ice and sea water across the Bering Sea Shelf
in spring 2006 and 2007.&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine the seasonal succession of
diatoms living in sea ice and open water over the Chukchi Sea Shelf from summer
2015 to summer 2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will examine diatom
assemblages in a collection of seawater, sea ice, and sediment trap samples and
then compare these assemblages to those in the top 1 cm of sediments below.
Seawater and sea ice samples were collected in 2006 and 2007, while the sediment
trap samples will come from the Chukchi Ecosystem Mooring which will begin
collecting a full annual cycle of diatom sedimentation this summer. The
investigator will count cleaned diatoms at 1000x magnification using standard
counting methods and taxonomy, identifying to the species level whenever
possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The driving hypothesis of the research is that a
predictable subset of diatoms is in the ice algal and spring blooms and is also
in the sediments directly below. The investigator also aims to test the long-
held hypothesis that sea ice diatoms are preferentially dissolved at the sea
surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A robust sea ice proxy is essential for
realistically reconstructing past sea ice extent and retreat in the Arctic
Ocean. This work will serve to ground statistically based sea ice proxy in
ecological reality. This pilot study, awarded to a new researcher at Iowa State
who is in the process of establishing her lab, will be leveraged to launch a
larger, sea-based study that will include deploying sediment traps in the Bering
Sea. Research results will enable climate modelers to use records of sea ice
during previous warmings to predict how primary productivity and sea ice will
change in the coming decades and to anticipate the ecosystem-scale impacts such
changes may precipitate.