* 1524806
* CHS: Small: The Future of Geospatial Data: The Analytics and Implications of Open Source Mapping
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Kenneth Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,367.00

This project will produce methods and tools in the critical area of geospatial
data that both the larger computer science research community can use as well as
the public-sector and private-sector development communities. Geospatial data
are a critical area of research and development, notably in supporting rapid
response to disasters arising from natural or technological hazards, as well as
other sudden crises. This research will deeply investigate the conditions under
which volunteer-generated data in "open source mapping" environments are
generated and used. The tools developed in this project will help further
validate volunteer-generated open geospatial data, and enable appropriate use
through better analytical inspection methods. In addition, the connections
between social computing activities and impacts on the world will be
substantiated in clear ways, especially through the windows of humanitarian
events and societal resilience-building. How open mapping can be made more
viable for social problems will also be advanced through this
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the team will design,
develop, deploy, and evaluate a software infrastructure and its associated
application programming interface that operates on large historical files of
OpenStreetMap data. OpenStreetMap is a 2+ million member, decade-old volunteer-
based organization that has created a "open data" based digital map of the
world. This research will allow examination of the interpersonal, group, and
organizational means by which collaborative cartography is accomplished through
social computing. It will then examine the implications of having open
geospatial data available to humanitarian efforts, which are important drivers
to socio-technical change, including that of disaster response, resilience-
building of critical infrastructure, and other governmental responsibilities.
The research combines computational and behavioral analytics to address critical
questions at multiple levels of analysis, from database instantiation to
institutional use.