* 1524638
* Collaborative Research: Developing and Assessing Effective Cyberlearning within the STEMWiki Hyperlibrary
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Joshua Halpern, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2018
* USD 54,112.00

This is a collaborative project involving the University of California, Davis
(Award DUE-1525862), Diablo Valley College (Award DUE-1525057), Howard
University (Award DUE-1524638), the College of Saint Benedict (Award
DUE-1525021), Hope College (Award DUE-1524990), and the University of Arkansas,
Little Rock (Award DUE-1525037).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand
the content and capabilities of the STEMWiki Hyperlibrary, which was launched to
provide vetted Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) learning
resources to the public in the form of easily accessible, online college
textbooks that alleviate the rising costs of postsecondary education. The
STEMWiki Hyperlibrary consists of a number of connected, discipline-focused
hypertext applications (ChemWiki, BioWiki, MathWiki, StatWiki, GeoWiki,
PhysWiki), which are freely accessible to students regardless of socioeconomic
or educational backgrounds. The ChemWiki (http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu) is
currently the most developed STEMWiki, with millions of visits each month. By
making high-quality STEM learning resources readily available, the project will
positively impact at least four main populations: (1) the non-science community;
(2) socioeconomically disadvantaged students; (3) smaller or financially
disadvantaged academic institutions, including high schools, that wish to adopt
new learning technologies but cannot afford the initial steep costs of a new
curriculum; and (4) discipline-based education researchers looking for a
platform on which to evaluate new interdisciplinary approaches and curriculum
modifications, which would otherwise absorb too large of a budget to develop
from scratch. Once sufficiently developed, the Hyperlibary will be a power
platform for the dissemination of new educational content and the evaluation of
emerging educational technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEMWiki
Hyperlibrary is designed as a collaboratively constructed learning environment
that enables the dissemination and evaluation of new educational resources and
approaches as online course textbooks, with an emphasis on data-driven
assessment of student learning and performance. The STEMWikis allow learners to
cooperatively construct and organize knowledge, providing an important
alternative to "one size fits all" instruction in which content is presented in
a static, prepackaged manner. In this project, the investigators will augment
the constituent STEMWikis of the Hyperlibrary with ancillary homework and
simulation applications, as well as formative assessment modules. They will
integrate the content of the STEMWikis both horizontally (across multiple STEM
fields) and vertically (across multiple levels of complexity) within a network
that will provide not just single textbooks but a rich "hyperlibrary" through
which new, interconnected STEM textbooks can be constructed. The result will be
an easy-to-use platform on which faculty members can collaborate to create and
publish reusable, online pedagogical content. The project team will add
ancillary online homework (the Student Ability Rating and Inquiry System
[SARIS]) and simulations (via the ChemCollective,
http://www.chemcollective.org). From these components, they will build an
assessment infrastructure that tracks and correlates use of individual Wiki-
based textbooks with simulations, homework activity, and exam performance, with
the goal of identifying and tracking student performance across multiple STEM
curricula.