* 1524578
* Collaborative Research: Tectonic Significance of Long Run-Out Coarse-Grained Facies in the Cordilleran Foreland Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2023
* John Geissman, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 102,864.00

Sediments deposited in basins in front of fold-and-thrust belts, also known as
foreland basins, record the tectonic growth and development of the belts. One
prevalent model for sedimentation in these basins is that fine-grained sediments
in record tectonic growth of the thrust belt whereas coarse-grained sediments
accumulate during periods of thrust belt inactivity. This project aims to test
this model using innovative methods to determine the timing of sedimentation in
the Idaho-Wyoming fold-and-thrust belt. A successful challenge of the prevalent
model has the potential to change geological understanding of how fold-and-
thrust belts belts develop. This is of particular importance because the Idaho-
Wyoming thrust belt and associated foreland basins host important hydrocarbon
resources. A better understanding of basin development will provide important
insights into hydrocarbon exploration. The project would advance other desired
societal outcomes through: (1) full participation of women in STEM; (2) improved
STEM education and educator development through engagement of a K-12 science
teacher or undergrad student in the UTeach program, and participation in the
Geoscience Teacher Symposium for K-12 science teachers; (3) increased public
scientific literacy and public engagement with STEM through development of
displays and videos for the University of Arizona Flandau Center; and (4)
development of a globally competitive STEM workforce through training of
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For over two decades
foreland basin stratigraphers and sedimentologists have used the two-phase model
of foreland basin subsidence to interpret stratigraphic sequences in foreland
settings. This model hypothesizes that episodes of fine-grained distal
sedimentation are the syntectonic response to orogenic growth and rapid flexural
subsidence, whereas coarse-grained distal facies accumulate during periods of
thrust belt inactivity, erosion, and isostatic rebound. This research project
will test this model using geo/thermochronologic and magnetic polarity
stratigraphic study of mid- to Upper Cretaceous foreland basin deposits in
northeast Utah and southwest Wyoming, a classic foreland. Detrital geochronology
(U-Pb on detrital zircon and apatite) and thermochronology (apatite fission
track) will determine detrital lag-times (the time difference between the
exhumation age of a sediment grain from the source terrane and its depositional
age in the basin). Second, better age control in the poorly dated proximal part
of the basin fill will be established by using magnetic polarity stratigraphy on
fine-grained interbeds within thick alluvial fan deposits located adjacent to
major thrust faults. This combined approach allows accurate correlation of the
proximal and distal facies, and establishment of the time difference between
exhumation and depositional ages of the distal, coarse-grained intervals. Long
lag-times in the distal coarse-grained facies and irregular long-term trends in
lag-time, this would support the two-phase model whereas relatively brief (&lt;5
Myr) lag-times and a steady to decreasing lag time trend would indicate that
coarse-grained sediments prograded directly into the distal basin during
tectonic events in the thrust belt and therefore would nullify the two-phase
model.