* 1524857
* AGS-PRF: Photochemistry of Impurities in Nature-Identical Snow Crystals
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Ted Hullar, Hullar                  Ted
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 172,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship proposal focuses on characterizing
photochemical reactions (caused by sunlight) on laboratory-generated snow
crystals. The research will evaluate the impact of crystal type on photochemical
reaction rates, and compare these findings to observations from previous work
conducted in frozen solution and other natural snow analogs. Because many of the
important reactions in snow are photochemically driven, the exact nature of the
reaction environment must be well characterized in order to fully understand
chemical reactions in snow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has the
following objectives: (1) develop and build a machine to make nature-identical
snow and incorporate impurities into the synthetic snow; (2) determine the
location of impurities in this nature-identical snow; (3) determine the relative
actinic fluxes for various impurity locations and with various crystal habits;
(4) for synthetic snow made in liquid nitrogen, a commonly used snow analog,
determine the location of impurities and local actinic flux; and (5) compare
photochemistry of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in various
compartments of nature-identical and liquid nitrogen synthetic
snows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the locations of co-condensed impurities
in nature-identical snow crystals will improve understanding of the possible
suite of chemical transformations in the crystals and the eventual fate of their
reaction products. Measurements of the sensitivity of photochemical parameters
to crystal habit will provide information important for proper modeling of snow
and ice photochemistry. By determining photolysis rates for several PAHs under
varying snow crystal morphologies and impurity locations, this research will
provide useful information about reaction rate constants under natural
conditions, including sensitivity to impurity location or crystal habit. These
data will help to resolve current discrepancies in measured photolysis rates.
The proposed research will significantly advance the understanding of snow and
ice photochemistry by providing both a refined tool to study the natural
environment and substantial data to more accurately understand photochemical
reactions in snow and ice.