* 1524052
* TWC: Small: Language-level Control of Authority
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Stephen Chong, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 483,230.00

Modern computer applications are typically made up of different software
components that are created by, or may act on behalf of, mutually distrustful
entities. To ensure the security of computer systems, it is important to
restrict the ability of the components to perform actions within the computer
system. The Principle of Least Authority states that a component should be given
only the ability (or authority) it needs to perform its task, and no more. If
this principle is followed, and a component is malicious or has errors, then the
component is limited in the damage it can do to the computer system. However,
existing techniques for building computer applications make it difficult to
enforce the Principle of Least Authority. This project aims to develop the
foundational ideas and technology to specify, reason about, and restrict the
authority of software components, in order to make it easier to follow the
Principle of Least Authority, and thereby improve the security of computer
systems. All software and tools developed during the project will be publicly
released, and the project will engage graduate and undergraduate students with
this research.

The project will investigate and extend the theory of language-level control of
authority, and will use this theory to provide practical tools and techniques to
reason about and enforce application-specific authority control. There are three
research directions that this project seeks to explore. First, develop a
language-based framework for the design and implementation of authority control
mechanisms. The framework will provide extensible and composable authority
control mechanisms. Second, investigate the theory of language-based
authorization mechanisms (including extensible authorization mechanisms). Third,
investigate the interaction between authorization mechanisms and information-
flow control in order to simplify enforcement of expressive and precise
information security guarantees. For the first two directions, the research
approach is to: (1) develop formal language models that capture the essence of
the mechanisms being investigated; (2) formally state desirable semantic
properties of the models; (3) develop mechanisms that provably enforce the
desirable semantic properties; (4) validate the models and mechanisms through
prototype implementations. For the third research direction, the research
approach is to extend the formal language models and prototype implementations
with information-flow control mechanisms, and establish guarantees that
authority control mechanisms can provide regarding information security.