* 1524427
* RI: Small: Theory and Algorithms for Learning Perturbation Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Tommi Jaakkola, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 08/31/2018
* USD 407,091.00

Machine learning concerns designing and understanding computer programs that
learn from experience. Modern complex settings (for example natural language)
require the use of flexible probability models that permit one to entertain
large numbers of possible hypotheses (semantics) underlying the observations
(sentences). In such models likely structures (parse trees) are guided by
functions that assess the suitability of structures by breaking them into
smaller pieces. Richer models require larger subsets making it challenging to
efficiently explore large sets of possible hypotheses.

This project takes a fresh look at structured modeling by developing a new
paradigm for modeling by combining randomization of parameters and combinatorial
optimization. The combination provides a mechanism for inducing complex
distributions over structures yet explicitly maintaining easy generation of
likely structures. We pursue a comprehensive plan to understand, extend, and
design these perturbation models towards the end goal of solving significant
cross-cutting applied problems in natural language processing such as parsing or
structured recommender tasks such as paraphrasing. Beyond modeling, the proposed
work has the potential to merge tools and techniques across areas from
theoretical computer science (stability, tractability), combinatorial
optimization (relaxations, certificates), to probability (sampling from convex
bodies). The tools developed will be broadly useful across prominent areas, from
computer vision, natural language processing, to medical informatics and
computational biology. The proposed work by its very nature compels strong
collaborative relationships across disciplinary boundaries, from theory to
applications. The PI will actively pursue these opportunities. All the software
produced in this project will be open-sourced, and made available for download.
The PI will also engage in outreach activities that enable high school students
to participate.