* 1524844
* AGS-PRF:  The Diurnal Cycle, Cloud-Radiative Feedbacks, and Large-scale Tropical Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* James Ruppert, Ruppert                 James          H
* Fellowship Award
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2018
* USD 192,000.00

This award supports a 2-year Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in which the PI
will study the influence of the diurnal cycle on the Madden-Julian Oscillation
(MJO). The MJO is a large region of convection and rainfall that forms over the
Indian Ocean and propagates slowly eastward into the central equatorial Pacific.
The MJO influences weather and climate worldwide, affecting the formation of
hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico, atmospheric rivers that produce floods and
landslides on the US west coast, and the onset of El Nino events, among other
impacts. Despite its importance and concerted efforts over several decades, the
MJO has not yet been adequately explained, and weather and climate models have
difficulty simulating and predicting it.

Research under this award addresses two aspects of the diurnal cycle, the first
of which is the influence of the diurnal cycle of sea surface temperature (SST)
in moistening the overlying atmosphere. When the MJO is in its "suppressed"
phase, in which fair weather prevails in the absence of organized convection and
rainfall, SST has a relatively pronounced diurnal cycle. The diurnal cycle of
SST is expected to result in greater surface evaporation and more vigorous
vertical mixing of moisture throughout the lower atmosphere, with the overall
moistening serving to promote the onset of the "active" phase of the MJO. A
suite of computer simulations is used to determine the importance of the diurnal
cycle of SSTs for moistening the atmosphere and promoting MJO onset.

Further research considers the change in the diurnal cycle of cloudiness that
occurs between the suppressed and active phases of the MJO. The smaller and less
developed clouds of the suppressed phase occur preferentially in the afternoon,
while the deep convective clouds of the active phase are most prominent at
night. The PI hypothesizes that this shift in the time of maximum cloudiness has
implications for the solar heating of the atmosphere that constitute a positive
feedback, enhancing convection during the active phase and inhibiting it in the
suppressed phase. Further computer simulations will be performed to test this
hypothesis.

Finally, the PI will perform a simulation of an MJO event observed during the
DYNAMO field campaign (see AGS-1022899) using a global high-resolution
nonhydrostatic model (the ICON model). The results of the simulation will be
used to further test the hypothesized effects of the diurnal cycle on the MJO.

As noted above, the work has societal broader impacts due to the worldwide
weather and climate impacts of the MJO and the potential of this research to
improve MJO forecasts. In addition, the work supports the PI at an early stage
of his career, thereby promoting the future workforce in the research area.
Also, the work is conducted at the Max Planck Institute of Meteorology (MPI-M)
in Hamburg, Germany, under the supervision of Dr. Cathy Hohenegger. The host
institution is among the world's top climate modeling centers, and scientific
collaboration between a US PI and MPI-M scientists is expected to be beneficial
to the US research community.

This award was supported with funding from the Office of International Science &
Engineering as well as the Climate and Large-scale Dynamics Program.