* 1524476
* RUI: Alpine Loess, Periglacial Uplands, and Exotic Additions: Investigating Past and Present Dust Deposition in the Alpine Zone of the Uinta Mountains, Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,01/31/2021
* Jeffrey Munroe, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2021
* USD 202,952.00

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance

Atmospheric dust is generated in lowlands through a variety of natural and
human-induced processes. Once delivered to high mountain environments, wind-
borne dust is responsible for a multitude of effects including altering the pH
and chemistry of surface water, contributing to soil formation, and decreasing
the reflective properties of snow. In the Rocky Mountains, recent study of lake
sediment records suggests that rates of dust deposition have increased in the
past few centuries, linking human land use in lowland basins with dust
deposition in the mountains. This project will analyze the amount and
distribution of dust accumulating in the Uinta Mountains to determine the
regional and inter-annual variability in dust deposition rates and properties.
Cores from alpine lakes will also be investigated to ascertain the changes in
wind-borne deposits over the last several thousand years as continental glaciers
receded and human habitation increased. Given the growing evidence that dust
deposition plays an important role in the ecology of alpine systems, this
project will provide useful information for management of mountain ecosystems
and the surrounding basins. This project will be conducted at a primarily
undergraduate institution and will train the next generation of research
scientists.

A technical description of the project

This project will use an extensive set of existing lake-sediment cores and soils
data, along with new collections of dust and soil, to test three complementary
hypotheses: 1) Dust flux and geochemical properties are primarily controlled by
aridity within regional source areas in the western United States; 2) Post-
glacial sedimentary records from high-elevation lakes in the Uintas will record
synchronous changes in physical properties that reflect variations in the
regional dust system driven by paleoclimate variability; 3) Long-term (~106 -
107yrs) weathering on the unglaciated Uinta summit upland has resulted in the
formation of pedogenic clays from elemental building blocks delivered by
atmospheric dust. Six undergraduate students will receive training in research
techniques and each will complete independent research along with the
opportunity to present at professional meetings.