* 1524304
* Collaborative Research: A Structural, Thermochronologic, and Provenance Investigation of a Hypothesized Transition From Subduction to Slab Breakoff in the Greater Caucasus
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Nathan Niemi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2021
* USD 271,458.00

Slab breakoff, in which a slab detaches from a subducting plate and sinks into
the mantle, exerts a first-order control on the geodynamic evolution of
collisional orogenic belts because breakoff fundamentally alters the forces
along the convergent margin. Modeling indicates that observable characteristics
of breakoff within a collisional orogen include subduction of an ocean basin
before collision, a transient pulse of accelerated rock and surface uplift in
the belt, a decrease in convergence rate over the breakoff and an increase above
adjacent parts of the slab that remain attached. However, geologic observations
of this process within continental collision zones are not well documented. This
University of California Davis and University of Michigan research team, in
collaboration with their international partners, in explores the idea that the
recent geological history of the Greater Caucasus (between the Black Sea and the
Caspian Sea) is a consequence of this process. The project will advance desired
societal outcomes by: (1) development of a globally competitive STEM workforce
through the training of several U.S. graduate students, involvement of
undergraduate students in research, and training of graduate students from
Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan; (2) increased partnerships between academia
and the hydrocarbon industry and strengthening of existing collaborations and
the development of new collaborations with scientists in Armenia and Georgia,
Taiwan, and Canada. The project would provide the graduate students with rich
international research experiences. The project is supported by the Tectonics
Program and NSF's International Science and Engineering
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will test the hypothesis
that the Greater Caucasus reflects the transient geodynamic response to recent
slab breakoff beneath the western portion of the range. This event follows the
Oligocene to Pliocene closure of a remnant ocean basin, subduction of which
presently continues beneath the eastern half of the range. The research team
will carry out a field investigation of this little-studied orogen using
structural mapping and balanced cross-sections, sediment provenance studies
using U-Pb analyses of detrital zircons and (U-Th)/He analyses of apatite,
bedrock low-temperature thermochronometry, and neotectonic investigations. They
aim to constrain the magnitude of Cenozoic shortening across the Greater
Caucasus along three orogen-perpendicular sections, and to derive the exhumation
history of the Greater and Lesser Caucasus from low-temperature
thermochronometry. Integration of these data with detrital provenance and lag
time analyses of adjacent sedimentary basins will capture the geologic response
to a transient geodynamic event and record perhaps the first evidence for slab
detachment at the subduction-to-collision transition in an active orogen.