* 1524296
* TWC: Small: Designing a Coordination Mechanism for Managing Privacy as a Common-Pool Resource
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Emilee Rader, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 463,107.00

Ubiquitous computing technologies such as "smart" door locks, thermostats,
fitness trackers and video monitors can help make users' lives safer and more
efficient. These devices automatically collect data about users and their
activities within their homes, which are then combined and processed by
algorithms on a cloud server owned by the service provider. This enables
beneficial system functionality that would not be possible from the devices in
isolation. However, aggregating data from different points in time and about
many different devices and users can also produce potentially invasive insights
and inferences about individuals and households that can be surprising,
unsettling or harmful when used for purposes users do not expect. This project
develops a coordination mechanism for users to jointly manage derived data as a
common pool resource. This shifts privacy problems from the current up-front
decisions about what to disclose toward a collective governance model that
supports updating disclosure decisions as technology and social norms evolve.

This project will investigate norms for acceptable uses of derived data, as well
as develop and evaluate tools to support collective privacy management
decisions. The social norm studies include semi-structured interviews to
identify norms, and validation experiments involving simulated norms violation
and responses. Building on frameworks for analyzing social-ecological common
pool resource systems, the project will perform iterative design and prototyping
of a privacy coordination mechanism based on home automation systems. The system
will be installed and evaluated in a real-world test to evaluate effectiveness
and usability, as well as qualitative analysis of unexpected events.

More information is available on the project website at:
https://bitlab.cas.msu.edu/privacy/