* 1524852
* SHF: Small: Transformations for Synergistic Analysis of Large Evolving Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Rajiv Gupta, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The importance of graph processing has grown with the popularity of graph
analytics. An important feature of real-world graphs is that they are constantly
evolving (e.g., social networks, networks modeling spreading of a disease etc.).
Graph analytics over an evolving graph entails repeating analysis over snapshots
of a graph taken at different points in time to observe how features of interest
change over time. For large real-world graphs with tens of billions of edges,
evolving graph analysis is both highly compute- and memory-intensive. By
developing transformations that reorganize the computation and data, techniques
for rapid evolving graph analytics on modern computing platforms are being
considered. Many students are being trained and educated in this important
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graph analysis can greatly benefit from cores and
storage available on modern parallel machines. However, effectively exploiting
the resources remains an enormous challenge due to irregular nature of
parallelism and lack of data locality in graph computations. This work is
leveraging two key characteristics, overlapping working sets and computed value
stability, to develop techniques for speeding up graph analytics. The techniques
being considered include: optimization of reading and writing of large graphs on
disk, optimizing inter-node communication on a cluster, and optimizing
computation over multiple versions of an evolving graph. These optimizations are
being used to greatly enhance the performance of multiple popular graph
processing systems. Public dissemination of these software enhancements are also
planned.