* 1524394
* Sulfur Isotope Fractionation and Sulfur Partitioning between Apatite and Silicate Melts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Adam Simon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,320.00

Volcanoes around the rim of the Pacific Ocean are intimately related to the
formation of copper, gold, and iron ore deposits. These metals are vital
components of our nation's civil and military infrastructure, and understanding
how these ore deposits form is fundamental to ensuring a sustainable supply for
our growing population. Observations of natural volcano-related ore systems
indicate that the element sulfur is almost always associated with copper, gold
and iron, which suggests that sulfur may play a role in concentrating these
metals to levels that allow companies to mine them profitably. In nature, sulfur
exists in several different states, depending on how much oxygen is present, and
scientists have determined that the state of sulfur moderates the mobility of
copper, gold and iron in volcanic systems. In this project, the scientists are
investigating how to use sulfur concentrations in the mineral apatite, which is
the same mineral that makes human teeth and bones, as a way to better constrain
the formation of metal deposits and understand more broadly what controls the
movement of sulfur in volcanic systems. The science team includes university
faculty, a post-doctoral researcher, one doctoral student who is the first in
his family to graduate from college, and several undergraduate students who will
work closely with the senior scientists. The scientists are collaborating with
faculty and students at the University of Hannover, Germany, where they will
learn new techniques and then implement them at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has as a main goal to provide
critical information to constrain Earth's sulfur cycle. Scientists have
determined that sulfur in the oceanic crust and overlying sediments is recycled
to the upper mantle at subduction zones and partly returned to the surface via
arc volcanism. Existing data demonstrate that the sulfur isotope signature of
oceanic crust differs significantly from that of volcanic gases and arc magmas.
Arc magmas typically have low sulfur contents, but cover a wide range of
sulfur-34/sulfur-32 isotope values from -0.5 to +20.7 per mil, whereas oceanic
crust is typically more sulfur-enriched and characterized by average
sulfur-34/sulfur-32 values that are close to 0 per mil. Working hypotheses to
explain these discrepancies include degassing, metasomatism, and variations in
oxidation state. In this study, we are working to test whether or not the total
sulfur content and the sulfur isotopes abundances in apatite crystals and
coexisting silicate melt can help elucidate Earth's sulfur cycle. A prerequisite
for the interpretation of total sulfur and sulfur isotope signatures in apatite
and application of this to understanding processes affecting volatiles in
subduction zone magmas is a quantitative knowledge of the sulfur speciation in
apatite over a wide range of oxidation states. We are investigating
experimentally total sulfur and sulfur isotope partitioning between apatite and
silicate melt at conditions relevant to subduction zone volcanic environments.
The proposed approach combines equilibrium fractionation and dynamic
decompression experiments with high precisions sulfur and sulfur isotope
analyses. They plan to use micro-Xray absorption near edge spectroscopy to
determine the oxidation state of sulfur within single apatite crystals and the
coexisting melt phase. The experiments will yield a robust and comprehensive
dataset, which will facilitate the interpretation of total sulfur and sulfur
isotope signatures in apatites and coexisting silicate melt in natural systems.
Simultaneous with the experimental program, we are measuring total sulfur and
sulfur isotope abundances among samples from active volcanoes (Mt. Mazama, Mt.
Pinatubo, Mt. Merapi, and Quizapu). Assuming that apatites can preserve the S
(isotope and speciation) signal of a magma formed due to dehydration melting
above the subducted slab, our experimental data may enable the estimation of the
S (isotopic) composition of the involved fluids derived from the slab, determine
the redox of a magma at apatite formation and elucidate the degassing history of
a magma, all based on the analyses of natural samples.