* 1524535
* III: Small: Data Analysis in the Cloud with Guaranteed and Explainable Performance
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Magdalena Balazinska, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Increasingly many users have access to large datasets that they need to analyze.
Astronomers, oceanographers, and other domain scientists rely on data analysis
for their science. Journalists may want to analyze data to use in their
articles. Over the past several years, cloud service providers have been
offering an increasingly large selection of data management services for data
analytics (e.g., Amazon Elastic MapReduce or Google BigQuery). Cloud services
provide a seamless access to powerful data analysis tools, often directly
through the browser. Too many services, however, remain too close to the
traditional mode of operating a database management system. They reveal too much
information about their internal architecture and deployment: Users are required
to reason at the level of service instances, instance types, and gigabytes
processed. As a result, users today must be data management experts to choose
between these services and leverage them in a cost-effective manner. This
project will develop new data management techniques that will enable cloud
service providers to isolate users from the details of their service internals
while offering the ability to trade off price and performance. The project will
further develop tools to explain performance and help users re-write their
queries to improve it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the project will
develop new approaches to (1) predict not only the query runtime but whether a
query is likely to execute slower than estimated due to failures, skew,
cardinality estimation errors, or contention; (2) guarantee query runtimes by
dynamically changing both the resources allocated to a query and its failure-
handling and skew-handling mechanisms as needed; (3) post specific slowdown
factors in case of heavy load and guarantee them through novel scheduling
algorithms; and (4) explain query performance and suggest rewrites in a way that
does not require users to understand query plans. The project will implement all
of the algorithms in the open source Myria cloud data management system (and
service) recently developed and in continuous operation at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
site at: http://cloudperf.cs.washington.edu