* 1524824
* Volatile Clues to the Initial Controls on Large Explosive Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Paul Wallace, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2020
* USD 310,000.00

The goal of this project is to better understand how large explosive volcanic
eruptions start and the timescales (days or weeks or more) of precursory
activity that might serve as a warning sign of an impending eruption. Enormous
explosive eruptions (known as supereruptions) have occurred in the recent
geologic past that are many times larger than any eruptions that have taken
place in historic times. Some of the best and youngest examples, at Yellowstone,
in eastern California, and in New Zealand will be studied in this project. A
primary goal is to determine if external factors, like an earthquake and
movement along a fault, can cause such eruptions to start, or whether instead,
they start when a magma body in the earth?s crust becomes overpressured and
bursts, like a ruptured balloon. The project will involve chemical analysis of
ash and pumice deposits that were created during the opening stages of the
eruptions because these preserve a record of information about how and why the
eruptions started and how long it took for magma to move to the Earth's surface.

This project will test some fundamental ideas about how large explosive
rhyolitic eruptions start and when caldera collapse occurs. Despite many
important advances in modeling of these processes, there is a surprising lack of
geochemical data on the very earliest deposits from large explosive eruptions
that could inform the debate about eruption triggering. A quantitative record of
magma decompression and ascent rates shortly before and during the opening
stages of these eruptions will be obtained by measuring concentrations and
gradients of volatiles (H2O, CO2, Cl, S, F) in melt inclusions and reentrants
(unsealed inclusions) in quartz and the OH contents of plagioclase. Because
magma ascent rates reflect the extent of overpressure in the underlying magma
body, constraining ascent rates for the earliest materials from an eruption
using diffusive loss of volatiles can provide insight into whether internal
(magma overpressure) or external (little or no overpressure) triggers were
involved. Based on preliminary results for the Huckleberry Ridge fall deposit
(Yellowstone), such data appear to provide a unique record of the processes and
timescales of vent development just prior to and during the opening phases of an
eruption, with implications for when and why caldera collapse develops and how
magma bodies were configured in the upper crust. The results of this
investigation will provide quantitative information about how rapidly
supereruptions begin and will contribute data to models of geophysical signals
that could precede them. This project involves collaborations with other
scientists in the U.S. and New Zealand for some of the specialized chemical
analyses that will be done and for computer modeling using the results.