* 1524765
* Collaborative Research: The Record of Early Cretaceous Growth of the Nevadaplano From Syn-orogenic Deposits of the Sevier Hinterland
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Sean Long, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 117,001.00

Researchers have long been interested in mountain belts and the processes that
create them. The Cordillera of the western United States has long been
interpreted as a mountain belt that developed in response to subduction of
oceanic crust beneath continental crust. Despite being a "type" mountain belt,
however, questions remain about the timing and magnitude of surface uplift
during much of the prolonged duration of subduction off of the west coast of
North America during the Mesozoic. Intensive study of the South American Andes
has led some to suggest that surface uplift lags behind the shortening that
occurs in response to subduction; this runs counter to the conventional wisdom
that surface uplift and shortening should occur in tandem with each other. This
study aims to provide an estimate of surface elevation relatively early in the
Cordilleran mountain building event, during which a large amount of shortening
took place. This estimate, combined with existing surface elevation estimates
from the end of the Cordilleran event and at greatest levels of crustal
thickening, should enable us to determine whether surface uplift occurred after
or in tandem with shortening during the Mesozoic. These results have the
potential to teach us a great deal about the response of the lithosphere to
subduction in different types of mountain belts, which has broad implications
for seismic activity and hazards. In addition, because we use ancient climate
data to estimate ancient elevations, this project will provide valuable insight
into ancient climate conditions during a relatively warm period in Earth's
history, and also how animals and plants respond to both climate and elevation
change through time. Museum displays at the Las Vegas Natural History Museum and
Sierra College (Rocklin, CA), will inform visitors about the new findings
related to mountain development, as well as Mesozoic plants and animals which
once inhabited the area. Other important societal outcomes include providing
support for three early career researchers; broadening of participation in an
important STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) discipline;
and development of research infrastructure. Results of the research will be
presented in the peer-reviewed scientific literature and at professional science
meetings; analytical data will be made available via publically accessible
community data repositories.

To determine surface elevation in central Nevada during the Early Cretaceous,
the project team will use conventional and "clumped" stable isotope geochemistry
to estimate ancient temperature and stable isotope composition of water. These
data will then be compared to similar datasets from the time-equivalent Cedar
Mountain Formation in Utah (a study in progress) in order to estimate hinterland
paleoelevation. These data will be integrated with sedimentology, paleontology,
palynology, geologic mapping and tuff geochronology to provide critical context
about the ancient environment of the region that will bolster the
interpretations of the geochemical records and improve the resulting
paleoelevation estimates. When placed in the existing framework of the timing
and magnitude of crustal shortening that occurred during the Sevier orogeny, the
paleoelevation estimates will be used to distinguish between three surface
elevation scenarios, each with distinct geodynamic implications. Surface
elevations of 1-2 kilometers are predicted directly from the shortening history,
assuming that isostatic compensation accompanied crustal thickening throughout
the duration of shortening. Elevations lower than this would imply that crustal
thickening coincided with generation of dense lower lithosphere, and elevations
higher than this would suggest that removal of dense lithosphere operated early
during orogenesis. The results of this study will provide valuable insight into
the range of lithospheric processes that operate during subduction-related
orogenesis as well as provide valuable ancient climate data for the western
United States. In addition, this study will push paleoaltimetry farther back in
time than existing datasets, so modifications we make to typical approaches used
in paleoaltimetry to determine these very ancient paleoelevations will be
valuable for pushing paleoaltimetry estimates in other orogenic systems further
back in time.