* 1524569
* AGS-PRF Coupling Between Regional Climate Feedbacks and Large-Scale Circulation in a Hierarchy of Models
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Nicole Feldl, Feldl                   Nicole
* Fellowship Award
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2016
* USD 86,000.00

Climate change due to increased greenhouse gas concentration is generally
referred to as global warming, and the sensitivity of climate to greenhouse gas
increases is measured by the increase in global mean temperature for a given
uniform increase in greenhouse gas concentrations. Yet the feedback processes
which determine climate sensitivity show substantial geographical dependencies,
for example the albedo feedbacks associated with ice and snow are largely
confined to colder high latitude regions, while cloud and water vapor feedbacks
are strongest in the subtropics. The response of climate to uniform external
forcing also shows strong geographical dependence, with important consequences
for human and natural systems. But the spatial pattern of the response does not
match the spatial pattern of the feedbacks, as atmospheric and oceanic
circulation are effective in redistributing the excess energy introduced to the
system by the regional feedbacks. Moreover, robust changes in atmospheric
circulation are found in climate change simulations, presumably caused by the
feedbacks and external forcing, but they may in turn have substantial effects on
the feedbacks.

This award supports the PI to conduct postdoctoral research to understand the
interplay of regional climate feedbacks, energy transport, and atmospheric
stability and circulation dynamics in determining the regional response of the
climate system to external forcing. The specific focus of the work is on climate
feedbacks and climate change in the tropics and subtropics and how they relate
to changes in the strength of the Hadley cell, the overturning circulation in
which air rises in the rainy intertropical convergence zone and subsides in the
dry subtropics. The PI and her colleagues have developed a diagnostic equation
in which fractional changes in the strength of the Hadley cell can be decomposed
into contributions from all of the factors mentioned above. The diagnostic
analysis is applied to a set of climate simulations archived for the Climate
Model Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5) for which the climate feedbacks
can be quantified. One question to be addressed is why model simulations tend to
show a decrease in the strength of the Hadley simulation as climate warms, and
another is whether model-to-model differences in the Hadley cell response can be
related to differences in feedbacks and other factors. This analysis will be
supplemented by experiments with a hierarchy of models at various stages of
complexity, to examine causal relationships between changes in the Hadley cell
and the feedbacks and energy transports.

The work has important broader impacts given the substantial social and
ecological impacts of climate change in the tropics and subtropics. The results
of this work may be valuable for understanding the behavior of model simulations
of future climate change, in particular for understanding and reducing
uncertainty in climate model projections, and for deciding which aspects of
simulations are likely to prove most reliable. In addition, the project has an
educational component in which the PI will develop educational materials to
provide undergraduate students with a rigorous foundation in climate feedback
analysis. The materials include hands-on exercises using a simple energy balance
model written in Python, which will be made available online.