* 1524013
* Collaborative Research: The Spectral and Thermal Response of Active Basaltic Surfaces: Constraining Lava Cooling, Petrology and Flow Propagation Models
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Rachel Lee, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 07/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

Over half of the world?s volcanoes produce basaltic lava, making it the most
common form of volcanic activity on Earth. These volcanoes occur at every
tectonic setting and on every continent with much larger outpourings of basaltic
lava in the past linked to mass extinction events. Recently, new eruptions (or
new phases of ongoing eruptions) have occurred at Tolbachik in Russia
(2012-2013); Bardarbunga in Iceland (2014); Etna in Italy (2014); and Kilauea in
Hawaii (2014) emphasizing the ongoing hazard potential of basaltic eruptions and
the lava flows they produce. For example, a recent lava flow from the Pu?u
?&amp;#332;?&amp;#333; vent in Hawaii threatened both property and to
potentially isolate many of the residents in the town of Pahoa had it continued
to advance. Therefore, monitoring lava flow direction and velocity becomes
critical in these situations. Several analytical models have been introduced in
recent years that are designed to estimate lava flow advance using temperature
measurements in order to ultimately predict where the flow will stop once it has
cooled sufficiently. The temperature of the advancing flow is commonly measured
with infrared (IR) instruments from the ground, air, and from orbit. However,
there are many factors that can affect the accuracy of these measurements. If
assumptions of these factors are incorrect, then errors in the measured
temperature could adversely impact the predicted hazard potential. One of these
assumptions is the emissivity of the surface material, which is determined by
the atomic structure of the surface and ultimately controls how efficiently it
radiates heat. Prior emissivity measurements have been made on lava samples once
they have cooled to a solid. However, emissivity is not constant and should in
fact vary in molten lava because the atomic structure has changed to some
degree. There are no quantitative emissivity measurements of molten basaltic
lava that exist and therefore this research is designed to make these complex
measurements using rigorous laboratory and field data collection followed by
testing using an existing flow model. The study will also produce a new
automated field-based IR instrument that could be of use to any government
agency charged with eruption monitoring. The research will build on prior NSF-
funding and continue successful international collaborations between the
research group at the University of Pittsburgh and the Australian National
University (Australia), the Universit√© Blaise Pascal (France) and the Hawaii
Volcano Observatory. The project also provides funding for an early career
researcher at SUNY Oswego as well as several undergraduate and graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents a step-change in both
remote sensing and flow modeling because it supplies, for the first time, the
most accurate IR temperature data on eruption products that are needed to
forecast hazards and predict lava flow dynamics. Understanding the cooling,
formation and dynamics of active basaltic surfaces will not only help to resolve
compositional, textural, and silicate structural changes occurring in the flow,
but also becomes critical for any measurement or model reliant upon accurate IR
temperatures. The IR wavelengths are sensitive to radiant temperature as well as
to the surface emissivity due to the presence of strong IR spectral bands,
produced by the Si-O and Al-O bonds in the minerals. Therefore, in order to
measure the accurate temperature of active flows it is first necessary to
understand the spectral effects caused by the glassy cooling crusts and the
molten surfaces. That is the overarching goal of this research, which is divided
into two primary tasks: (1) a laboratory-focused study with the goal of
measuring the IR emissivity of basaltic glasses and melts using a unique micro-
furnace that operates in conjunction with the PI?s laboratory spectrometer; and
(2) a field-based study with the goal of advancing existing IR instrumentation
capable of collecting similar data. The laboratory measurements acquired under
task one will be made on high temperature basaltic melts with an accuracy of
greater than 2%. These results will clarify a long-standing debate of whether
thermal IR emissivity of molten surfaces is lower than that of the corresponding
cooled surfaces (and more fundamentally, if so ? why?). Furthermore, it will
provide data to resolve atomic bond-scale processes ongoing during cooling and
therefore will also allow for the reconstruction of the cooling history of past
lava flows. These results will serve as calibration for the ground-based data
collected during the second task. Measurements will be made of active basalt
flows using a new multi-spectral IR instrument developed for this project. This
will be the first time that an IR camera will be used to acquire spectral rather
than temperature data, with future development leading to construction of a
ruggedized instrument capable of deployment on remote volcanoes for monitoring
fundamental physical properties of lava flows in near real time. Finally, the
results from both the laboratory and field measurements will serve as input into
the FLOWGO thermo-rheologic model in order to determine their final effects on
the model estimated flow length, viscosity and velocity. All of these results
will be applicable to satellite-based measurements of temperature and thus has
the potential to open entirely new areas of petrology, flow modeling and
volcanological remote sensing research. &lt;br/&gt;