* 1524596
* Sediment Recycling in Southern Cascadia: Insights From Seafloor Sediment and Mafic Volcanic Rock Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Frank Ramos, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2021
* USD 136,691.00

This project will investigate the contribution of seafloor sediments and other
components to magmas erupted in the southern Cascades. In subduction zone plate
boundaries like Cascadia, an oceanic plate sinks, or 'subducts', into the mantle
beneath a continental plate. The subducted plate material, which includes
oceanic crust and some portion of the overlying seafloor sediments, is then
recycled into the mantle and incorporated into the magmas that erupt at
volcanoes like those in the Cascades. This research will use the chemical
compositions of both magmas erupted in the southern Cascades (from northern
California through central Oregon) and the seafloor sediments and oceanic crust
offshore of the southern Cascades to model the contributions of sediments, and
other components, to the magmas. The estimates of sediment recycling provided in
this research will be important to a range of scientists studying the Cascadia
subduction zone: such recycling can impact the explosivity of volcanic eruptions
and slip during future earthquakes at the Cascadia plate boundary.

This project will address three key questions about recycling of subducted
material in the southern Cascades: 1) What is the contribution of subducted
seafloor sediment to magmas erupted in the southern Cascades?, 2) What is the
quantity of subducted material (oceanic crust, sediment) added to the mantle,
and what is the nature of that subducted material (fluid and/or melt)?, and 3)
How do these and other important parameters (mantle compositions, extents of
mantle melting, etc.) vary along the arc? To answer these questions, detailed
analyses of the geochemical compositions (major and trace elements, isotopes) of
seafloor sediments and crust from the Gorda plate offshore of the southern
Cascades and basaltic arc magmas (including volatile contents) will be obtained
and used to model the contributions of each potential component to the magmas.
Currently, the compositions of sediments offshore of southern Cascadia are
unknown, making direct assessment of their contributions to the magmas
impossible. As a result of this research, there will be a complete and
continuous dataset of the geochemistry of magmas and their origins and the
compositions of offshore seafloor sediments for ~450 km of Cascadia. Thus, when
combined with previous work on magmas and their sources in other portions of the
Cascades, this will be one of the best-studied arcs worldwide, making large-
scale along-arc assessments of subduction and magmatic parameters possible.