* 1524377
* OCE-RIG: Changes in Herbivore-Algal Interactions in Kelp Forest Ecosystems in Response to Ocean Acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Kristy Kroeker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,362.00

Kelp forest ecosystems provide food for commercial and recreational fisheries,
support biodiversity, and promote tourism in coastal communities. In this
project, the investigator will examine how accelerating environmental changes
could affect kelp forest ecosystems and coastal communities by studying the
ecological processes influencing the survival of young kelp. Research results
may contribute to management of kelp forest ecosystems as increased storm
frequency and intensity elevates the importance of processes affecting the
survival of young kelp (i.e., herbivory) in the recovery and persistence of
future kelp forests. In addition, training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students from under-represented groups in STEM are integrated into
the research plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is
to determine how seawater temperature and carbonate chemistry combine to affect
the interactions between a wide range of invertebrate herbivores and the early
life history stages of giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera. In kelp forest
ecosystems, herbivores can limit survival of juvenile kelp following
disturbances when populations must reestablish from microscopic stages. Recovery
dynamics in kelp forests may be especially important in future scenarios with
projected increases in disturbances (e.g., storminess and extreme events). When
combined, warming and ocean acidification can substantially reduce the survival
of early life history stages of kelp thereby increasing the importance of
herbivory in regulating kelp forest recovery and dynamics in a high CO2 world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine benthic communities from kelp
forests in the California Current, an area of rapid acidification. Using a
factorial laboratory experiment, the effects of future temperature and CO2
scenarios on per capita and per population interaction strengths of a wide range
of herbivore species on the early life history stages of the giant kelp will be
tested. The the effects of warming and ocean acidification on the nutritional
quality and palatability of M. pyrifera will also be tested, which could
indirectly affect interaction strengths.