* 1524522
* Replicating Experimental Studies:  Moving Beyond Undergraduate Student Samples
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2017
* Jeffrey Lucas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 95,705.00

Social scientists have in recent years become increasingly concerned about the
extent to which results of experimental studies can be replicated. Although
replication is a hallmark of science, social scientists devote relatively little
time and attention to replication efforts. Additionally, in the cases when
social scientists do attempt strict methodological replications of experimental
studies, it is nearly always a case of replicating studies carried out with
undergraduate students as participants with studies that have new samples of
undergraduate students. Experimentalists rarely pursue methodological
replications with samples not comprised of undergraduates. The investigator will
attempt to replicate findings in three widely cited experimental studies using a
sample of older adults, but also makes new predictions for each
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes to replicate three important
experimental studies from social psychology, each with a focus on gender norms
and/or gendered behavior. The replications will be completed with a sample of
older adults in an age-restricted retirement community as participants. One of
the studies to be replicated is Shelley Correll et al.'s (2007) study on the
motherhood penalty, which found that undergraduate students evaluated mothers
who were job candidates more negatively than women without children, whereas
they evaluated fathers more positively than men without children. A second is
Brent Simpson?s (2003) paper which found that women responded relatively more to
fear, and men relatively more to greed, when participating in a social dilemma.
The third is Rob Willer et al.'s (2013) paper which found that men who had their
masculinity threated responded with extreme displays of masculinity, whereas
women who had their femininity threatened did not respond with femininity
displays. There are a number of reasons to expect that older adults might behave
differently in these studies than did college students, although we expect them
to behave in some of the same ways (e.g., penalizing mothers relative to non-
mothers in the labor market) as well. The results of the studies should advance
science in fundamental ways, pursuing an activity that is frequently
acknowledged as fundamental to the advancement of science but rarely pursued.
Additionally, each replication has the capacity to produce results that are of
theoretical and intellectual interest beyond simply determining whether the
original results hold in a new sample. The proposed studies also have a
significant training component, leading to intensive training in research
methods in an innovative setting for three graduate students.