* 1524768
* Laramide Relamination of Mantle Lithosphere Beneath the Colorado Plateau: A Xenolith Study
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Alan Chapman, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 09/30/2018
* USD 163,440.00

This award will provide support for the career development of a junior
investigator in the area of Earth Sciences. The study will foster new
collaborations and enhance old partnerships with scientists at the University of
Arizona and Rice University. This project will constitute the intellectual basis
and support the training for three undergraduate students. A classroom- and
field-based outreach program, through University of Arizona Extension and
intended for students in grades 6-8, will be integrated with this research.
Course materials produced through this program will be shared with the
geosciences community through the Science Education Resource Center (SERC). The
results from this study will contribute to the fundamental goals of Earthscope
and will be published in major peer-reviewed scientific journals and in an
article for non-specialists. Data resulting from this study will be made
accessible to the public in Integrated Earth Data Applications, EarthChem, and
PetDB databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of geophysical data
suggests geologically recent mobility of the continental mantle beneath western
North America. Several lines of evidence suggest that mantle lithosphere beneath
southern California was tectonically displaced eastward by a Late Cretaceous
episode of shallow subduction and "relaminated" to the base of the continental
lithosphere beneath the Colorado Plateau transition zone (central Arizona). The
principal investigator will test this hypothesis by comparing the petrogenetic
and thermal histories of mantle xenoliths derived from both areas. If Arizona
and California xenolith suites evolved in a similar manner, then a strong case
can be made for major Phanerozoic displacement and subsequent reconstruction of
southwest U.S. mantle lithosphere. This study will provide a geodynamic and
geologic context to understand mantle displacements beneath western North
America. This research will provide key constraints on the origin and evolution
of mantle lithosphere beneath the southwest U.S., an enhanced ability to
recognize modern and ancient analogous settings worldwide, an improved
understanding of the effects of subduction angle on the stability of mantle
lithosphere at craton active margin transition zones, and a high probability of
recognizing a remnant of the southern California mantle lithosphere that has
been "relaminated" beneath central Arizona. This result would imply a &gt;500 km
tectonic displacement of the southern California mantle fragment and provide
intriguing explanations for the long-term strength of the Colorado Plateau
relative to adjacent geologic provinces and for active lithospheric delamination
beneath the plateau.