* 1524192
* 2015 SSSE for F.G. Walton Smith
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Richard Behn, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2017
* USD 247,200.00

The University of Miami requests funding for additional and back-up
instrumentation on the R/V Walton Smith, a 96,? general purpose regional vessel
operated by the University of Miami?s Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Sciences (RSMAS) as part of the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V WALTON
SMITH conducts a substantial portion of her operations in the near shore waters
of South Florida and the Gulf of Mexico, providing scientific information
relevant to major environmental initiatives. The operations include oil spill
monitoring, water management changes, municipal waste disposal, and storm water
discharge among others which are deemed critical to the sustainable development
of the South Florida and Gulf economy. In 2014, R/V Walton Smith completed 138
days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 17% of the total sailing schedule
(24 days). In 2015, R/V Walton Smith is scheduled for 120 days with NSF days
(20) accounting for 16% of the total sailing
schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment requested
in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Profiler Winch
$140,000 &lt;br/&gt;Upgrade of Ship?s Northern American Davit Cranes (2) $73,000
&lt;br/&gt;Naval Architect Evaluation for Winch Upgrades $25,200 &lt;br/&gt;Wire
Lube System $9,000 &lt;br/&gt;Air Conditioning Upgrade $110,000 &lt;br/&gt;
$357,200 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.