* 1524250
* CIF: Small: Inference over Asymmetric Network and Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ali Sayed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 514,000.00

In an age when the word "network" may refer to social networks, power networks,
transportation networks, or data networks, interest in information processing
over graphs has met with resurgence. The efforts under this proposal are
relevant to applications involving large and distributed amounts of data, as is
the case with health informatics, surveillance applications, data networks, or
cloud computing. The research results will enable engineering systems to benefit
from a bottom-up design paradigm involving coordination among less powerful
agents to achieve higher levels of cognition and performance by an
interconnected network of cooperating agents. The research will develop
techniques that enable agents to work collectively for a common objective and to
counter the degrading effect of imbalances that may exist in their interactions
such as the fact that some agents in the network may be more informed than other
agents; some agents may have a domineering tendency; some agents may be willing
to share only partial information due to privacy and secrecy considerations; and
some agents may be subject to corrupted data; or have different objectives than
the group. Results developed under this work will benefit the training of a
diverse body of students in the strategic area of network science. The results
will also be disseminated broadly to the research community online and in
archival publications and meetings.

Performance indicators in networked applications include cooperation among
agents to bestow resilience to failure; privacy and secrecy considerations where
agents may not be comfortable sharing data with remote centers for processing;
and the fact that large amounts of data may already be available in dispersed
form and aggregation of the data at a central location can be costly. These
considerations have motivated the development of powerful distributed mechanisms
that enable agents to cooperate to attain superior inference capabilities. Many
distributed techniques ignore critical asymmetries that exist in both network
and data structures. Robotic swarms are one example of a notable application
where agents can benefit from adjusting their exploration space in response to
asymmetry conditions, malfunctioning of neighbors, or suspicious behavior by
intruders. A second example is the use of networked learners to mine information
from big databases, such as those related to health informatics, power grids,
social networks, or surveillance applications. If asymmetries are ignored, they
can lead to erroneous inference conclusions and degraded performance. This
research effort exploits cognitive abilities to enable networks to counter
asymmetries and their deleterious effects. In particular, this project seeks
adaptation and learning mechanisms that endow multi-agent systems with the
ability to implement decision-making processes that mimic quorum responses by
animal groups, the ability to identify and react to domineering or intrusive
behavior, the ability to implement divide-and-conquer, clustering, and labor
division strategies, and the ability to counter the effect of corrupted data.