* 1524012
* ECCS: Biomedical Circuits and Systems 2015 Conference Attendance Award for Domestic Students, Oct. 22-24, 2015,  Atlanta George
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* Maysam Ghovanloo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Support for IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference( BIOCAS2015) ,
October 22-24, 2015

The IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS) is a premier
international forum for presenting interdisciplinary research and development
activities related to medicine, life sciences, physical sciences and engineering
that will shape tomorrow's medical devices and healthcare systems. It brings
together researchers, designers, clinicians, and engineers from industry,
academia, and government, along with graduate and undergraduate students, to
disseminate the latest cutting-edge research results and innovative solutions
for today's complex health problems at the frontiers of biomedical engineering,
life sciences, and circuits and systems. The conference also includes one full
day of tutorials, offered by prominent researchers and pioneers in the hot
topics, which is meant to educate the attendees in areas of high demand. The
11th edition of the IEEE BioCAS will be held from Oct. 22-24, 2015 in Atlanta,
GA. The NSF funds will be used to cover or assist with the attendance expenses
for three categories of students and post-docs from domestic US institutions: 1.
Senior undergraduate or junior graduate students, who are not yet at the stage
to have their own papers at the conference, however, have demonstrated a strong
academic background demonstrated by their GPA and two strong letters of
recommendation, 2. Senior graduate students who have accepted papers at the
conference with strong reviewer scores and a strong letter of recommendation
from their advisor, 3. Post-doctoral fellows who have accepted papers at the
conference with strong reviewer scores, but do not have any other source of
funding to support their travel or registration. This grant provides numerous
benefits to these students, who may not otherwise be able to attend, by
providing them with education and networking opportunity in advanced
multidisciplinary fields, brightening their future prospects and benefiting the
society.