* 1524191
* RUI: Modes of Dome Formation in the Southern Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Jamie Levine, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 139,895.00

The Tallulah Falls and Toxaway domes are map scale structural features that
interrupt the regional trend of the Southern Appalachian Blue Ridge mountains.
In map pattern these two domes bare striking resemblance to domal geologic
structures in western North America that have long been understood as the result
of extension and thinning of the continental crust. However, the Tallulah Falls
and Toxaway domes, along with a number of other Southern Appalachian domes are
considered to have been thought to have formed major crustal shortening and
thickening during plate convergence. Indeed, nowhere in the Southern
Appalachians has evidence for major localized crustal extension been recognized
despite its presence in every major mountain range and type of plate tectonic
boundary world wide, including convergent (Himalayas, Alps), transform
(Anatolia, Venezuela), and divergent margins (mid-ocean ridges). Consequently,
the absence of major extension within the Southern Appalachians, a plate margin
that has experienced several phases of collision and subsequent rifting, is
notable either because it displays a unique set of dynamic processes, or these
structures have yet to be documented. This project is aimed at distinguishing
between competing models of mountain building processes as recorded in the
Tallulah Falls and Toxaway domes, and to determine their origin. This research
will accomplish many of the outcomes NSF seeks to achieve in terms of benefits
to society, including: full involvement of women in science, improved science
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education, increased public
scientific literacy and engagement with science, and preparing and engaging a
diverse STEM workforce. This project will maximize student involvement in all
aspects of the project from field-work and laboratory analyses, to data analysis
and presentation of results. These students will be trained in cutting edge
scientific techniques, and consequently will be better prepared for careers in
earth science. While in the field, undergraduates and the principal
investigators will communicate live with students enrolled in introductory
courses at Appalachian State University, allowing a dialogue both about how and
what kind of geologic research is currently being conducted. Results of the
study will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and presentations
at professional meetings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The mechanism and timing of
mid-crustal doming and exhumation is unknown in the Southern Appalachians, and
here crystalline complexes are considered exclusively as examples of
contractional features. This interpretation bares striking similarity to that of
Cordilleran metamorphic core complexes prior to the recognition of low-angle
normal faults, now widely accepted as the locations of major crustal extension.
Extensional exhumation of mid-crustal rocks would represent a significant
departure from extant models of Appalachian mountain building, which adhere to a
framework wherein all major structures exhibit thrust, or strike-slip
displacement. The study will focus on two supposed contractional domes, the
Tallulah Falls and Toxaway Domes, which straddle the Georgia, North Carolina,
and South Carolina borders. The objectives of this project are to investigate
the criteria necessary to determine timing and distinguish between contraction
and extension related dome formation and exhumational models. In order to
accomplish the principal investigators will determine: 1) the nature of the
boundaries between the Tallulah Falls and Toxaway Domes and their cover; 2) how
the timing of exhumation relates to doming and structural emplacement; and 3)
how metamorphic grade variation is distributed within these domes. This project
will incorporate field and laboratory structural observations, and geo- and
thermochronometric measurements. Shear zone fabrics will be analyzed in the
field and in thin section in order to determine the kinematics and metamorphic
conditions of dome exhumation, and correlated with specific tectonic events
using monazite Uranium-Thorium-lead (U-Th-Pb) dating. Timing of exhumation will
be based on relative cooling ages across the boundary using Argon-Argon
(40Ar/39Ar) dating in white mica and amphibole, and fission track dating in
zircon.