* 1524214
* Mapping Pathways To Urbanism And Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Tatsuya Murakami, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 180,670.00

Dr. Tatsuya Murakami of Tulane University will conduct archaeological research
on the origins and development of one of the first cities in Central Mexico.
Once built, cities tend to grow in size and complexity, and it is observed that
many modern cities keep attracting people from rural areas. However, urban
formation is by no means a necessary consequence of population growth and/or
technological, economic, and political development. Recent investigation has
shown that there are many different forms of cities, and thus multiple pathways
to urbanism. While some early cities were created as a result of the incentive
of powerful individuals and groups, other cities were formed without a strong
central authority. Understanding causes and consequences of early urbanism has
great implications for reconsidering the current state of urban societies in
historical and comparative perspectives and for better understanding the human
nature. This study forms part of a long-term research program that explores how
social distinctions (e.g., social inequality, division of labor) and social
integration are simultaneously achieved and are constituted by different kinds
of material culture. The project will provide an empirical basis for such
endeavor and will serve to generate testable hypotheses.

Dr. Murakami, in collaboration with Mexican and Japanese scholars, will carry
out surface reconnaissance, manual auger testing, and excavations of residential
areas at the archaeological site of Tlalancaleca in the modern state of Puebla,
which was one of the largest settlements during the Formative Period (800 BC-AD
200) in Central Mexico. The Central Mexican urban traditions during the later
periods can be characterized by compact, high-density settlements, and cities
such as Teotihuacan and Tenochtitlan served as seats of ruling elites.
Investigation at Tlalancaleca will shed an important light on how these urban
traditions were created in specific cultural and historical settings. Was the
creation of the first city in Central Mexico an outcome of political
centralization? Or was the early city an aggregate of more or less independent
communities? To what extent were various individuals and groups integrated into
a single urban community? To answer these significant questions, this study will
examine diachronic changes in the extent of urban settlement, population size
and density, neighborhood organization, and the extent of monumental
construction. All these variables are closely associated with the nature of
intra-urban communication, and their assessment will illuminate the nature and
degree of social integration in terms of the relative role of actions of
powerful individuals and groups as well as commoners. This study will
specifically address the role of cooperation and collective action in the
genesis and transformation of urban settlement. This project actively involves
both undergraduate and graduate students from the US and Mexico for professional
development and enhances international collaborations. Public outreach and the
training of local people in archaeological practice are also an essential part
of the project and will contribute to community development in a rural area of
Mexico.