* 1524312
* CIF: Small: Towards Structural Information
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Wojciech Szpankowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,594.00

With the ability to acquire data at high velocity, variety, and volume on
diverse natural and engineered processes, comes the need to derive novel
insights and translate raw data into context-specific knowledge as structural
information, of crucial importance for further advances in engineering and
science. This project pursues an information theoretic foundation, inspired by
the great success of information theory in establishing fundamental limits for
problems related to relatively simple classes of random processes (such as
Markov processes or ergodic sequences). Many real-world domains exhibit
complexities that violate assumptions used to derive these fundamental results.
For example, data bases often have strong structural correlations, and these
underlying data structures often do not lend themselves naturally to formulation
in the classical information-theoretic framework. In yet other cases, data
interpretability is itself an issue: as an example, the absence of a product
recommendation is distinct from a negative recommendation. The outcome of many
analytics tasks, including inference and recommendation, is not easily modeled
by traditional information theory formalisms. These challenges notwithstanding,
this project posits that formalisms inspired by information theory are critical
when dealing with data at scale, speed, and complexity in today's applications,
where reliability of solutions from ad-hoc analytics can be questioned. Tools
developed as part of the project will be used in areas such as the
characterization of biological and social networks, and development of robust
pervasive communications infrastructure.

Data is increasingly available in various forms and it appears in exponentially
increasing amounts. Most of such data is multidimensional and context dependent;
thus it necessitates novel structural theory and efficient algorithms to extract
meaningful information. Typically, a database for these new types of data is in
the form of a "data structure," which in turn conveys a "shape" of the data. The
data itself consist of labels implanted in the structure, often locally
correlated. This project aims to quantify the information conveyed by such
multimodal data structures, via the following specific goals: (1) Discover
fundamental limits of information content for a wide range of multimodal data
structures with correlated labels. Once this goal is met, the project will
devise asymptotically optimal lossless and lossy compression algorithms
achieving these limits. (2) Develop Lempel-Ziv like algorithms for graph
compression (with correlated labels) and graph data mining. (3) Understand
structural properties of large systems with local mutual dependencies,
constraints, and interactions often described by Markov fields. Finally, (4)
Analyze flow of structural information over a noisy channel.