* 1524634
* EAGER: Cyber-Physical Fingerprinting for Internet of Things Authentication: Accelerating IoT Research and Education Under the Global City Teams Challenge
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Sanjay Raman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Device authentication and identification has been recently cited as one of the
most pressing security challenges facing the Internet of things (IoT). In
particular, the open-access nature of the IoT renders it highly susceptible to
insider attacks. In such attacks, adversaries can capture or forge the identity
of the small, resource constrained IoT devices and, thus, bypass conventional
authentication methods. Such attacks are challenging to defend against due to
the apparent legitimacy of the adversaries' devices. The primary goal of this
research is to overcome this challenge by developing new authentication methods
that supplement traditional security solutions with cyber-physical fingerprints
extracted from the IoT devices' environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a novel machine learning framework that enables the IoT to
dynamically identify, classify, and authenticate devices based on their cyber-
physical environment and with limited available prior data. This will result in
the creation of environment-based IoT device credentials that can serve as a
means of attestation, not only on the legitimacy of a device's identity, but
also on the validity of the physical environment it claims to monitor and the
actions it claims to be performing over time. The framework will also encompass
an experimental IoT software platform that will be built to validate the
proposed research. Owing to a partnership with the NIST Global City Teams
Challenge (GCTC) project "Bringing Internet of Things Know-How to High School
Students", a collaboration with IoT-DC, Arlington County, VA, and other
entities, the proposed research will train high school students, STEM educators,
and a broad community on a variety of research topics that will include IoT
security, cyber-physical systems, and data analytics. The broader impacts will
also include the creation of an interdisciplinary workforce focused on securing
tomorrow's smart cities.