* 1524267
* AGS-PRF: Modeling Ice Crystal Habit Evolution from Vapor Growth and Riming--Investigating How Evolving Ice Particle Properties Impacts Clouds, Precipitation, and Phase Partitioning
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Anders Jensen, Jensen                  Anders
* Fellowship Award
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2018
* USD 172,000.00

Representing ice in microphysics models is important not only to study the
effects of ice on cloud dynamics and cloud lifetime, but also for accurate
quantitative precipitation forecasts. Traditional microphysics parameterizations
artificially separate ice into categories such as cloud ice, snow, and graupel.
These models assume that for each category ice crystal size varies with mass,
but they do not account for ice crystal shape evolution. In nature, ice crystal
shape, or habit, is temperature dependent and evolves as ice moves through a
cloud. Ice crystal shape significantly affects vapor growth rates by varying the
gradients in the encompassing vapor field. Ice crystal shape also influences
riming rates and fall speed. Traditional models are not able to capture this ice
crystal shape sensitivity.

This project will study the impact of ice crystal shape evolution on different
cloud systems. Simulations will be conducted using the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model to look at how ice crystal habit evolution impacts
orographic precipitation, tropical cyclone dynamics and precipitation, and
squall lines. A 2-dimensional modeling framework will also be used to explore
the effects of evolving ice crystal shape on phase partitioning in mixed-phase
clouds. Finally, how representing lightly-rimed ice crystals, which is now
possible by evolving ice crystal shape, impacts mixed-phase cloud stability will
be studied.

Intellectual Merit: The research provides a unique opportunity to study how ice
crystal habit evolution impacts different cloud systems. At present, the degree
to which ice particle shape evolution influences cloud evolution is unknown.
With the new microphysics parameterization, the influence evolving ice crystal
shape has on cloud system properties can be explored. How light riming affects
mixed-phase clouds can also be examined for the first time.

Broader Impacts: Modeling ice crystal fall speed evolution which is partially
determined by ice crystal shape is crucial for quantitative precipitation
forecasts. Also, cirrus cloud properties and lifetime are incredibly sensitive
to ice crystal fall speeds. Cirrus cloud radiative properties depend on ice
crystal shape as well, meaning ice crystal shape could have important influences
on climate. Because the microphysical methods in this study can, in principle,
be used in any modeling framework, the research has the potential to impact
modeling ranging from operational forecasting through climate studies of ice
clouds. Being able to more accurately forecast precipitation, especially heavy
or persistent precipitation that could cause flooding in general makes this
research relevant to society.