* 1524836
* Development of a Temperature Compensated Optical Fiber Strainmeter For Detecting Slow Slip Events
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 167,481.00

This project will develop a new method for measuring strain in the Earth. Earth
strain is a measure of deformation in the ground from a variety of causes
including earthquake processes, volcanoes, tides, and underground fluid movement
(for example, from hydraulic fracturing in oil and gas production). Detecting
Earth strain and mapping its variation in time and location can contribute to
models of what is happening deep underground. Measuring these tiny changes
requires a very special sensor and extreme care in attaching it to the Earth. In
this project, a fairly new type of strainmeter will be tested; an optical fiber
in a protective cable will be stretched in a trench several hundred meters in
length and buried. Precision laser optics will sense minute changes in the
length of the buried optical fiber and hence detect Earth strain. This type of
strainmeter, if successful, will be significantly less expensive than
alternative methods of strain measurement and allow wider use of strain
measurements to study earthquakes and man-made sources of strain. As well as
making possible a number of new geophysical investigations, this work will
advance the technology of optical fiber sensors and likely find applications in
other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several years ago, our group designed
and installed a 250-m-long borehole optical fiber vertical strainmeter. The
instrument detects Earth strain by interferometically recording length changes
in a tensioned optical fiber held fixed at the top and bottom ends of a long
borehole. Subsequently we developed a prototype horizontal optical fiber
strainmeter in a 180-m-long 1-m-deep trench. When analyzed in the teleseismic
and tidal bands, excellent agreement is found between both optical fiber strain
records and those from the 730-m long reference laser-vacuum strainmeters sited
adjacent to them at our southern California field site, Pi√±on Flat Observatory
(PFO). Noting the cost savings from deploying in a trench rather than a
borehole, we have identified several important improvements for the horizontal
trench sensor, including a dual-fiber thermal compensation scheme, a simple
braced-monument coupling system, and a compact, low-cost electro-optical system,
that we are confident will make the horizontal sensor perform as well as the
borehole sensor. We propose to integrate these improvements and develop a
robust, widely deployable, inexpensive, and sensitive optical fiber long-
baseline strainmeter that we will evaluate at PFO. One of our long term plans is
to request additional funding to deploy this type of instrument, once proven, to
study Slow Slip Events (SSEs) in Costa Rica where GPS measurements have
indicated frequent slow slip, at both deep and shallow levels of the subduction
zone. A coastal deployment of the instrument would be quite close to the zone of
shallow SSEs, allowing their recording with unprecedented detail.