* 1524133
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Predictability and Recoverability of High Vowel Reduction in Speech
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* James Whang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,786.00

Human cognition relies on direct and indirect information to draw conclusions.
Processes that rely on direct information are called bottom-up processes, where
a conclusion is drawn based solely on the provided information; processes that
rely on indirect information are called top-down processes, where elements such
as context, pattern-recognition, and probability are used to form an expectation
for a particular outcome. Studies have shown that a strong top-down process
often blocks bottom-up processing of certain information available in the
stimulus, but how the two types of processes interact is poorly understood. As
an integral part of human cognition, language also shows interactions of top-
down and bottom-up processes, where differences that are meaningful in one
language may be readily ignored as uninformative in another. Language,
therefore, is an excellent tool for shedding light on how the processing of
direct and indirect information interacts in the mind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research focuses on Japanese as a case study. The syllable structure of Japanese
overwhelmingly follows a simple consonant-vowel structure. However, the process
of high vowel reduction in Japanese, where unaccented vowels /i, u/ are weakened
between two voiceless consonants (e.g., /suki/ &gt; [ski] 'like'), often results
in the complete deletion of a vowel during speech production. However Japanese
speakers often report perceiving a vowel between two consecutive voiceless
consonants, even in the complete absence of a vowel (e.g., [ski] perceived as
/suki/). It is unclear at this point what drives this misperception of
apparently non-existent vowels, but there are two likely sources. The first is
an indirect source. Given the simple syllable structure of Japanese, Japanese
speakers are conditioned to expect a vowel after a consonant, in which case the
misperception of a vowel would be the result of a strong top-down process. The
alternative is a direct source. Because high vowel reduction is common in
Japanese, Japanese speakers may be hypersensitive even to subtle acoustic
information that indicates the presence of a vowel, in which case the perception
of a vowel would be the result of a bottom-up process. A production experiment
and a corpus study will first test what acoustic information for a weakened
vowel exists in naturally produced speech. A perception experiment will then
manipulate the direct and indirect information to test which of these Japanese
listeners rely on more when perceiving a weakened vowel. The experimental
results will inform a computational model, which investigates how a reliance on
the direct and indirect cues might be learned. The experiments, together with
the model, will lead to a deeper understanding of the extent in which bottom-up
and top-down processes are shaped by experience both in language and more
broadly in human cognition as a whole.