* 1524382
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Curation And Integration Of Inconsistent And Incomplete Temporal Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Wang-Chiew Tan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* James French
* 07/31/2017
* USD 31,120.00

In today's digital world, incomplete and inconsistent information about an
entity can often be found in multiple different data sources, or in different
versions of the same source at different times. To harness the rich amount of
information available, many organizations curate and integrate public (and
private) data over time to create a comprehensive temporal view of relevant
entities. This project will have the potential to make significant societal
impact through the development of a software prototype for data curation and
integration. Such a prototype will enable the users to construct robust,
application-specific, consistent views of temporal data on demand, which will
lead to new classes of applications, particularly those involving profiling,
tracking, monitoring, archiving and understanding of the evolution of entities
over time. This project will also provide the opportunity to train students in
several critical research areas central to temporal databases, data analytics
and big data. The results obtained in this investigation will be incorporated
into advanced graduate courses on large-scale data integration offered at both
SUNY at Buffalo and UC Santa Cruz. The software artifacts and datasets produced
will be made freely available for broad dissemination and sharing.

This project will advance the state-of-the-art in data curation and integration
over temporal data through addressing three fundamental challenges. First,
unlike incompleteness in non-temporal data, incompleteness in temporal data may
be time-varying. Time-varying incompleteness will necessitate the introduction
of time-dependent nulls. The second challenge is that inconsistency can also
occur in temporal data. Inconsistency will be handled by declaratively
specifying temporal preferences and algorithms to resolve conflicts based on
those preferences. Alternatively, under the assumption that the inconsistent
temporal database is left as is, this project will consider how consistent query
answers can be computed over such a database. This project will also consider,
for the first time, data with both incompleteness and inconsistency in a single
formal framework, which will require significant conceptual and practical
advances. The third challenge is to achieve temporal data independence through a
conceptual framework that will use a formal, two-tier approach to manage
temporal data; the abstract view provides the semantics and the concrete view
for the physical representation of temporal data. The views hide lower-level
details and allow for declarative, logical specification of queries, mappings,
and dependencies. For further information see the project web site at
http://greenwich.sites.ucsc.edu or http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~chomicki/.