* 1524530
* Role of Silica Redistribution in the Evolution of Subduction Megathrusts, Shimanto Belt Japan
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Donald Fisher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 324,925.00

The last decade has seen two of the most destructive earthquakes ever recorded,
with nearly 300,000 lives lost due to ground shaking and inundation of coastal
areas by tsunami. In the case of the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and several other
large recent earthquakes, the seismic event was preceded by, and therefore
potentially triggered by, a type of fault behavior known as "slow slip" -- a
behavior that was unknown two decades ago. Therefore, the old paradigm that
faults along plate boundaries either "creep" or experience earthquakes due to
"stick-slip" behavior does not explain the full range of fault behavior along
active subduction zones-- behavior that includes periodic "slow earthquakes" and
microseismicity that coincides with tremor. Recognition of this diversity of
slip behavior demands a new paradigm that explains the role that these various
behaviors may play in triggering earthquakes. The central tenet of this study is
that information about heterogeneity in plate boundary slip behavior is not only
recorded by seismicity, but also in the distributions and textures of veins, or
mineralized cracks, that we can observe today in exhumed ancient subduction
boundaries. This project is specifically designed to investigate the roles of
natural hydrofracking and local redistribution of calcium carbonate and silica
for the evolution of slip instabilities associated with microseismicity, slow
slip, and the buildup and release of elastic strain in earthquakes. Vein systems
will be examined in ancient plate boundary fault zones in Japan that record a
range of conditions that reflect the depths and temperatures at which
earthquakes are generated. The principal investigator and his colleagues have
developed an over-arching hypothesis that relates silica redistribution in fault
zones - as exemplified in vein textures and mineralogies - to earthquake
dynamics. If the hypothesis is correct, models of subduction zone behavior must
consider not just the frictional behavior of the fault but also the role of
footwall hydrofracturing (i.e., a predictable function of fluid sources and
permeability) and silica redistribution (i.e., a thermally activated process) as
an explanation for the heterogeneity in plate boundary behavior in subduction
zones. In addition to the research goals of the project, this award provides
support for the training of an Hispanic female graduate student at Penn State
thus contributing to broadening of underrepresented groups in a Science,
Technologoy, Engineering and Math (STEM) discipline, as well as providing
opportunities for the participation of an undergraduate student who will
complete research-heavy independent senior thesis during year two of the
project. Students will be trained in the use of lower temperature models for
crack sealing that have been used along passive margins with application to the
oil industry while bridging these models toward application to higher
temperature rocks from subduction plate boundaries. The graduate student will
also be involved in an international collaboration with Japanese scientists, and
this study of exposed ancient rocks will complement the ongoing NantroSEIZE
offshore drilling experiment designed to evaluate in situ the processes that
characterize the plate boundary at depths where earthquakes are generated.
Because subduction zones have significant potential for large magnitude
earthquakes, studies of fault zone behavior in these settings have potentially
significant implications for the health and economic well being of society.

This study is designed to investigate the hydrofracturing and subsequent healing
recorded by mineralized veins and fabrics that develop in the footwall of
subduction interfaces. It is hypothesized that the range of textures observed in
veins is a manifestation of the range of heterogeneous plate boundary slip
behavior that is observed along convergent margins. The healing of the fractures
within the underthrusting sediments adjacent to the plate interface can occur in
times that overlap with earthquake recurrence intervals at the temperatures of
the seismogenic zone. Open fluid-filled cracks could impact the effective stress
and the strength/elastic properties of the rocks that store and release elastic
strain energy, so the healing of cracks could be fundamental to the locking
behavior of the seismogenic zone. Vein systems and related scaly fabrics from
six regionally extensive shear zones within the Shimanto Belt in Japan that
formed during subduction and contain pervasive quartz veins representing the
full range of temperatures within the seismogenic zone will be studies. The
principal investigators will: 1) characterize the vein systematics on the
outcrop both as a function of lithology and position relative to major faults,
2) evaluate vein microstructures petrographically and with cathodoluminescence,
and 3) develop elemental maps of potential silica sources adjacent to veins,
including scaly fabrics. To evaluate the role of local diffusion of silica, we
will map major element concentrations in areas that define potential silica
sources (e.g., scaly fabrics and wall rock with cleavage adjacent to fractures).
They will also determine the aperture of cracks and the degree to which
fractures are sealed based on microstructures. Microstructural information will
be used in conjunction with scanline surveys of vein spacings, thicknesses, and
lengths to put constraints on the spacings of open fractures and the times
needed to seal fractures. This study will enable us to address fundamental
questions about quartz veins adjacent to the subduction interface: What are the
sources of silica within veins? Can we identify silica depletion zones typical
of local silica redistribution? How does crack aperture and crack spacing vary
as a function of rock type and temperature? Is there a systematic variation in
vein textures with increasing temperature and depth within the seismogenic zone?
The Shimanto belt of Japan is ideal for this study as it exposes regional fault
zones that are interpreted as paleo-decollements (active plate boundary damage
zones in the underthrusting footwall) and for comparison, examples of out-of
sequence splays that accommodated seismic slip and juxtaposed rocks of the
existing accretionary prism.