* 1524363
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Human-Supervised Manipulation of Deformable Objects
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* M. Cenk Cavusoglu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2021
* USD 469,191.00

The goal of the proposed work is to develop algorithms that enable human-
supervised robotic manipulation of deformable objects under significant
uncertainty. Manipulation of deformable objects is essential in surgery, which
involves complex manipulations of delicate and highly deformable tissue under
substantial uncertainty, and in manufacturing, where many assembly tasks involve
flexible parts and materials (e.g. cables, textiles, and composites). Recent
advances in robot hardware (e.g. the da Vinci and Baxter robots) have made
robotic manipulation of deformable objects physically possible but robots still
lack the algorithms necessary to perform practical tasks in this domain when
there is significant model uncertainty. This project will have broad societal
impact through its applications in surgical and manufacturing robotics. The
ability to robustly manipulate deformable structures is an important precursor
technology towards realizing intelligent robotic surgical assistants. Robotics
and its medical applications have the potential to inspire children to pursue
careers in STEM fields and meet the needs of America's growing health-care and
manufacturing robotics industry. Integration of the research activities with
education will emphasize actively involving undergraduates in research
activities and introducing new lecture material and projects into undergraduate
and graduate courses. Also, special emphasis will be given to recruit qualified
students from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the
proposed research is to develop algorithms that enable human-supervised robotic
manipulation of deformable objects under substantial uncertainty. Specifically,
the research will focus on developing adaptive complexity models for modeling
deformable object dynamics and associated uncertainty, planning algorithms for
integrated exploration and task execution, control algorithms for robust
manipulation of deformable objects under uncertainty, and algorithms for
effective human supervision of robotic manipulation of deformable objects. The
intellectual merit of the project comes from its fundamental contributions to
robotic modeling, planning, and control algorithms for manipulation of
deformable objects. The research will have impact in the fields of robotic
manipulation, motion planning under uncertainty, and compliant manipulation
control.