* 1524647
* RI: Small: An Ensemble of Neuromechanical Models of C. elegans Locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Randall Beer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 492,189.00

One of the central challenges of neuroscience is understanding how animals
operate as integrated wholes, that is, how their neural activity, working in
concert with the properties of their bodies and environments, coordinates their
behavior. When faced with such a daunting challenge, it makes sense to first
study simpler instances of the general problem of interest. In this regard, the
nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans is a uniquely qualified target for
investigating the operation of integrated brain-body-environment systems. It is
the only animal for which the connectivity of its entire nervous system is
known. In fact, the anatomical structure of its entire body has been
characterized to the level of individual cells. In addition, its genome has been
completely sequenced and its entire developmental lineage has been
characterized, from fertilized egg to adult animal. The goal of this project is
to draw upon these many resources in order to construct integrated brain-body-
environment models of C. elegans locomotion, a behavior that serves as the
foundation for all other behaviors that this animal
exhibits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the entire connectome of C. elegans is
known, detailed knowledge of the electrophysiology of its nervous system is far
less complete. For this reason, the approach has two components: constrained
stochastic optimization and ensemble analysis. The investigators will construct
computational models constrained by the known connectivity of the C. elegans
ventral cord circuitry, the known layout of its body wall musculature and the
partially-known electrophysiological properties of the neurons involved. They
will then apply a stochastic optimization technique (evolutionary algorithms) in
order to find values of the unknown electrophysiological parameters of this
model that maximize a measure of locomotion performance. In general, different
optimizations will result in different values for these parameters, all of which
are consistent with the known experimental constraints. Thus, the object of
study is not an individual model, but rather the entire ensemble of models that
result from repeated optimizations. A detailed study of this ensemble will
suggest specific new experiments whose results can then be used to further
constrain future optimizations. The particular focus of these modeling efforts
is on understanding the relative roles that proprioceptive feedback from body
stretch receptors and the intrinsic dynamics of ventral cord circuitry play in
the generation and propagation of the locomotion pattern.