* 1524860
* AGS-PRF: A Global Survey of Atmospheric Hydroperoxides: HOx Cycling, Tropospheric Ozone and Chemistry-Climate Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Michelle Kim, Kim                     Michelle       J
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2017
* USD 172,000.00

This project supports an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellow to investigate the
atmospheric chemistry of biogenic isoprene emissions. Isoprene can be produced
by terrestrial ecosystems and can react differently in the atmosphere depending
on what other gases and aerosols are present. Nitrogen oxide concentrations can
influence the extent to which isoprene contributes to the formation of ozone or
very small organic particles in the atmosphere.

This research investigates isoprene oxidation processes in conditions with low
concentrations of nitrogen oxides (NOx), and the effects of isoprene oxidation
products on ozone and the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA). The
focus is on the formation, destruction and physical uptake processes of
hydroperoxides. The research is expected to address long-standing questions
about hydrogen peroxide deposition rates and its impact on the budget of
hydrogen oxide radicals (HOx), and lead to new parameterizations based on in-
situ data. The contribution of isoprene to SOA formation will be investigated by
examining the sources and sinks of each oxidation reaction across a wide variety
of environmental conditions. A novel instrument will be deployed for the
separation of isoprene oxidation products to examine the different chemical
fates of each.