* 1524247
* OCE-RIG: Crustal and Mantle Processes at Gorda Ridge Based on Olivine-Hosted Melt Inclusion Compositions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Virginia Dorsey Wanless, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2018
* USD 98,981.00

The goal of this project is to determine the depths and distribution of
crystallization of magmas within the oceanic crust at mid-ocean ridges. The
release of latent heat during crystallization of magmas that forms the oceanic
crust is a primary mechanism by which heat is transferred from the Earth's
interior to the oceans and atmosphere, and it drives the hydrothermal
circulation that sustains chemosynthetic life on the seafloor. Thus, determining
where crystallization occurs within the magmatic system and how magmas are
distributed to the oceanic crust is critical for our understanding of global
geochemical cycles and mid-ocean ridge systems as a whole. This project will
provide funding and research experience for a graduate and undergraduate student
at Boise State University (BSU) and results will be incorporated into a new
marine geosciences course at BSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
project is to determine how variations in spreading rate, ridge axis morphology,
and lithospheric thicknesses influence crystallization depths and magma
compositions along Gorda Ridge. The investigator will use major, trace and
volatile compositions of olivine-hosted melt inclusions to address three
questions regarding melting and crystallization: (1) How do crystallization
depths vary along Gorda Ridge and what does this indicate about lithospheric
thickness? (2) Are there variations in magma compositions and melting
systematics that correlate with ridge morphology? (3) How do melting systematics
and crystallization depths beneath North Gorda compare to the Cleft segment on
the Juan de Fuca Ridge? To address these questions, the investigator will
determine the pressures/depths of crystallization of each melt inclusion using
vapor-saturation pressures derived from volatile contents. Next, major and trace
element concentrations will be used to determine how magma compositions vary
along the ridge axis. These results will be incorporated into numerical
calculations to determine how mantle source compositions and total extents of
melting vary along axis. Finally, crystallization depths and melting models will
be compared to previous studies of melt inclusions from a variety of ridges to
determine how variations in spreading rate, magma supply and lithospheric
thickness influence melting and crystallization beneath mid-ocean ridges.