* 1524779
* Leveraging faculty expertise in CREATE pedagogy to transform teaching and maximize student outcomes through courses focused on scientific literature at 2- and 4-year institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Stanley Lo, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 298,600.00

The President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) predicted
in 2012 that, unless measures are taken to facilitate US students' completion of
degrees in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM), there will not be
enough STEM graduates to fill STEM jobs in the near future. Both PCAST and
Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education, a recent document
reflecting the views of more than 500 biology faculty representing a variety of
scientific fields and academic institutions, call for engaging students in the
scientific process as one means of ensuring a well prepared professional STEM
workforce in the future. The CREATE (Consider, Read, Elucidate hypotheses,
Analyze and interpret the data, Think of the next Experiment) teaching/learning
strategy aims to improve undergraduate science education by engaging students,
at the beginning as well as at the advanced stages of their academic careers, in
intensive analysis of the scientific literature. It provides one potential low
cost answer to the challenges posed by PCAST and Vision and Change. Through
multiday workshops (supported by NSF grants DUE 0681536, 1323005, 1021443), the
PIs have introduced faculty to CREATE, followed workshop alumni as they
transformed their courses into CREATE courses, and monitored workshop impact,
teacher ability and student cognitive (process skills) and/or affective
(attitude/beliefs) gains in CREATE courses. The project is designed to capture
CREATE 'effective practices' and innovations developed by workshop-trained
faculty, and to improve and test CREATE approaches for community college
settings. It will enable the investigators to streamline and enhance their
efforts to gather evidence on both faculty use of the technique and student
learning outcomes and to help faculty develop techniques specifically
appropriate for introductory biology courses and use at community colleges, as
well as to assess CREATE impact on additional community college
cohorts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a pilot study in which the
authors closely followed a set of workshop attendees (CBE Life Science
Education, (2014) 13:224-242). The PIs will in year 1 of the two-year project
hold focus groups with experienced CREATE faculty in preparation for a weekend
conference bringing together a subset of these, to capture their innovations to
the CREATE strategy and jointly develop ways to more effectively integrate
CREATE in both four-year and community college settings. Also in year 1,
community college CREATE faculty will work with the PIs and a Community College
Project Consultant to develop a full CREATE curriculum applicable to first-year
Biology at community colleges. In year 2, the PIs will extend testing of CREATE,
including the novel curriculum, to four additional community colleges. In
addition to examining student learning outcomes, this research will capture new
insights into the factors that either promote or inhibit the transformation of
faculty teaching practices. Taken as a whole, this two-year research project
will produce significant CREATE curricular resources and publications that will
facilitate changing science pedagogy via the CREATE strategy and study both
student outcomes and factors that promote or inhibit faculty pedagogical change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in
support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.