* 1524825
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Linking Small-volume Silicic Magmas to a Yellowstone Super-eruption Using a Petrochronologic Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Mark Schmitz, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2018
* USD 66,659.00

Yellowstone National Park and vicinity is home to three volcanic super-eruptions
within the last two million years. Between super-eruptions, smaller effusions of
compositionally similar lavas have erupted onto the surface, however the
relationship between the timing of magma production for precursory and super-
eruptions is unknown. This project seeks to test the contrasting hypotheses that
Yellowstone super-eruptions are the culmination of gradual accumulation of magma
that is periodically tapped by precursory eruptions, or alternatively, super-
eruptions are the result of independent episodes of rapid magma production
without connection to the smaller pre-cursor eruptions. This research bears on
our understanding of how quickly large super-eruption volumes of magma may be
generated and reside under active volcanic calderas, with implications for the
assessment of eruption recurrence and volcanic hazards.

To assess the potential connections between super-eruptions and smaller lava
effusions, the morphological, chemical, thermometric, isotopic, and age
characteristics for small volume rhyolitic lavas that erupted between the 2.1
and 1.3 million year old super-eruptions will be used to establish the
timescales and processes by which magmas are generated and evolve. These
processes include partial melting of earlier-formed volcanic products and
associated crystal recycling, magma crystallization and differentiation, as well
as mixing and hybridization with mantle-derived basalts; the relative importance
of each process is best explored through the crystal cargos of each eruption.
Specifically, the minerals zircon and sanidine will be extracted from the lavas
and analyzed by various state-of-the-art methods to assess the contribution of
small volume magma batches to the super-eruption. Dating the intermittent
eruptions will provide a framework for the recurrence interval of Yellowstone
volcanism and bear upon the question of lifespans of eruptable magmas. This
award will allow three undergraduate students from Westminster College (Utah) to
participate in field and lab based research over three years, and promote
knowledge and technology transfer between this undergraduate-only liberal arts
college and the Isotope Geochronology Laboratory at Boise State University
(Idaho). The collaborative model will allow students to interact with graduate
students and laboratory technicians at Boise State University, and conduct
hands-on research with instrumentation not available at Westminster College.
Students will participate in data processing, interpretation, and presentation
at local and national conferences; results from this study will be included in
undergraduate courses at Westminster College, and displayed as interpretive
materials on public lands near the eruption sites.