* 1524435
* AGS-PRF:  Daytime to Nocturnal Convective Transition in the Central United States
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* John Peters, Peters                  John           M
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2017
* USD 126,815.00

This award will provide funding for a postdoctoral researcher to study how the
character of thunderstorms changes during the transition from day to night.
During the day, thunderstorms feed off of the solar heating of the ground and
are referred to as surface-based. When the sun sets and the ground begins to
cool, the air flow into the thunderstorms becomes elevated and the thunderstorms
often consolidate into a larger complex known as a mesoscale convective system
(MCS). Computer models do not capture this transition well and forecasting of
whether an MCS will form and how long it may survive becomes very difficult.
This study will make use of both numerical modeling and observations to study
the transition. The research should provide forecasters with more information
about these hazardous nocturnal events which can contain severe winds and
flooding rains. The researcher also would like to connect with other colleagues
to determine how the public interprets forecasts for these types of events with
an eye towards improving overall public safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher plans to improve basic understanding of the dynamics of the nocturnal
transition of convection through a series of numerical modeling experiments and
analysis of high-resolution field observations. Two main research questions will
be addressed: 1) How do increasing planetary boundary layer stability,
increasing low-level jet strength, and increasing low-level lift along the
terminus of the low-level jet influence upscale growth and behavior of
convection during nocturnal transition and 2) Do field observations of nocturnal
transitioning MCSs corroborate the results from numerical experiments? The
researcher will perform idealized numerical experiments to address the first
question and then follow-up with analysis of data from the Plains Elevated
Convection at Night (PECAN) field campaign.