* 1524656
* FOUNDATIONS: Integrating Evidence-based Teaching and Learning into the Core Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Susan Metz, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,778,458.00

This is an institutional transformation project called the Foundations Program.
It is operating in an increasingly receptive environment, building substantially
on initial earlier efforts to use evidence-based teaching in lower division STEM
courses. The project is working towards a major transformation in the education
practices at Stevens Institute of Technology in the core courses in mathematics,
science, and engineering taken by all engineering students in their first two
years at Stevens Institute of Technology. It is leveraging the experiences of a
core group of faculty and academic administrators in which improved teaching
practices informed by educational research have been recently implemented. The
Foundations Program will provide the training, support, and recognition to
enable the participating faculty to make this changes systematically. Training
and support include the provision of professional development for faculty
participants related to the theory and practice of research-based course design
and pedagogy as these are grounded in core STEM disciplines. Trained course
assistants will be provided to reform instructors to aid in the transition.
Reform instructors will be assisted during their transition by formative
assessment experts. The necessary faculty time and internal structures needed to
reflect and gauge progress and share this information will also be supported.
The Foundations Program plans to use advocacy with colleagues, internally and
externally, in order to catalyze diffusion beyond the early phases of this work.
A distinctive feature of the program is to target deep and transferable
learning, both within and across disciplinary domains. In order to achieve this
result coherently, the team will begin with an emphasis on modeling. The
associated expected improvement in student competency and self-efficacy is
expected to lead to the strongest educational gains and also improve persistence
to the bachelor's degree by all student groups. Integral to implementation of
the Foundations Program, a set of policies and actions are being put in place to
align the faculty recognition and rewards system to fully recognize the efforts
being made by reform instructors. These changes in the reward system will
support the advocacy efforts and are expected to gain traction with the faculty
and administration, thereby becoming institutionalized and
sustained&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will contribute to the
knowledge base on how universities, especially those with a research focus, can
first conceptualize and then implement an effective model to transition teaching
in major core STEM courses to evidence-based approaches. It will further
illuminate the key faculty enablers that can promote depth and spread of such
approaches. A diffusion of innovations model is being employed to guide the
research on this institutional transformation process. The team will investigate
and assess the effectiveness of a strategy that simultaneously targets both
individuals and the organizational environment and the planned evolution in
later years from defined and prescribed changes to emergent or adaptive changes.
The role of full-time, non-tenure track teaching faculty is explicitly included.
The program will contribute to the identification and assessment of curricular
content and the teaching practices, such as modeling, that can promote deeper
and transferable learning within and across disciplines in the critical
foundational STEM courses.