* 1524797
* RI: Small: Probabilistic Planning with Reduced Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shlomo Zilberstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,987.00

Probabilistic planning is essential for the construction of autonomous systems
that can operate robustly in the face of uncertainty---from simple household
products to space exploration vehicles. As the range of the tasks performed by
such systems grows, so does the complexity of planning. This project studies the
foundations of automated planning with reduced models---models that include less
detail on the problem at hand and thereby facilitate the development of faster
planning algorithms. Renewed interest in planning with reduced models was
prompted by the surprising success of determinization, which employs classical
planning techniques that ignore uncertainty and creates new plans online
whenever the exiting plan fails. The success of such methods at the first
international probabilistic planning competition indicated their great
potential, but recent works have also revealed significant drawbacks.

The main goal of this project is to exploit the insights offered by successful
methods for planning with reduced models, while exposing and addressing their
inherent drawbacks. In particular, the project addresses four key challenges:
(1) how to plan with a reduced model, yet factor in, to some limited extent, the
complete model; (2) how to execute plans constructed for a reduced model, while
minimizing the change of reaching a state for which no valid action is
available; (3) how to perform planning and execution concurrently, exploiting
all the available time to improve the plan; and (4) how to formulate this
continual planning paradigm in a way that is amenable to a formal analysis, so
that guarantees can be established on the overall performance. The project
offers a comprehensive treatment of these challenges by introducing a new
planning paradigm that generalizes the concept of determinization and creates a
whole spectrum of reduced models that differ from each other along two key
dimensions: the number of outcomes per state-action pair that are fully
accounted for in the reduced model, and the number of occurrences of the
remaining outcomes that are planned for in advance. The project offers
fundamental contributions to planning and execution under uncertainty, placing
previous works on reduced models in a broader context and shedding light on
their effective use in practice. Project outcomes include new planning and plan
execution algorithms, training undergraduate and graduate students in this area,
and a range of outreach activities.