* 1524581
* Collaborative Research:  Rapid Magma Ascent Recorded in Volatile Diffusion Profiles
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Erik Hauri, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2018
* USD 66,739.00

What makes some eruptions more explosive than others? This fundamental questions
is still largely unanswered, even after a given eruption has occurred. Theories
link eruptive vigor to the amount of gas and stiffness of the magma, but magmas
that have similar stiffness and gas-forming species can still erupt in a wide
range of styles, some highly explosive, some quiescent. This project explores
another fundamental parameter ? the rate at which magma rises in the volcanic
conduit prior to eruption. The magma ascent rate will affect eruptive volume and
vigor and also how bubbles form, grow and coalesce. In general, slow magma rise
leads to more efficient bubble separation and less explosive eruption. This
project aims to test the control of magma rise speed by extracting timescale
information from erupted crystals and glass for several eruptions that span a
range of exlosive magnitudes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take
advantage of new developments in using the zonation of volatile species in glass
and crystals to obtain diffusive timescales that reflect ascent on the order of
minutes to days prior to eruption. Four different chronometers will be used: 1)
multi-species volatile diffusion through melt embayments, 2) water loss through
olivine from melt inclusions of different sizes, 3) water zonation in olivine
and clinopyroxene, and 4) zonation inside melt inclusions. Data will be obtained
that derive from different microbeam techniques (NanoSIMS, FTIR, electron probe,
laser ablation ICPMS) that record chemical zonation at the resolution of 5-25
microns. The proposed targets are a pair of well-documented eruptions from each
of three volcanoes: Etna (2001 and 3930BP), Cerro Negro (1992 and 1995) and
Paricutin (1943 and 1948), which span the range in mass eruption rates that
characterize the transition from strombolian to subplinian styles. The eruptions
targeted are specifically designed to test ideas as to the relationship between
ascent rate and eruption rate in hydrous mafic magmas, among the most common but
least well understood eruptions. This project will support a Ph.D. student and
two high school interns from the Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, a
public high school comprised largely of minority students from lower
socioeconomic groups.&lt;br/&gt;