* 1524110
* Constraints on Plateau Architecture and Assembly From Deep Crustal Xenoliths, Northern Altiplano (Southern Peru)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Mihai Ducea, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2017
* USD 111,994.00

This award will support a petrologic and geochemical study of the portions of
the crust that were picked up and embedded in volcanic rocks (xenoliths) once
used by the Incas to build the city of Cuzco, in Peru. The geologic history of
this part of the Andes is still poorly understood, specifically the reason for
the high altitude that characterizes the region called the Altiplano. The rocks
to be analyzed sampled the deepest portions of the crust in the Altiplano that
are not exposed anywhere else in the region. It is expected that the results
will provide us with a new understanding of how the deepest portions of
continents evolve in mountainous areas. This study will also foster scientific
collaborations with Peruvian and Chilean experts on local and regional Andean
geology. Results of this project will be incorporated into the teaching
curriculum at the University of Arizona, and will serve as the basis for the
training of a M.Sc. student and also that of an undergraduate student. Because
the volcanic rocks were the main building materials used by the Incas in Cuzco,
knowledge derived from this project may impact our understanding of archeology
in this famous heritage site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to conduct a
petrographic, thermobarometric, geochemical, isotopic and geochronologic study
of newly discovered lower crustal xenoliths in Quaternary volcanic rocks from
the northernmost Altiplano Plateau, Peru. At least eight individual lava flows
contain xenoliths. Together, they are the second known occurrence of crustal
xenoliths from the Altiplano and can provide invaluable information about the
plateau's origin and development. This award will support a study of the crustal
xenoliths aimed at (a) resolving the timing of crustal thickening and
metamorphism initiation under the northern Plateau, (b) understanding whether
crustal shortening was primarily driven by material underplated from the west
(arc-side) or east (fold and thrust belt side), and finally (c) quantifying the
role of magmatism to crustal thickening/loading. These xenoliths fill an
important gap in our convergent margin rock record. The research plan comprises
a field-sampling component followed by a petrographic and petrologic study of
xenoliths. Sm-Nd and Lu-Hf garnet geochronology and monazite U-Th-Pb
geochronology will be used to determine the age of metamorphism in conjunction
with a thermobarometric study of the garnet-bearing assemblages. Igneous and
detrital zircon geochronology will be employed to determine the age of magmatic
intrusions in the Altiplano crust, and to constrain the origin of
metasedimentary rocks, respectively. Elemental and radiogenic isotopic
geochemistry will further illuminate the origin and crustal age of the
assemblages studied here. The main deliverable after this project is a
manuscript that will be submitted to a scholarly journal. Samples collected from
this study will be made available to other interested members of the community.