* 1524898
* Collaborative Research: OpenPath - Improving Student Pathways to Computing Professions via Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Clifton Kussmaul, Western New England University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2022
* USD 389,569.00

The OpenPath project will improve undergraduate computing education by
developing a learning pathway through the computing curriculum that will help
address key challenges of computing education via student exposure to and
participation in Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software (HFOSS) projects.
HFOSS is open source software that improves the human condition, addressing
needs in areas such as health care, disaster management, education, economic
development, and accessibility. Students will be provided with opportunities to
positively impact their communities or others, which will engage and motivate
traditionally underrepresented minorities and women to pursue careers in
computing. As a result, the OpenPath project will improve student learning and
content retention, and will help students to develop professional skills and
personal attributes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OpenPath will integrate two existing
research initiatives: participation in HFOSS, and Process Oriented Guided
Inquiry Learning in Computer Science (CS-POGIL). In CS-POGIL, students work in
small self-managed teams using specifically designed materials to construct
their own knowledge. In this project CS-POGIL will be used to scaffold early
learning and help students develop team and process skills. This early learning
will support a transition to more independent learning in HFOSS environments.
Working in an HFOSS project provides students with the skills and professional
experience needed to ensure a smooth pathway to the computing professions.
Multiple types of evaluations will enable the research team to track the
progress of the project, to determine the legitimacy of the model created and
its mapping to the curriculum, to understand the impact of the faculty and
student activities, and to identify the student learning that occurs through
participation in an HFOSS project.