* 1524992
* CHS: Small: Printable Partitioning of 3D Models using Level Set Methods
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Huamin Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 407,882.00

As 3D printing technology becomes mainstream and starts to revolutionize our
daily lives as well as the manufacturing industries, a critical problem is about
to emerge: how can we effectively divide an object into multiple printable
components, when the design of this object does not provide such a partitioning?
We might need such a partitioning because the object is too large to fit into
the printer, or we want to reduce the printing time, or the object needs to be
packed more tightly, or we just want to make part of the object replaceable or
reusable. In this project, the PI will investigate object partitioning from six
aspects: printability, stress load, surface details, packing, assembly, and
consistency among multiple objects. The computational tools developed from this
research will broaden the use of 3D printing technology in a wide range of
areas. the PI's existing collaborations with industrial partners such as Adobe
and NVIDIA will enable project outcomes to have broad impact, while the PI will
publish demo applications and make source code available online to further
accelerate dissemination. The PI will also collaborate with his institution's
University Center for the Advancement of Teaching (UCAT) on incorporating the
results of this research into both undergraduate and graduate graphics courses.

The ultimate goal is to develop an automatic partitioning system that quickly
converts the mesh of one object into a series of meshes, each of which
represents an object component. Preliminary results indicate that the level set
framework is a promising approach. The project encompasses a comprehensive
research agenda focused on three fundamental subproblems: how to analyze the
quality of a partitioning according to a variety of printing, packing, and
assembly criteria; based on the previous analysis, how to improve the quality of
a partitioning using level set methods; and how to facilitate the practical use
of a partitioning by constructing auxiliary structures. Many of the subproblems
central to this research are new and have not been systematically studied
before. The development of this technology will require both theoretical and
practical studies of system integration, computational efficiency, and time-
stepping. Finding solutions to such issues within the level set framework will
allow the PI to formulate his system as a localized iterative partitioning
optimization process, whose result can meet the requirement of different 3D
printing applications.