* 1524866
* AGS-PRF Impacts of Large-Scale Dynamics on Regional Climate Sensitivity: Model-Paleodata Comparisons in Three Mid-Latitude Regions
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Juan Lora, Lora                    Juan           M
* Fellowship Award
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 172,000.00

This AGS PostDoctoral Research Fellow (PRF) award supports the comparison of
simulations of last glacial maximum (LGM) and present-day climates from general
circulation models to paleoclimatic proxy data to investigate dynamical
mechanisms that affect regional climates. This analysis will help to determine
the dominant large-scale mechanisms affecting the regional climates at LGM of
three mid-latitude regions, as well as clarify the ability of regional paleodata
to elucidate large-scale paleoclimatic phenomena.

Climate models that are used to predict future climate changes will be
benchmarked against paleodata that serve as proxies for past climate parameters
thereby testing the ability of these models to correctly simulate past climate
states and helping to ensure that dynamical processes involved in generating
regional responses are well represented and properly simulated. This, in turn,
will help assess the regional capabilities of models under climates different
than the current, informing future improvements and development of these models.

Of principal interest is the influence of planetary-scale dynamics on regional-
scale changes in temperature and the hydrological cycle. The Fellow will examine
the effects of such phenomena as mid-latitudinal stationary waves and monsoon
dynamics on atmospheric and surface temperatures and precipitation in three
regions including the Chinese Loess Plateau, the southwestern United States, and
the midwestern United States with the aim of quantifying the regional
sensitivities in the models. Output from Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison
Project (PMIP) simulation model runs will be compared to published datasets that
serve as proxies for temperatures and the hydrological cycle in these three
regions. The Fellow will further investigate identified dynamical mechanisms,
including their sensitivities to boundary and forcing uncertainties by use of
the Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique (LMDZ) model.

This project helps to improve understanding surrounding regional response to
climate variability across temporal scales and significant outreach activities.
Outreach activities to be conducted at Markham Middle School, whose students are
predominantly Hispanic and Afro-Caribbean, are intended for improving science
communication and education to minorities. Also, one of the undergraduates who
will work with the Fellow over the next year is also from an underrepresented
minority in the sciences. As an additional broadening participation exercise,
the Fellow will give a science talk about the proposed research at the UCLA
chapter of the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in
Science (SACNAS), and will furthermore recruit an undergraduate student from the
SACNAS chapter to be involved in the research and outreach activities during the
second year of the fellowship.