* 1524811
* Experimental Calibration of Inter-mineral Magnesium and Iron Isotope Fractionation at High Temperatures
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2016,10/31/2022
* Craig Manning, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 10/31/2022
* USD 341,311.00

Isotopes of common rock-forming elements have great potential for understanding
the redistribution of mass during geological processes. In order to make use of
these isotopes one must know how they partition between different minerals in
the rocks. Two of the most important elements of interest to the geological
community are magnesium (Mg) and iron (Fe). This group proposes to build on
their previous experimental program to test and augment theoretical predictions
for iron and magnesium isotope partitioning between mineral phases at high
temperatures. The project represents an uncommon integration of experimental
petrology and isotope geochemistry. The investigators have trained three
graduate students in recent years, two of whom are women, an underrepresented
demographic in the geological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron and magnesium
are targeted for this interdisciplinary study because of their importance as
rock-forming elements and recent indications that these elements may be more
mobile in Earth's mantle than previously thought. Indeed, there has been an
explosion of studies on the distributions of these isotopes in natural samples.
The focus of this study is on Fe and Mg isotope fractionation between spinels
and other phases. Spinels are of interest because there is more than one
coordination site for these cations in the spinel structure, affording tests of
the principles of stable isotope partitioning. Experiments will be performed in
a piston cylinder apparatus. The group will use the three-isotope method to
establish equilibrium fractionation factors in these two isotope systems. This
method involves spiking one of the phases with an excess of the abundant isotope
in order to disturb the usual state of mass-dependent fractionation among three
isotopes in the experiments. This mass fractionation relationship among the
three isotopes is a necessary condition for equilibrium. The drive towards
reestablishment of that condition during the experimental run is used as a
monitor for isotope exchange in the experiments. The team will investigate
equilibrium Mg isotope fractionation between Mg(Al,Cr)2O4 spinels and forsterite
olivine and equilibrium Fe isotope fractionation between almandine garnet and
magnetite (an inverse spinel). Results of the latter experiments can be combined
with previous experiments to arrive at temperature-dependent garnet-olivine iron
isotope fractionation factors. Both systems are pivotal in the interpretation of
natural Mg and Fe isotope data.