* 1524815
* Seismotectonics of the Zagros (Iran) From Orogen-wide Earthquake Relocations
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Edwin Nissen, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2019
* USD 243,551.00

Earthquakes are amongst the most significant natural hazards faced by mankind:
globally, millions of fatalities are forecast this century, while in the United
States half of the population is at risk from damaging shaking. However,
earthquakes also provide valuable information on Earth?s structure and
tectonics. In this project, we will be using information from earthquakes to
learn about the structure and tectonics of the Zagros mountains in Iran. The
Zagros are a classic example of a young continental ?collision zone?, caused by
the Arabian plate crashing into Eurasia, and are also amongst the most
seismically-active regions anywhere in the world. However, its many earthquakes
are buried under a thick blanket of sediments and so the fault-lines that
generate them cannot be identified using conventional field mapping. Instead, we
will use cutting-edge seismological techniques to locate very precisely the past
half century of earthquake activity, in doing so highlighting the locations of
buried faulting at depth. The Zagros can be used as a modern analog to parts of
the Rocky Mountains and Appalachians which formed tens to hundreds of millions
of years ago and which are no longer seismically active. An improved
understanding of the Zagros will therefore help us understand the structure and
tectonic history of parts of the United States.

The Zagros range in Iran is a type example of how thick sedimentary basins are
shortened during the early stages of continental collision. However, its
present-day kinematics are obscured by uncertainties in the locations of steep,
seismogenic reverse faults buried within or beneath the 8-16 km-thick
sedimentary cover, and by conflicting interpretations of their role in
controlling the growth of "whaleback" anticlines which dominate its
physiography. The prevalent seismotectonic model for the Zagros has earthquakes
concentrated along a small number of large, basement reverse faults which
account for discrete steps in the exposed stratigraphic level, with shortening
of cover rocks away from the master thrusts accommodated by detachment folding
along weak salt layers. An alternative model holds that earthquake faulting is
widely-distributed through the Zagros, correlating with individual anticlines
through fault bend and fault propagation folding. We propose a simple test of
these conflicting models that will integrate two state-of-the-art earthquake
relocation procedures to yield improved epicenters for the entire, ~50 year
back-catalog of several thousand teleseismically-recorded events in the Zagros.
The first step repositions discrete clusters of earthquakes with respect to
well-located ?calibration? events whose hypocenters are known independently from
InSAR observations and modeling or from temporary local seismometer deployments.
The second step uses results from the first as prior constraints in a Bayesian
relocation algorithm that is better suited to larger data sets spread over wider
regions, and which has well-characterized uncertainties and minimal location
bias. Epicentral uncertainties will drop from a few tens of kilometers (for
routine catalog estimates) to no more than a few kilometers. The existence and
importance of major basement faults will be confirmed if the relocated
epicenters aggregate into streaks of seismicity aligned with the known steps in
stratigraphic level, whereas the opposing model will be supported if earthquakes
mostly lie away from the proposed basement faults.