* 1524544
* NRI: Robotic Tool-Use for Cleaning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Maya Cakmak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,063.00

Cleaning is as one of the most desired capabilities for personal robots,
according to reported surveys and interviews conducted with potential users.
However, successful solutions to robotic cleaning have so far been special-
purpose robots designed for particular cleaning tasks, as with the vacuuming or
mopping robots. Instead, this project aims to make general-purpose mobile
manipulators perform a much wider range of cleaning tasks, including dusting,
wiping, scrubbing, sweeping, or mopping, by enabling them to use human tools.
Cleaning is a key activity of daily living and an important task in the
maintenance of one's quality of life. Many older adults lose their independence
when they can no longer carry out cleaning tasks. Similarly, many mobility-
impaired individuals rely on others for cleaning. Robots taking on these tasks
could therefore positively impact millions of individuals. General-purpose
cleaning robots could also have significant economic impact, similar to those of
special-purpose ones like the Roomba. Cleanliness is critical in many commercial
facilities, such as hotels or department stores, which involve large surfaces
that need to be regularly cleaned in specific ways that programmable cleaning
robots developed in this project could handle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General-
purpose cleaning robots need to be able to use many different cleaning tools, in
many different environments, based on many different user preferences. The
diversity of possible situations makes it difficult to develop universal
controllers or planners for arbitrary cleaning tasks. Furthermore, it is
impossible to know the users' preferences in advance. To address these
challenges, this project develops a Learning from Demonstration (LfD) technique
that allows a robot to learn cleaning actions from human demonstrations. This
technique exploits the common structure of cleaning tasks: they all involve
moving a cleaning tool relative to a target surface with a certain pattern while
applying a certain force on the surface. Although many LfD approaches already
exist, none of them allow learning cleaning actions that generalize to arbitrary
surfaces with arbitrary cleaning patterns. This project contributes new
representations and learning algorithms that enables a mobile manipulator to
clean surfaces of arbitrary size, shape, curvature, dirt distribution, and
clutter, using different types of cleaning tools. The methods developed in the
project are evaluated with real cleaning tasks through systematic experiments
and user studies in the lab, as well as, in the real world through an identical
robot deployed in a private home.