* 1524796
* Collaborative Research: Thermal Structure of Continental Lithosphere Through Time
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Peter Nabelek, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 261,521.00

The processes by which the crust of the Earth formed and grew in the first 2
billion years of earth history ? the Archean eon - remain a major unknown
because tectonics and meteor bombardment removed most of the rock record from
that time. Major crustal consolidation and growth occurred at the end of this
era but debate still continues about the mechanisms. Critical to making progress
is a better understanding of the thermal regime of the crust at this time since
many proposed models depend on thermal-driven buoyancy to explain this major
episode of crustal growth. To that end, this collaborative project would
determine the thermal properties of rocks at elevated temperatures in order to
better estimate the thermal properties of early Archean crust. The results would
be used as the basis for modeling of Archean crust, which would improve our
understanding of the strength of the lithosphere in this early phase of crustal
growth and evolution. The experimental approach is cutting edge and would
provide valuable constraints to the broader community interested in modeling of
early crustal processes as well as to other fields such as geophysics,
geodynamics, and materials science. The project would advance desired societal
outcomes through: (1) full participation of women in STEM; (2) improved STEM
education and educator development through development of K-12 teaching
materials, teacher workshops, and classroom outreach; (3) development of a
globally competitive STEM workforce through graduate and undergraduate student
training; and (4) increased partnerships through collaboration with scientists
in Australia and Canada. The Tectonics Program and NSF's Office of International
Science and Engineering support the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines the thermal structure of the continental lithosphere over time with
particular emphasis on the thermal properties and rheology of Archean
lithosphere. The research team will determine thermal diffusivity data for lower
crustal minerals as well as for rocks from the Kapuskasing Structural Zone
(Ontario, Canada), which provides a cross section through a Late Archean
greenstone belt into the mid- to lower-crust. These data will be used as the
basis for numerical models of Archean lithosphere rheology. The first objective
is to explore the range of thermal diffusivity and conductivity of the
continental lower crust, and how it varies with rock type and temperature. This
will involve: (1) thermal diffusivity measurement of lower crustal minerals and
Archean rocks from the Kapuskasing zone and elsewhere to high temperature by
Laser Flash Analysis; (2) comparison of room-temperature optical scanning method
and Laser Flash Analysis; (3) heat capacity measurement to high temperature by
differential scanning calorimetry; and (4) development of a model for
calculating thermal conductivity of rocks to high temperatures from their
mineralogy and porosity. The second objective of the project is to estimate the
rheology of typical Archean continental crust, its effects on tectonic style,
and changes through time. This involves: (1) combining thermal modeling with
available surface heat flow data to determine the nature of the crust as based
on the Kapuskasing section; (2) test thermal models of this same section in
Archean times against pressure-temperature conditions recorded by the rocks; and
(3) calculate rheological profiles for Archean crust, to find out if the crust
was weak, strong, or had weak layers into which deformation was concentrated.