* 1524079
* Anthropogenic Landscape Effects And Social Organization Of Food Foraging And Production In A Variable Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Karen Schollmeyer, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 120,379.00

Understanding how people acquire food and maintain food security under changing
social and environmental conditions has important implications for both
understanding past human societies and exploring ways for contemporary societies
to maintain access to food supplies. Archaeological datasets are ideal for
examining this issue, providing a record of the foods people ate and how access
to those foods changed at a scale of many centuries. Over time, prehistoric
populations increase or decrease; average precipitation and temperatures vary;
the agricultural crops available for planting change; and the abundance of wild
plants and animals vary in response to hunting, harvesting, and climate
variation. Prehistoric people responded to those changes by adapting their
methods of acquiring food, by moving together into large villages or dispersing
to small settlements, and by migrating to new locations. By studying prehistoric
cases, archaeologists can identify techniques that worked well for sustaining
villages and communities during lean years and for taking advantage of favorable
conditions. Importantly, archaeologists can also identify techniques that failed
to sustain communities during periods of food stress. This information is
potentially valuable for modern communities and government agencies planning for
economic, climate, or other stresses that affect food availability. For example,
knowing how people integrate obscure wild foods into agricultural production
systems during lean years may provide useful analogs for public planning at the
community, state or regional level to promote community, population, and
political stability in times of crisis. The results of this study will interest
researchers in many fields investigating ways of maintaining food security in
the face of changing climate conditions and shifting human populations. This
research will assess changes in farming and foraging in relation to three major
issues. First, it will examine evidence for increased effort and dependence on
agriculture from multiple prehistoric archaeological sites and time periods.
Researchers will then use this information to examine how changes in human
population levels and investment in agriculture affected timber, food plant, and
game animal species availability in the areas around prehistoric settlements,
including how negatively impacted species may have recovered during periods of
human population decline. Finally, the project will examine how household
specialization in farming crops or foraging for wild resources varied in
relation to village size, agricultural intensification, and changes in wild
resource availability. Data will come from charred food plant remains, wood
charcoal, and animal bone from 80 previously-excavated prehistoric
archaeological sites in southwestern New Mexico spanning the period from A.D.
150 to1400. Some of the data will be obtained from unpublished manuscripts
containing analyses not widely available until now. In addition, 335 previously
unanalyzed flotation samples and 8 previously unanalyzed animal bone assemblages
from older excavations will be analyzed. Systematically examining data from
numerous sites and a long time period will provide new insights on how people?s
activities influence the food resources available to them, including identifying
ways of acquiring food that were stable for long periods. The results will be
important for archaeologists and for scientists and policymakers interested in
food security and sustainable development.