* 1524417
* CIF: Small: Networks: Evolution, Learning and Social Norms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Mihaela van der Schaar, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2020
* USD 482,627.00

Much of society is organized in networks, be they enterprise, scientific,
education, societal, social, economic, etc. This project aims to study how
networks evolve, which networks emerge, how information about the individuals in
the network affect the evolution and the eventual shape of the network and
conversely, how the evolution of the network affect learning about the
individuals in the network. Closely related issues are how the evolution and the
shape of the network affect the functioning of the network, and what social
norms promote the formation and maintenance of well-functioning of networks.
This research project will enable us to better understand, monitor, design,
operate and secure networks of many kinds. In particular, this research will
help design new policies for creating a safer and more creative Internet.

A sizeable network science literature studies networks that have already formed;
a smaller literature, mainly in microeconomics, studies the formation of
networks---but makes heroic assumptions (e.g., homogeneous agents/entities,
complete information about other agents) that deviate from reality. Neither the
network science literature nor the microeconomics literature takes into account
that agents behave strategically in deciding what information to consume,
produce and share (in addition to deciding what links to form/maintain/break)
and that agents begin with incomplete information about others (i.e., they must
learn about others). As a result, neither network science nor microeconomics
provides a useful methodology for understanding, predicting and guiding the
formation (and evolution) of real networks and the consequences of network
formation. The overarching goal of this research project is to develop such a
methodology. The research plan will take into account that agents behave
strategically and that they begin with incomplete information about each other
and thus must learn over time what information to produce and consume, and which
connections to form and maintain and which to break. Thus, agents? learning and
the network structure coevolve over time. A distinguishing feature of the
current project is the application of social norms to understand and promote the
evolution and well-functioning of networks.