* 1524216
* 19th Annual GLOBE Partner Meeting and GLOBE Working Groups Meeting
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Henry Ortiz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2016
* USD 275,877.00

This award is providing partial support for the 19th annual meeting of Partners
and Working Groups involved with the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit
the Environment (GLOBE) program, being held in Los Angeles, CA between July 19
and July 24, 2015. The GLOBE program is a worldwide community of students,
teachers, scientists and citizens working to understand, sustain, and improve
Earth's environment at local, regional and global scales. The mission of GLOBE
is to promote the teaching and learning of science through authentic, hands-on
student research, enhance environmental literacy and stewardship, and promote
scientific discovery. GLOBE strives to expand the number and diversity of
students engaged in STEM and pursuing scientific careers. Since its inception,
GLOBE has trained more than 20,000 teachers representing ~27,000 schools around
the world. The more than 12 million students who have participated in GLOBE have
contributed over 126 million data measurements to the GLOBE database for use in
student- and scientist-led research projects. The GLOBE annual meeting provides
an essential venue to bring together the 134 U.S. Partners and 114 Partner
Country Coordinators for strategic planning, program coordination, sharing of
best practices, and piloting of new resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 19th
annual GLOBE meeting, being organized by an international committee of
scientists, GLOBE Partners, and educators, will focus on the following
activities: 1) train participants on the use of selected GLOBE protocols for
short- and long-term research projects; 2) train participants in the use of new
data entry, data analysis, visualization and communication tools recently
augmented on the GLOBE web site; 3) highlight new opportunities to engage larger
communities in GLOBE through citizen science projects; 4) introduce Partners to
new tools that enable GLOBE students to engage in environmental research and
peer review; 5) assess the success after its first year of operation of a new
governance structure for GLOBE (including new Working Groups and a U.S. Partner
Forum); 6) identify and model best practices for using GLOBE resources to
implement new standards for STEM, language arts, and math; 7) model best
practices for engaging students in the end-to-end research process using the
suite of GLOBE tools; and 8) introduce a pilot program to integrate technology
that connects in real-time remote research sites through live interactive
collaborations between teachers, students, and scientists. Keynote presentations
will be given by scientists and 7 master teachers. In addition to the 130-150
Partners and Country Coordinators attending the meeting, a group of 40 students,
3 teachers, and 7 additional chaperones will engage in a 2-day intensive
research study on Catalina Island, modeling GLOBE program research resources.
Pre- and post-meeting evaluation of participants will document the near- and
longer-term impacts of the annual meeting activities, as well as the extent to
which the resources modeled duirng the meeting are disseminated back to the
GLOBE communities being served by the Partners.