* 1524241
* Collaborative Research:  A Lagrangian Description of Breaking Ocean Surface Waves from Laboratory Measurements and Stochastic Parameterizations.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/18/2014,09/30/2019
* Juan Restrepo, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 312,471.00

Wave breaking effects are important in many areas of atmospheric and ocean
sciences, including air-sea interaction and momentum, energy and biogeochemical
fluxes; hurricane dynamics and thermodynamics; pollutant transport and
dispersion; aerosol production and ocean acoustics, to name a few. The goal of
this collaborative research is to build a stochastic Lagrangian parameterization
of surface wave breaking that can subsequently be applied to wave and ocean
modeling. The students and postdoctoral researchers employed in this project
will gain experience in the disciplines of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM). The data and breaking parameterization developed here will
subsequently find direct application in atmosphere and ocean modeling.

Increases in the fidelity and resolution of ocean models, specifically those
focused on the sub-mesoscales, require improved representation of surface wave
processes. In addition to the importance of wave breaking in the dynamics of
wave-current interaction, it also plays an important role in mass transport
beyond that represented in classical theories of Stokes drift; in the dynamics
and kinematics of Langmuir turbulence; and, more generally, in the transport and
dispersion of tracers and pollutants. This research involves laboratory
experiments to measure the Lagrangian displacement and velocity of fluid
particles in breaking waves. The data will then be used to develop and
parameterize a stochastic ordinary differential equation, within the class of
Langevin equations, to describe the Lagrangian motion of the fluid elements. The
parameterization will be constrained by the n-point structure functions for the
experimentally obtained particle paths, which are comparatively easier to obtain
and to relate to a stochastic ordinary (Lagrangian) differential equation, when
compared to obtaining the n-point structure function of an (Eulerian) stochastic
partial differential equation. Given the Lagrangian model, a projection to the
Eulerian frame will be used to obtain the dynamical representation of breaking
for wave-current interaction and other mixed-layer processes.