* 1524473
* Multicomponent Diffusion in Silicate Melts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Youxue Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2019
* USD 410,000.00

Diffusion is a ubiquitous process originating from random motion of particles in
a liquid, solid or gas. In simple systems, such random motion leads to a net
mass transfer from a region of high concentration to one of low concentration.
Although it is a microscopic process, diffusion plays a critical role in
numerous macroscopic phenomena ranging from nutrient transfer in the human body,
dispersal of pollutants, to a variety of igneous processes, such as explosive
volcanic eruptions and igneous rock formation. For example, explosive volcanic
eruptions begin with bubble growth, whose rate is controlled by the diffusion of
gas molecules from the melt into the bubbles. Incidentally, bubble growth in
melts is similar to the daily encountered bubble growth in beer, champagne and
soft drinks. The more generalized diffusion concept has also been applied to
understand the mean height of continents. Igneous rock formation is the
collective effect of crystal growth in magma, in which diffusion plays an
important role. A natural silicate melt typically contains many major oxide
components, and hence the diffusion is multicomponent diffusion, more complex
than diffusion in simple systems. The goal of this research is to understand
multicomponent diffusion in silicate melts, which would advance the ability to
interpret and quantify rates of such processes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One
manifestation of the complications due to multicomponent diffusion is that an
oxide component in silicate melts often diffuses from low concentration to high
concentration, termed uphill diffusion. In the literature, diffusion in natural
silicate melts is treated partially: If a component shows 'normal' diffusion
behavior, meaning the flux is from high concentration to low concentration, it
is quantified using the effective binary diffusion treatment. On the other hand,
if a component displays uphill diffusion, researchers simply note the behavior,
and then shy away from it without quantification. Such uphill diffusion is
frequently encountered in experiments using silicate melts as well as in natural
systems. As science advances rapidly and becomes increasingly more quantitative
and predictive, it is time to confront the challenge of multi-component
diffusion in natural silicate melts. The base melt composition chosen for this
investigation will be similar to a mid-ocean ridge basalt, the most abundant
terrestrial rock with a narrow compositional range. There are 8 major oxide
components and the diffusion is described by a 7 by 7 diffusivity matrix.
Glasses with appropriate compositions will be synthesized to form diffusion
couples. High-temperature and high-pressure diffusion couple experiments will be
carried out. The compositional profiles in the quenched glass will be measured
using an electron microprobe. The data will be fit using the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm to extract the diffusivity matrix. For verification, the obtained
matrix will be used to calculate diffusion profiles in previous mineral
dissolution experiments, and the calculated results will be compared with
measured profiles. After verification, the diffusivity matrix will be applied to
predict real diffusion in natural magmas during a variety of processes,
including crystal growth and dissolution, magma mixing, and post-entrapment
interaction between a melt inclusion and the host mineral. The results will be
published and disseminated in scientific meetings and in teaching.