* 1524972
* Collaborative Research: Simulation-Based Policy Analysis for Reducing Ebola Transmission Risk in Air Travel
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Sirish Namilae, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The researchers on this project will build fine-scale simulation models for
infection spread during air travel in order to identify the causes of infection
spread, as well as procedures and policies that will limit its spread without
major disruption to air travel. The researchers propose to create a super-
computing based application that will provide useful insight to decision makers
- such as medical responders, policy makers etc. dealing with Ebola. The models
can be applied at the level of individual flights; thus not only can the spread
of Ebola be understood for a particular flight, but also procedures can be
developed that will limit the infection risk for that
flight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An air-transport model, which operates at the level
of individual flights, will be integrated with a phylogeographic model (that
captures the historical processes responsible for the existing geographic
distributions of individuals) in order to analyze the spread of infection
between geographic regions when potentially infected populations are being
transported into, out of and across regions, by air travel. The result of this
work will help identify policy as well as operational solutions to reduce the
risk of a pandemic, and also set up scalable software capabilities on a readily
available infrastructure that can be used to address the current Ebola pandemic,
as well as respond quickly to new emergencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal integrates the PIs? combined expertise in modeling human movement in
planes, modeling the spread of infections, building a software infrastructure
for decision support, and large-scale parallel computing. The models will be
integrated using the Complex Systems framework (CSF, developed by a member of
the proposing team) that provides a comprehensive decision support environment
for analysis. Through this project, and in addition, CSF?s scalability will be
enhanced to petascale machines, and methods will be developed to reduce the
large computational cost of these simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of
this work will provide valuable insight to policy makers. In particular, fine
grain questions regarding plane travel can be asked and answered, such as: (a)
the risk air travel has on disease spread to neighboring regions (b) can a
change to another type of a plane lead to reduced risk of transmission? (c) Do
certain seating arrangement or changes to boarding and disembarkation processes
reduce the likelihood of transmission?