* 1524272
* The Changing Landscape of Feedstocks for Chemical Production--Implications for Catalysis: A Workshop; Washington, D.C.; May 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Teresa Fryberger, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2017
* USD 92,000.00

PI: Fryberger, Teresa&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1524272&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, the price of natural gas in the United States has dropped sharply
as a result of its availability in shale formations and the technological
advancements in horizontal drilling and fractionation techniques (called
fracking) to access it. Current estimates predict that almost 50% of U.S.
domestic gas production will come from shale over the next 20 years. The
development of large shale gas resources is revitalizing chemical manufacturing
in the U.S. Low cost methane, natural gas liquids (NGLs), and condensate from
shale gas fields are allowing the U.S. to regain global cost-competitiveness in
the manufacture of commodity, intermediate, and fine chemicals. The Board on
Chemical Sciences and Technology (BCST) of the National Research Council will
develop and conduct an interactive, multidisciplinary public workshop that
focuses on identifying gaps and opportunities in catalysis research in an era of
shifting feedstocks, from crude oil to natural gas, for chemical production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, global
petrochemical manufacturing is undergoing a shift away from production based on
conversion of crude oil products -- primarily naphtha, which consists of a
complex mixture of hydrocarbons generally having between 5 and 12 carbon atoms.
Naphtha is converted into a wide variety of lighter hydrocarbon products,
including fuel oils, other fuels, and bulk-/fine-chemical precursors. Many of
these products are produced as byproducts of even larger processing steps. For
example, the production of butadiene used for tires is a byproduct of ethylene
production from naphtha. Natural gas, on the other hand, consists primarily of
methane, but also includes varying amounts of other alkanes, such as ethane,
propane and butane, which are valued as feedstocks in chemical markets. The most
significant of these is ethane, which is converted to ethylene and then a wide
range of downstream products, ranging from adhesives to textiles to plastics.
Switching feedstock from naphtha to ethane, while creating opportunities for the
petrochemical industry, has also changed the relative availability of chemical
products, and thus has impacted their costs. For example, the cost of ethylene
has decreased, while the cost of butadiene capacity has risen, as it is a
byproduct of naphtha/oil cracking used to create ethylene. Likewise, aromatic
chemicals, such as styrene, xylene, and many others are increasing in cost,
since their production is also based on naphtha byproducts. Expansion of and
improvements to our ability to process both methane and NGLs for use in chemical
production have the potential to significantly enhance our ability to realize
maximum economic value from U.S. shale gas deposits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity will
identify advances in catalysis that are needed to enable the U.S. to fully
realize the potential of the shale gas revolution for the U.S. chemical
industry. It aims directly at helping to target the efforts of U.S. researchers
and funding agencies on those areas of science and technology development that
are most critical to achieving these advances. For example, the workshop could
lead to research that develops new methane conversions to chemical
intermediates; develops new pathways for converting plentiful natural gas into
useful chemicals with simple, inexpensive materials and moderate conditions; and
enables on-purpose routes to chemicals that have traditionally been produced as
byproducts of crude oil refining. Such developments would have significant
positive impacts on the U.S. economy and competitiveness.