* 1524909
* SHF: Small: Uncertainty Modeling and Design Methods for Heterogeneous Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Cristinel Ababei, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 251,068.00

Future embedded systems will contain tens and projected hundreds of
heterogeneous cores. The increased complexity and heterogeneity, however, come
with new design and optimization challenges including increased design
uncertainties due to process, voltage, and temperature variations and poor
reliability due to elevated rates of faults. Therefore, it is imperative to
rethink existing embedded system design approaches in order to directly consider
these issues during the design and optimization processes. To address these
challenges, this research develops a new design method to address the increased
uncertainties and to improve reliability and performance of future complex
embedded systems.

This new design method is developed with both general probabilistic and non-
probabilistic uncertainty models. These uncertainty models are used to develop a
multi-objective computer-aided design automation framework, which incorporates
several algorithmic innovations based on Monte Carlo techniques and evolutionary
algorithms. At the heart of the proposed design flow lies the hardware/software
co-synthesis or mapping problem, which is solved with enhanced evolutionary
algorithms. By bridging several areas of research including uncertainty
modeling, hardware/software co-synthesis of embedded systems, robust multi-
objective optimization, and design automation tools development, the proposed
design method enables the development of better embedded systems, which have an
increasingly dramatic impact on society via applications ranging from automotive
and consumer electronics to military and space. The proposed research is also
closely integrated with a broad and diverse education and outreach plan aimed at
inspiring female students to pursue careers in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics. More broadly, the results of this project impact significantly
the design of future integrated systems by building the foundation for
subsequent studies aimed at establishing robust multi-objective optimization for
next-generation embedded systems.