* 1524078
* Ultrasonic Velocity Measurements on Multiphase Agg
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Robert Liebermann, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 498,063.00

The chemical composition of the Earth's deep mantle holds important information
for many processes at the surface, including the global carbon budget and water
cycles, earthquakes, and plate tectonics. Since no samples from depths greater
than 12 km are available for direct laboratory investigations, the team's
approach is to bring candidate rock and mineral specimens back to the deep
mantle pressure and temperature conditions inside a laboratory apparatus, and
then conduct in-situ experiments to understand the physical and chemical states
and properties of these minerals at mantle depths. In comparison with previous
studies, this project marks a major advancement by measuring directly the sound
velocities in synthetic rock samples which bear a closer resemblance to those in
the real Earth. From both technological and scientific aspects, these
technological advances can be readily applied to the study of non-geoscience
substances, such as those important to industrial and energy sciences and for
the designing and discovery of new materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
propose to conduct direct measurements of compressional [P] and shear [S] wave
velocities and densities on multi-phase aggregates of pyrolitic composition and
mantle constituent minerals (KLB-1 pyroxenes; coesite and stishovite) up to the
P-T conditions of the top of the lower mantle using ultrasonic interferometry in
conjunction with synchrotron X-radiation. These directly measured velocities of
aggregates take into account the effects of chemical reactions among co-existing
phases (phase fractions, minor element partitioning) in the equilibrated
specimens as well as the effect of minor elements on elasticity and can be
compared directly with seismic velocity-depth profiles. In addition to yielding
phase equilibria for pyrolitic compositional model as a function of depth, these
unprecedented results will provide critical data for the interpretation of
seismically-derived velocity and density vs. depth profiles and place
constraints on the mineralogical composition and dynamic processes of the
Earth's interior.