* 1524585
* Supporting the Multibeam Sonar Systems of the U.S. Academic Research Fleet: Coordinating Operations to Optimize Data Quality
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2015,03/31/2021
* Vicki Ferrini, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2021
* USD 775,192.00

Multibeam sonars have become fundamental mapping tools for a wide range of
oceanographic studies,&lt;br/&gt;and significant investments have been made in
installing these systems on several ships in&lt;br/&gt;the U.S. Academic
Research Fleet. The Multibeam Advisory Committee (MAC) was developed in 2011 to
coordinate fleet-wide sonar calibration efforts, to perform consistent and
routine assessment of system performance, and to provide tools and protocols for
consistent data acquisition practices. The MAC has achieved its primary goals
and seeks funding for continued support to maintain its support role for sonars
across the fleet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNH and LDEO propose to continue the
activities of the MAC, specifically to develop technical resources, tools,
guidelines and expertise to optimize the operation and monitoring of multibeam
sonars&lt;br/&gt;across the U.S. Academic Fleet. They will continue to
facilitate communication among the community&lt;br/&gt;of stakeholders including
representatives from operating institutions, complemented by
key&lt;br/&gt;outside experts from the user and technical/engineering
communities, and sonar manufacturers&lt;br/&gt;that can assist in providing
guidance on the broad array of issues faced by the operators&lt;br/&gt;of the
fleet's multibeam systems. They propose to maintain the activities of the MAC's
technical&lt;br/&gt;teams by working closely with vessel operators, visiting
ships periodically to review system&lt;br/&gt;performance and installing
software tools, and providing training to seagoing
personnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.