* 1524453
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Trade, Trust, and Social Relations in Transnational Trade
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Sharika Thiranagama, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2016
* USD 21,756.00

Contemporary global commodity trade is often understood to be controlled by
large, multinational corporations. However, when we look more closely at actual
commodity movements, a wide range of local actors comes into view. These include
traders and trading communities who move goods and capital across surprisingly
vast distances. Yet researchers who study global capitalism have tended to
overlook the contemporary significance of such actors, assuming that because
they may depend on kinship, community, and regional networks for commerce, their
ability to affect global markets is limited. Recently, however, new evidence
suggests that this assumption may be based on a false division between economic
and social life and thus blind social scientists to the true importance of
traditional traders and trading communities. To investigate this possibility,
the research supported by this award will investigate several previously
neglected questions. What relationships are there between local practicies and
international commodity trade? Is contemporary commerce connected to historical
trading networks? Are connections of kinship, friendship, and obligation
important in modulating flows of goods across changing international regimes of
regulation and taxation? And, given that traders are often key social as well as
economic intermediaries, how might their activities affect relationships during
and after periods of war and political stress?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To pursue
these question, Stanford University anthropology doctoral student, Nethra
Samarawickreama, supervised by Dr. Sharika Thiranagama, will undertake research
on an Indian Ocean trading community. Because of the complexity of the
questiions, the research site needs to be relatively bounded in order to be able
to observe the economic micro-processes at work. Therefore, she has chosen to
focus on the gold and gem trade in Sri Lanka, which has historically been
dominated by family businesses that function locally and transnationally, do so
across lines of ethnic difference, and have sustained economic relationships
before, during, and after Sri Lanka's recent civil war. She will complement the
Sri Lanka-based portion of her investigation with research in Singapore, where
South Indian businessmen recirculate Sri Lankan goods throughout the Indian
Ocean. To gather data, the researcher will use multiple social science research
methods, including: participant observation, semi-structured interviews, the
elicitation of family histories, and archival research. First, she will examine
traders' discourses of trust to understand how trading families constitute
themselves, access credit, build reputations, engage in philanthropy, and forge
far-reaching relations of dependency. Secondly, she will seek to conceptualize
traders' local relations through frames wider than the nation and situate them
in transnational commercial networks. Thirdly, she will seek to understand how
ethnic attachments and differences may coexist with enduring inter-ethnic
commercial exchanges despite conflict and its aftermaths. Findings from this
research will contribute significantly to understanding the relationship between
local socioeconomic systems and global trade, as well as opening up new arenas
for developing policies to faciliate peaceful co-existence in post-conflict
situations.