* 1524353
* Community College Undergraduate Research Initiative (CCURI): Creating a culture of change
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2022
* James Hewlett, Finger Lakes Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,691,820.00

The American Association of Community Colleges reports that an estimated 12.8
million students are enrolled at community and technical colleges. These numbers
account for 45% of all U.S. undergraduates, and highlight the increasing impact
that community colleges are having on the education of post-secondary students.
Several recent reports have made recommendations on the importance of providing
an authentic undergraduate research experience in the first two years of a
student's post-secondary education. While evidence continues to mount regarding
what needs to be accomplished, little is known about how to achieve the desired
reform. What is needed is a model of reform that can be tested, evaluated,
refined, characterized and disseminated nationally. The Community College
Undergraduate Research Initiative (CCURI) is a national consortium of community
colleges, four-year institutions, government agencies, and private organizations
dedicated to the development, implementation, and assessment of sustainable
models for integrating an undergraduate research experience into community
college STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support an
expansion of the CCURI network, along with the addition of several enhancements
to the model, and support research related to the impact of the CCURI model on
institutional culture change, faculty instructional practices, and student
persistence in STEM pathways. Two main questions will guide the research and
evaluation efforts of this project. 1) How does an institution move from a
culture of "no research" to a culture of "research as the norm," with research
as an integral part of the student experience? 2) What factors promote or
constrain culture change from "no research" to "research as the norm?" Data
gathered in response to these questions will improve the STEM undergraduate
enterprise's understanding of the impact of a research experience during the
first two years of a community college STEM program. In addition, the expansion
of the CCURI network will lead to the creation of a southwest regional network
of community college Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). This expansion
provides opportunities for studies to be conducted with respect to the
effectiveness of the CCURI model on institutions that serve predominantly
underrepresented groups.