* 1524967
* Collaborative Research: Accelerating the pace of research and implementation of Writing-to-Learn pedagogies across STEM disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Ginger Shultz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,037,926.00

National reports point to the importance of fostering a globally competitive
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) knowledgeable workforce
and a STEM literate population. This research represents a significant advance
in understanding how Writing To Learn (WTL) pedagogies promote learning in
science through mediating and moderating factors (i.e., mechanisms of effect).
Focused on introductory and capstone courses, the research has the potential to
be relevant across course levels, STEM disciplines, department, and
institutions. Additionally, the research will advance knowledge of how faculty
think about and use WTL in STEM, how WTL pedagogies can most effectively be
developed with faculty (avoiding the failures of entirely pre-packaged
curricula), and how to build and stimulate a nation-wide faculty network. The
use of a common heuristic framework, protocols, and metrics and a shared
implementation technology platform provides an opportunity to investigate WTL
pedagogies in STEM and associated student achievement outcomes at an
unprecedented scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase 4 of this research and
implementation program investigates and promotes WLT pedagogies. Through
integrating and expanding ongoing research across institutions, the overarching
goals are to broaden the scope of systematic investigation of WTL practices in
STEM education and to accelerate the pace of widespread adoption of WTL in STEM
courses. A set of quasi-experimental studies of WTL in introductory and capstone
courses in biology, chemistry, physics and statistics will examine student
outcomes and moderating and mediating variables in the context of STEM courses.
The combination of cross-sectional and longitudinal studies of student cognitive
and affective outcomes with large sample sizes will contribute to establishing
both construct and predictive validity of mediating/moderating variables and
processes associated with student learning outcomes across a broad range of
students, institutions, and conditions.