* 1524493
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Computation into Undergraduate Physics--A Faculty Development Approach to Community Transformation
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Larry Engelhardt, Francis Marion University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2021
* USD 89,330.00

This collaboration among five diverse institutions will build and nurture a
community of faculty committed to integrating computation in undergraduate
physics courses. Although computational methods are important in physics
research, they are scarce in the undergraduate physics curriculum. This project
will address this need through faculty development workshops, a post-workshop
support system, and a community building research project.

This project will focus on developing transportable, adaptable, and sustainable
methods for infusing an instructional strategy into the undergraduate physics
curriculum. It will place computer-based, algorithmic problem solving in a
position that is coequal to traditional mathematical and experimental methods.
Participants will develop computational exercises to be integrated into their
physics courses at the workshops, and later will receive support to ensure that
the integration of their developed materials into their courses is successful.
Faculty ownership will be emphasized in the participants' development activities
and is essential for transportability and sustainability. The project will
conduct a thorough research study of the effectiveness of the community building
approach, as well as the degree to which integration of computation into
undergraduate physics courses has increased. It will serve as a case-study
informing the literature on change in higher education practices. This research
component and its dissemination plan will ensure that the community will
continue to grow not only in membership, but also in the large-scale assessment
and implementation of best practices. When the computational materials developed
are used in physics classrooms, STEM student learning across the country will be
enhanced.