* 1524320
* Collaborative  Research:  Utilizing Cooling Histories to Determine the Sequence and Rates of Thrusting
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2018
* Delores Robinson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 235,031.00

This proposal is aimed at understanding the structural, tectonic, and exhumation
of a part of the Himalayan orogen in central and western Nepal. The principal
investigators are investigating how fault magnitude, geometry and rate are
related to uplift and exhumation in convergent margin plate tectonic systems
where two continents are colliding. This research will allow the principal
investigators to constrain both magnitude and age of faulting and gain insight
into the geometry of these faults along a fundamental plate boundary between
India and Asia in the Nepalese Himalaya, which will provide fundamental insights
into how convergent plate margins evolve through time. This region is the site
of large, destructive earthquakes that are a function of both geometry of the
faults and the rates at which these faults move; thus, the research has the
potential to further understanding in a region of active seismicity. This
proposal combines thermochronometry (the age at which minerals cool) with
numerical modeling to determine fault magnitude, geometry and rate. Geologic
mapping and associated cross sections provide an estimate of fault geometry.
This geometry provides a testable path along which rocks were displaced and
cooled from the subsurface to the Earth's surface. The principal investigators
will test the hypothesis that the geometry of faults controls the first-order
pattern of cooling ages that are recorded in rocks, which can then be tested by
comparing measured cooling ages to modeled cooling ages using different fault
geometries. This approach will provide workflows, methodologies, and examples of
how fault geometries, as determined from geologic cross sections, and rates
impact predicted cooling ages. In addition to the scientific objectives of the
study, the project is contributing to the national well-being and other socially
relevant outcomes by providing for training of graduate and undergraduate
students in an important STEM discipline, as well a contributing to the
broadening of underrepresented groups in the earth sciences. The project it is
contributing to the development of research infrastructure at two U.S.
university systems, and is promoting international collaboration between U.S.,
German, and Nepalese scientists. Results from this research will be incorporated
into classroom curricula. As part of this project, the principal investigators
are developing a series of research and teaching modules that will provide
interested graduate students and researchers from other institutions the skills
needed to use this research approach for their own field areas and datasets, and
allow educators to assign advanced undergraduates and graduate students
assignments that teach the systematics of how compressional fault systems form
and the relationships between deformation, erosion and deposition. The results
of the research will be disseminated through peer-reviewed scientific
publications literature and by presentations at professional society meetings;
data obtained from the project will be archived in appropriate community
supported data repositories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining thermochronometry
with numerical modeling has an enormous potential to quantify the rates,
magnitudes, and timing of deformation and erosion in active, contractional plate
tectonic settings. However, the interpretations of thermochronometric data are
critically dependent on determining the correct thermal, kinematic, and erosion
models. Understanding how fault magnitude, geometry and rate are related to
exhumation in compressional systems requires quantitatively linking the geometry
and magnitude of fault slip to the distribution and amount of erosion. In this
project, the principal investigators suggest that the geometry of fold-thrust
belts is best delineated through balanced geologic cross-sections, and they
hypothesize that the geometry of a fold-thrust belt, particularly the location
and magnitude of ramps in the decollement, control the first-order pattern of
cooling ages. To address this hypothesis they will apply a 2 dimensional thermo-
kinematic and erosion model to forward modeled balanced cross sections to
quantify the cooling history in a thrust belt setting. Balanced cross-sections
provide the kinematic sequence of rocks and structures necessary to reproduce
the mapped surface geology. The principal investigators will test the validity
of this kinematic sequence by assigning ages over which displacement occurs, and
use the range of potential velocity vectors to calculate heat transport,
erosion, and rock cooling. Matching the measured cooling histories recorded by a
suite of thermochronometers to that predicted by the kinematics of a balanced
cross-section is an additional support for the validation of the cross section.
This work will examine proposed structural geometries, the cooling ages of rocks
and their interdependence in central Nepal and far western Nepal. In central
Nepal, there is an abundance of geochronologic/thermochronologic data and recent
maps and cross section interpretations. In far western Nepal, there are detailed
maps and cross section interpretations with a growing body of
geochronologic/thermochronologic data. The researchers will capitalize on these
established and growing datasets to test our hypothesis by 1) evaluating a range
of permissible geometries for balanced-sections (both prior to and following
field work), 2) collecting critical field observations (bedding, foliation,
cleavage) and necessary thermochronologic samples, 3) establishing the cooling
history of duplexes and thrust sheets via a suite of thermochronometers, and 4)
modeling the dependence of chronometers on structural geometries, displacement
paths and rates. The intellectual merit of this project involves investigating
the sensitivity and utility of thermochronometer and kinematic data for
calculating the age and rate of thrust motion and associated exhumation. Using
this approach in Nepal, the principal investigators can evaluate the range of
shortening rates in space and time and determine if long-term shortening rates
though the Himalaya are constant or variable. These methods/processes will be
transportable to other contractional systems worldwide and will lead to a
reevaluation of the kinematics, geometry and rates in orogenic systems.