* 1524832
* Creating and Studying a National Network of Centers of STEM Education: Developing Foundational Infrastructure for Educational Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Gabriela Weaver, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,499,707.00

This project is a joint effort by the Association of Public and Land-grant
Universities (APLU), the University of Colorado - Boulder, the University of
Massachusetts - Amherst, and the Science Education Resource Center at Carleton
College. It will focus on two related threads of activities: 1) Studying the
nature and capacity of college and university STEM Education Centers
individually, including their relationships with campus centers for teaching and
learning (CTLs), and 2) Building a national network of campus-based STEM
Education Centers. The overarching goal is to develop a national community of
150 or more affiliated STEM centers that operate as a network in a self-
sustaining fashion. The network will be led by the PIs supported by an active
steering committee that will oversee its development. Activities to be supported
by the network will be annual meetings and the creation of an online resource
site to facilitate the operations of mature centers and nascent centers.
Participants in annual meetings will pay registration fees to initiate the
process of becoming a self-sustaining network. Overall this is a four-year
project of studying and seeding the network and associated centers. Through
these activities the network will provide a new national resource that will
support both established and nascent member centers and provide a new platform
for systemic transformation of undergraduate STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aspect of this project will use a mixed-
methods (quantitative and qualitative data collection) approach, including a
detailed examination of the cultural and functional situations of STEM education
centers on their campuses. It will categorize the types of work that the centers
do, and identify the programmatic and cultural challenges that STEM education
centers are particularly well-positioned to undertake. Initial research on the
network will explore the design and facilitation of learning networks and then
apply this understanding to promote those sustaining and scaling innovations
that transform undergraduate STEM education. The research will also examine how
the network supports individual and social learning as well as facilitating
institutional change.