* 1524270
* AGS-PRF:  The Effect of Principal and Distant Rainbands on Tropical Cyclone Intensity and Structures
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Yumin Moon, Moon                    Yumin
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 172,000.00

The intensity of tropical cyclones is an active area of study due to the obvious
implications for residents in coastal locations. Despite years of research,
models have been unable to consistently improve forecasting of intensity
changes. Among the many factors related to tropical cyclone intensity change is
the topic of how the spiral rainbands that branch out from the core of a storm
interact with the larger system. In this postdoctoral research fellowship, the
researcher will attempt to more realistically represent the multiple types of
rainbands in a tropical cyclone and analyze those simulations to answer
questions about how the rainbands interact with the overall system and work to
strengthen or weaken the storm.

This award is for a numerical modeling study of the effect of spiral rainbands
on tropical cyclone structure and intensity. The researcher contends that prior
modeling frameworks used to study rainbands do not allow for the simulation of
both principal and distant rainbands because they do not consider vertical shear
- what is known as a no-mean-flow condition. In this project, a series of
numerical simulations of tropical cyclones using the WRF model and including
different environmental vertical wind shear conditions would be performed. Three
main tasks are indicated: 1) Perform a series of high-resolution numerical
simulations under vertical wind shear that can simulate both principal and
distant rainbands in which vertical wind shear will be allowed to stay unchanged
or evolve over time, 2) Analyze the output of the simulations to quantify the
dynamic and thermodynamic effects induced by principal and distant rainbands on
tropical cyclone intensity and structure, and 3) Construct idealized but
realistic diabatic heating structures that are consistent with principal and
distant rainbands seen in numerical simulations in order to be used as forcing
for a linear 3D model to further understand the effects of spiral rainbands on
tropical cyclone intensity and structure.