* 1524518
* Development and Validation of Assessments for Industry-Valued Professional and Technical Learning Outcomes in Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Lin Ding, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 560,208.00

To educate engineering graduates of higher value to industry upon graduation,
curriculum reform requires effective assessment of knowledge, skills and
abilities (KSA) such as project management, performance on multidisciplinary
teams, critical thinking, addressing open-ended problems, thinking
entrepreneurially, communicating with diverse audiences, taking calculated
risks, and evaluating business and technical trade-offs. This project focuses on
KSA assessment in senior capstone design courses where students gain technical
and professional skills in realistic project experiences. The project team is
defining and prioritizing required professional skills; developing, testing, and
validating assessments that measure individual student achievement in diverse
settings; and disseminating proven assessments through workshops, conference
presentations, and focused communication vehicles including the Capstone Design
Conference and an Internet-based Capstone Design Hub.

Validated assessment tools will apply to engineering capstone design courses of
all disciplines, project types, team configurations, and student backgrounds.
Instruments are being developed with input from and testing with diverse student
populations, giving specific attention to female and minority populations.
Psychometric analysis of the instruments will involve the use of Classical Test
Theory (CTT) and Item Response Theory (IRT) psychometric analysis. Specifically,
the Classical Test Theory will be used to analyze item properties (item
difficulty and discrimination indices) as well as test properties (test
reliability and discrimination indices). Results from the CTT analysis will
allow the team to verify (a) whether items can collectively function well in
testing what they are purported to test; and (b) if not, which items may warrant
further inspection. A diverse community of practitioners is contributing to the
ongoing refinement and implementation of the assessments in order for them to
gain broad adoption, guide curriculum change, and benefit society through better
educated engineers entering the global workforce.