* 1524282
* Education and Health Consequences of Parental Migration on Children
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Zai Liang, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,836.00

Over 50% of the world population resides in urban areas and migration (both
internal and international) continues to be on the rise and increasingly affects
more children in the household. By some estimates, between 15 to 30% of children
in Africa, Asia, and Latin America live in households with at least one migrant
parent. The long-term separation of children from their parents may have long
term negative education and health consequences for children. Education is the
engine of modern society and an important resource and investment for today's
children to upward career mobility. To enhance our understanding of this
critical issue the investigator will study the education and health outcomes of
migrant the large population of children left behind in China. For the past
three decades, China has seen the largest internal migration in human history.
This massive wave of migration has also resulted in a major vulnerable
population, i.e. roughly 61 million of left behind children whose parents went
to work in Chinese cities. The researcher will conduct a major data collection
on 4th grade left behind children in rural China. The data collection includes
4th grade student transcripts during grades 1-4, homeroom teachers? written
evaluations of student education and behavior outcomes, assessment of student
mental health, and a household survey of sampled students. The study also
consists of analyses of variety of education outcomes and student mental health.
Using both newly collected data and existing longitudinal data the investigator
will examine health and behavior outcomes. Taking advantage of rich information
on migration, the research examines how a variety of migration related variables
(duration of migration, remittance, and distance of migration) affect education,
health, and behavior outcomes for left behind children.

The project builds major data and research infrastructure for the study of left
behind children in rural China and allows U.S. based researchers to carry out a
variety of research topics related to migration and the well-being of children.
As both internal and international migration continues to increase in the 21st
century, a comprehensive understanding of migration and outcomes for children is
not only important for China but also holds implications for left behind
children (either due to internal migration or international migration of
parents) in other countries as well. The project collects data on 1,000 current
4th grade students (both left behind children and children whose parents did not
migrate) in the migrant-sending province of Sichuan province. These data
include: (a) retrospective 4th grade student transcripts from grade 1 to grade
4; (b) Math and Chinese language tests of 4th graders; (c) homeroom teachers?
evaluation of education performance and behavior issues of each student, and (d)
a survey of student emotional development. The research team will also conduct a
survey of 1,000 student households, collecting data on basic socioeconomic
conditions of each household, migration and labor history of parents, and
information on parental home visits along with other household level
information. These data will be used to estimate statistical models of education
outcomes, behavior outcomes, and emotional development and test a variety of
hypotheses linking these outcomes to migration, remittances, school and
community contexts, and peer group influences.