* 1524902
* IUSE: A Pedagogical Framework for Undergraduate Project-Based Engineering Design Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Krzysztof Gajos, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 599,967.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project will develop a
framework to guide the design, evaluation, and improvement of project-based
engineering design courses. Engineering courses involving design projects are
increasingly of interest to educators setting curricula for undergraduate
engineering programs. Design projects improve students' problem solving
abilities. However, much variation exists in how projects are implemented and
existing guidelines are limited. This is due, in part, to the non-traditional
and open-ended nature of these courses when compared to typical engineering
courses. Currently guidelines are also hindered by a lack of research aimed at
aligning educational practice with learning theories and results from research
on the cognitive processes involved in design. The research will result in a
general framework and data collection tools intended to guide engineering
schools in making improvements in undergraduate project-based design courses.
Results of this project will help improve the ability of engineering students to
design innovative systems and processes to meet consumer needs. Continued
innovation in science and engineering is vital to national security, economic
growth, and achieving a sustainable society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop a framework that addresses three problematic aspects of engineering
design projects: the need for process-related, context-specific coaching to help
students acquire the procedural knowledge required for successful design; a lack
of access to detailed documentation of prior designs, which students need to
demonstrate an ability to transfer knowledge; and a related lack of access to
engineering communities of practice, with whom students must engage to learn
both the technical and social aspects of design knowledge. To define a general
pedagogical framework for engineering design, it is necessary to gather data
from large numbers of students and educators in a variety of courses and
contexts. To achieve this, new methods and online instruments will be developed
for evaluating the efficacy of different learning environments. The research
embedded in this project will yield insights into the processes followed by
novice designers and the types of coaching required to improve learners'
procedural knowledge, the ways in which learners interact with prior designs and
engineering communities of practice, and the effects these interactions have
upon their design knowledge. This latter contribution is especially important
given the increased availability of open source technology and related online
communities of practice. The project includes efforts to disseminate the results
of this work to the broader engineering education community.