* 1524062
* AF: Small: Connections Between Algorithmic Game Theory, Complexity Theory, and Learning Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Tim Roughgarden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this research project is to develop new results in theoretical
computer science that are useful for reasoning about fundamental economic
problems. For example, consider the problem of selling items in an auction ---
such as collectables on eBay, wireless spectrum to telecommunication companies
in a government auction, or sponsored links to advertisers through a search
engine auction. How can a seller use past experience to design better auctions?
For example, how can a search engine use its treasure trove of past bids to
optimize its keyword auctions? How much better is such an optimized solution
compared to a generic one? This research project will develop theory to help
answer all of these questions. For another example, a basic tenet of economics
is that perfect markets clear --- goods are priced in a way that supply equals
demand. A fundamental problem is to understand when such "market equilibria" are
guaranteed to exist. This research project will develop theory that uses
impossibility results from theoretical computer science (for computer
algorithms) to deduce impossibility results in economics (for market
equilibria). The research project also involves the mentoring of PhD students,
innovation in graduate teaching, the dissemination of lecture videos and notes
for graduate courses, the teaching of algorithmic fundamentals through massive
online open courses, and the organization of both traditional and new meetings
for the presentation and discussion of cutting-edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will pursue a broad research agenda
developing connections between algorithmic game theory, complexity theory, and
learning theory, guided by the central problems in these fields. The first set
of goals aims to understand when there exist mechanisms, such as simple
combinatorial auctions, with equilibrium performance guarantees as good as those
achieved by state-of-the-art approximation algorithms. The second set of goals
will advance the state-of-the-art in lower bounds for the worst-case equilibrium
performance of mechanisms. The third set of goals applies computational
complexity in novel ways to prove (conditional) impossibility results for other
basic concepts in algorithmic game theory, including Walrasian equilibria and
Borders-type polyhedral characterizations of optimal mechanisms. The fourth set
of goals applies the methodology of learning theory to auction design, for
example by identifying the amount of data that is necessary and sufficient to
achieve near-optimal revenue.