* 1524893
* Collaborative Research: Scaling Undergraduate STEM Transformation and Institutional Networks for Engaged Dissemination (SUSTAINED)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Julia Nord, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2020
* USD 159,998.00

This project is facilitating the growing use of STEM Learning Assistants in STEM
departments in institutions of higher education and improving implementations of
this approach. Learning Assistants (LAs) are talented highly-trained STEM
undergraduates who are hired by university and two-year college STEM instructors
to help transform courses to evidence-based approaches and assist enrolled
students to get the full impact of active learning methods. The Learning
Assistant model has spread rapidly into practice in the last few years. In
response to growing use and requests for assistance, the team that created the
LA model has recently developed an international Learning Assistant Alliance - a
collaborative network of 88 institutions that use Learning Assistants to
catalyze education transformation in mathematics, science, and engineering
courses. Members of the LA Alliance also engage in collaborative research with
peer institutions interested in developing and using improved outcome measures.
Project resources are supporting the development and implementation of a web-
based process for disseminating research-based LA instructional practices,
including a database to provide resources and information for new users that
will contribute to the efficient implementation of the LA model. Project
resources are also supporting a large-scale research study of the learning
outcomes and retention of over 50,000 undergraduates who have enrolled in
courses using the LA model. With the initial support provided in this award, the
LA Alliance is developing a governing structure and a plan for sustainable
funding in years beyond the grant.

The Learning Assistant model is a model for social and structural organization
in undergraduate STEM education that is related to and builds on the work of
Peter Senge on learning organizations and on the work of Jean Lave and Etienne
Wenger on communities of practice. It is an approach to supporting the growing
use of evidence-based instructional strategies. However, it is not a specific
instructional strategy but rather a method of training and using advanced
undergraduate students as course assistants and liaisons between instructors and
students enrolled in a STEM course. Built into the model is the baseline
expectation that participating institutions are working to bring about change in
the way undergraduate courses are taught and to study the effectiveness of these
changes.