* 1524931
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Network Economics for Secondary Spectrum Ecosystems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Tao Shu, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 10/31/2016
* USD 232,476.00

The emerging cognitive radio (CR) technology provides new solutions to the
wireless service business. A CR-capable service provider can acquire spectrum on
demand from the secondary spectrum market to avoid paying the huge spectrum
licensing fees, significantly lowering the threshold of entry to the wireless
business. As a result, it is foreseeable that small and local secondary wireless
service providers (SSPs) will flourish, transforming the wireless business from
one dictated by few giant carriers to a much more competitive marketplace.
Existing secondary spectrum market models mainly consider a market comprised by
big SSPs, where every SSP is assumed to have sufficient secondary radio resource
and coverage to independently service end users. In practice, however, these
models inevitably exclude the large number of small and local SSPs that do not
have enough resource and coverage to independently satisfy the demand of end
users (e.g., for high-rate access or long-range routing) from the market,
leading to reduced market competitiveness, and henceforth compromised market
efficiency. This project will investigate a novel competition-and-collaboration
spectrum market framework, whereby small and local SSPs will collaborate in
providing service to retain more market shares, better profitability, stronger
market competitiveness, and higher market efficiency. This project, if
successful, will significantly advance our understanding on the network
economics of the secondary spectrum ecosystem comprised by primary spectrum
sellers, SSPs, end users, and human, and will contribute to the real-world
deployment of economically feasible and sustainable spectrum market.

The proposed research will follow three thrusts. (1) For short-term services,
assuming perfect rationality for every player in the market, the secondary
spectrum market is first modeled as a spot market. A truthful procurement
auction model is proposed to study the optimal market mechanisms and their
strategy proofness under a variety of market conditions. (2) For long-term
services, the project will study the potential and implication of the futures
market, in which service predictability in the time domain is exploited to
improve market efficiency, using methods such as option pricing and hedging. (3)
The rational-player assumption is released and the project will study the impact
of irrationality and human factors on market efficiency using methods from
Behavioral Economics. This project will also carry out a comprehensive
educational plan to broaden its impact, including integrating research with
undergraduate and graduate education, recruiting and outreaching to minority and
under-represented students, and efficient dissemination and outreaching to the
general public.