* 1524455
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Making Computational Geometry Polynomial in Derivation Length and in Dimension
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Elisha Sacks, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Computational geometry is the discipline that creates algorithms to design and
manipulate shapes. It has wide application in science, engineering, and industry
-- CAD/CAM systems are a notable example. The problem is, where we see shapes
and their spatial relations, the computer sees only numbers -- and usually, for
speed, only approximate, "floating-point" numbers. E.g., points on a line that
are represented as numerical coordinates, when rounded to the number of digits
the computer stores, may no longer lie on any common line. Subsequent
calculations that rely on a line being straight or two lines intersecting at
most once can then go badly astray. Error in numerical computation can sometimes
be limited by rounding, but there is no practical technique for rounding three-
dimensional shapes.

This project investigates shape rounding by encasement: High-complexity shapes
are encased in approximating polyhedra with floating-point vertex coordinates.
Given an encasement, the PIs have described a rounding algorithm that projects
input features to nearby encasement features. For dealing with intersections of
surfaces, the project creates output-sensitive algorithms for another type of
encasement, an isolating encasement that can have distant boundary vertices but
cannot encase other features.

Encasement is only part of the solution, so the project also explores ways to
compute topological structure using bounded-complexity arithmetic by avoiding
numerical computation for the degenerate (zero) expressions. It investigates
using graph theory to analyze explicit expressions and algebraic techniques to
analyze expressions involving roots of polynomials.

The outcome is to include a software library for implementing computational
geometry algorithms with automated shape rounding. The project integrates
education and research through an introductory computational geometry course in
which standard algorithms are taught and implemented using the library.
Previously, the computational cost of multi-step algorithms forced students to
consider each algorithm in isolation.