* 1524527
* Scaling a Cyber-Enabled, Just-in-Time-Teaching with Two-Way Formative Feedback (JTF) Project From the Individual Faculty Level to the Disciplinary Department Program Level (JTFD)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Claire Honeycutt, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,499,738.00

This project is leveraging eight years experience of developing and implementing
the concepts and practices of Just-in-Time-Teaching with Interactive Frequent
Formative Feedback (JTF) pedagogy. The project is scaling JTF from a single
engineering discipline with eight faculty participating to seven engineering
disciplines with 84 faculty being involved through a professional development
program. JTF pedagogy integrates the evidence-based practices of student
engagement, contextualization of content, and web-enabled two-way formative
feedback into a pedagogy that has been shown to improve student attitudes,
achievement and persistence. The project will engage participating faculty in
year-long apprenticeships with a semester of biweekly workshops followed by a
semester of mentor supported classroom implementation of evidence-based
teaching. Research shows that changing faculty teaching beliefs toward evidence-
based strategies and practices can be difficult but working within a cohort
eases the transition. In response to this research , disciplinary communities of
practice will be formed to support faculty while they are changing their beliefs
and practices. The personal interactions that occur within and between the
disciplinary communities of practice will be characterized with social network
analysis and will be correlated to changes, across time, in the beliefs of the
faculty apprentices (e.g., the shift in faculty beliefs from teacher-centered,
transmission-of-information instruction to student-centered, conceptual-change
instruction) The important knowledge that will be generated and contributed to
the growing body of knowledge concerning faculty change will be an understanding
of the critical role and impact of disciplinary communities of practice such as
faculty interactions within and between them and the extent to which they
support faculty change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will assess faculty at
the beginning, middle, and end of each year-long apprenticeship by triangulating
the baseline and change in faculty beliefs and classroom practice with surveys,
interviews and classroom observations. The impact on students' persistence and
achievement will be determined from a participating faculty member's class
before and after the apprenticeship. The assessments will be used to: 1)
characterize the shifts in faculty beliefs, strategies, and practice toward
student-centered learning; 2) assess faculty fidelity of classroom
implementation of this new pedagogy in comparison with their faculty beliefs; 3)
develop sustainable disciplinary communities of practice and assess their impact
on faculty change; 4) characterize disciplinary differences in barriers to use
of JTFD in classroom implementation of evidence based practices; and 5) assess,
for faculty classroom use of JTFD, the disciplinary differences of change in
attitude, achievement, and persistence of students, especially for
underrepresented populations.