* 1524602
* Stress History of the Alpine Fault Using Rock Deformation Experiments and Numerical Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Steven Kidder, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2021
* USD 259,255.00

The state of stress in the crust and its spatial and temporal variability is an
active and longstanding research area in geodynamics, earthquake mechanics,
structural geology and rock mechanics. Stress levels on plate boundary faults
are the subject of ongoing debate and also a subject of particular societal
importance because it is the buildup of stresses along these structures that is
responsible for the most devastating earthquakes. This study examines stresses
on the Alpine fault, New Zealand, using two complimentary approaches. First, a
two-dimensional numerical model of the Alpine fault that incorporates shear
heating will be developed to provide an independent constraint on long-term
stress levels on the Alpine fault. Second, a set of rock deformation experiments
will be carried out to explore the new idea that significant variations in the
size of deformed grains in rock samples from the fault indicate that the large
grains formed in the middle crust under low stress conditions and smaller grains
formed during brief, seismically induced high-stress pulses. The project would
advance desired societal outcomes through: (1) full participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM; (2) development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce through training of graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups in the Earth sciences and support of an
early career scientist; and (3) increased partnerships through international
collaboration with New Zealand scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recrystallized
quartz grain size piezometric data from Alpine fault mid-crustal rocks show two
main features: (1) a significant lateral variation along strike of the fault
such that peak stresses are significantly reduced in the central portion of the
fault; and (2) grain size populations are strongly bimodal. When stresses based
on recrystallized grain size are compared to available independent constraints
on stress on the Alpine fault, a striking inconsistency emerges. Crustal
strengths indicated by numerical models based on force balance, calculations
based on potential energy, and earthquake focal mechanism data suggest
integrated crustal strengths two to three times weaker than seemingly indicated
by the grain size data. To reconcile these observations, this study investigates
the hypothesis the coarse-grained quartz population formed at the brittle-
ductile transition at a peak long-term stress of only ~50 MPa. The fine-grained
quartz formed during brief, seismically induced high-stress pulse. The project
delves deeper into the stress state(s) of the Alpine fault and the
interpretation of quartz microstructures in potentially non-steady state
settings using two complimentary approaches. First, a two-dimensional numerical
model of the Alpine fault that incorporates shear heating will be developed. Two
linked finite element models will be run together, one pertaining to the
Southern Alpine fault where exhumation rates are low, and a second from the
central Alpine fault where exhumation rates are extreme. The numerical model
will be tested using an inversion against multiple thermal constraints such as
metamorphic histories, thermochronologic data, and heat flow. As modeled
stresses increase, it becomes impossible at a certain point to recreate observed
thermal histories. The modeling thus provides an independent constraint on long-
term stress levels on the Alpine fault and may provide some additional insights
into its tectonic history. Second, a series of rock deformation experiments on
quartzites in a Griggs rig will be carried out to explore the effects of stress
variations on recrystallized grain size distributions and fabrics. Experiments
will be conducted using both gradual stress increases (simulated exhumation
paths toward the brittle ductile transition), and stress pulses followed by
stress relaxation (simulated postseismic deformation). Fabrics from
characteristic Alpine fault samples will be examined for purposes of comparison.