* 1524523
* Collaborative Research: Functional evolution of the mammalian backbone: insights from the forerunners of mammals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2018
* Stephanie E Pierce, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 06/30/2018
* USD 323,001.00

Revised Title: Collaborative Research: Functional evolution of the mammalian
backbone: insights from the forerunners of
mammals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mammals are known for their great range of
locomotor behaviors, including unique gaits such as galloping and bounding.
These gaits are made possible by the subdivision of the backbone into two
distinct regions: the thoracic region, which bears ribs and aids in breathing;
and the lumbar region, which is ribless, highly mobile and functions in
locomotion. Combined, these two sections of the backbone allow mammals to
breathe and move simultaneously, permitting the use of high speed gaits for
prolonged periods of time. But, how did this key mammalian trait evolve? Using
cutting-edge 3D technology, along with the rich fossil record of mammals and
their ancestors, this research will trace the origin and evolution of the
mammalian backbone and its link with the development of mammal-specific
locomotor behaviors. The work will deepen our understanding of the history of a
key characteristic of mammals and part of the skeleton that is of great medical
importance. Dissemination of the research will occur via two primary outlets.
First, a series of educational online videos will be produced by the award-
winning YouTube channel "The Brain Scoop". The series will include three
episodes documenting different stages of the research project in a fun and
engaging way, with the core aim to encourage an increased interest in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) topics among teenagers and young
adults. Second, the "The Brain Scoop" series will be used as the foundation for
an 'Experience Box' in the Field Museum's N. W. Harris Learning Collection. The
box will be available for K-12 educators to borrow and use in their classrooms,
and will include replica specimens and activities related to each episode that
are directly tied to Next Generation Science
Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mammals are known for their great range of
locomotor behaviors, including unique asymmetric gaits such as galloping and
bounding. Asymmetric gaits are made possible by the subdivision of the dorsal
vertebral column (the area between the pectoral and pelvic girdles) into two
morphologically and functionally distinct regions. Anteriorly, the thoracic
region bears ribs and is specialized for respiration, whereas posteriorly the
dorsoventrally mobile lumbar region functions in locomotion. Combined, the
regionalized dorsal vertebrae allow mammals to breathe and move simultaneously,
permitting the use of high speed gaits for prolonged periods of time. But, how
did this key mammalian trait evolve? Modern species provide little information
for examining this fundamental evolutionary question, as they all possess
distinct thoracic and lumbar regions. However, the clade to which mammals
belong, Synapsida, has a rich fossil record that provides a detailed view of the
origin and evolution of mammals. Using cutting-edge morphometric, biomechanical,
and 3D digital modeling techniques, this project takes a deep-time approach to
examine function of the vertebral column in fossil synapsids, and to trace the
origin and evolution of the thoracolumbar region and dorsoventral mobility. Four
synergistic approaches will be utilized: 1) morphometric data will be used to
examine the degree of morphofunctional regionalization of the dorsal vertebral
column in modern tetrapods and fossil synapsids; 2) ex vivo bending experiments
will be conducted on the vertebral columns of modern tetrapods bracketing the
synapsid-mammal transition to determine the link between form and function; 3)
novel virtual bending experiments will be carried out on 3D digital models of
fossil synapsid vertebral columns to determine their propensity for movement;
and 4) the data will be synthesized within a strict phylogenetic context to
reconstruct the origin and evolution of the thoracolumbar region and
dorsoventral mobility.