* 1524575
* Build, Understand, &amp; Tune Interventions that Cumulate to Real Impact
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Joseph Grabowski, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,795,922.00

The University of Pittsburgh has received an NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Education and Human Resources Design and Development tier award to
bring together a highly interdisciplinary team to study a suite of
instructional, cognitive-skill, and social/motivational interventions that have
been demonstrated to produce large improvements in learning in the context of
introductory STEM courses. This research is significant because it will allow us
to understand which interventions produce long-term positive outcomes, whether
these interventions combine negatively or synergistically within and across
courses, and the types of situations or groups of students for which they are
most effective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team consists of four
Discipline-Based Education Research scientists (biology, chemistry, physics, and
psychology), three learning scientists with expertise in social/motivational,
cognitive skills or active STEM learning techniques, and a learning scientist
with expertise in large-scale longitudinal data analysis with cutting edge
statistical techniques. This project represents the initial phase of a new type
of study termed "Intervention Science." Although interventions are relatively
commonplace in educational settings, very little research has sought to
comprehensively evaluate different interventions in a single, interdisciplinary
methodological framework. The research plan seeks to understand the relative
influence of different classroom "interventions" (e.g. "flipped" classes, active
learning, peer assessment, etc.) on indicators of student success (e.g. course
performance in downstream courses, participation in undergraduate research,
conceptual learning gains, etc.). Construction of control and experimental
groups will be accomplished using statistical techniques that assign students
probabilistically to such categories. Confounding circumstances (e.g. students
enrolled in different courses experiencing different interventions, or students
interacting with peers in other courses) will be handled using techniques such
as hierarchical linear modeling. Knowledge of the conditions in which
instructional, cognitive-skill, and social/motivational interventions are most
effective, and on whom, will inform the way in which faculty members implement
effective interventions in the classroom and, in that way, have a significant
impact on the educational experience of large numbers of STEM students
nationwide.