* 1524733
* AGS-PRF:  Air-Sea Momentum flux at High Wind Speeds in the North Sea
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2017
* Marc Buckley, Buckley                 Marc           P
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 192,000.00

This Post-doctoral Research Fellowship (PRF) involves field measurements of
atmospheric wind conditions near the surface of the ocean, during high sea
conditions from a research platform in the North Sea. These measurements will be
taken using a combination of wind measuring instruments (anemometers) and high
speed camera system. The goal of this research is to improve our understanding
of the interaction between the atmosphere and the ocean at the interface of wind
driven waves. This PRF will provide an early career scientist an outstanding
opportunity to interact with international collaborators in a challenging
research environment working at the forefront of science in this area.

This study seeks to deploy a suite of sensors onboard the FINO3 research
platform in the North Sea, 80km offshore from Germany, to take direct
measurements of momentum flux in high winds and high seas. The specific research
objectives include: - obtain direct field measurements of the total air-sea
momentum flux in high wind conditions; which combined with surrounding
observations of the atmospheric boundary layer, sea state and local wave field,
provide better parameterization of of air-sea momentum flux near the atmosphere-
ocean interface. - measure the partitioning of the total wind stress between
wave, turbulent, and viscous contributions. - assess the drag associated with
each spectral component of the complex wave field with multiple wind and sea
swell components and in the presence of whitecaps and sea spray, in order to
improve coupled atmosphere-ocean models. The project with complement a wind-wave
interaction study already in progress on the FINO3 research platform.