* 1524490
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changes in tropical forest farming under conditions of rapid socio-ecological restructuring
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* David Gilbert, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 17,539.00

Tropical rainforests are being transformed into many different kinds of
agricultural production systems. As these forests are transformed so too are the
livelihoods people obtain from them. This project explores what factors drive
the rainforest cultivation through an agricultural practice known as
agroforestry in light of various environmental pressures. This project trains a
graduate student in rigorous techniques of scientific, mixed-methods
environmental anthropology. This research will contribute to the growing
scientific exploration of the role of agroforestry in the livelihood of rural
people and maintenance of tropical forests. Project findings will potentially
aid environmental and land use policy makers through detailed analysis of
agricultural and ecological processes in a region of the world that is of
recognized environmental, cultural and political
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University doctoral candidate, David
Gilbert, advised by Dr. William Durham, will examine how forest farmers have
countered competing pressures on their forestlands to create inhabited
agroforests. This project uses environmental anthropology methods to better
understand this type of working forest, with implications for the social and
environmental sustainability of agricultural commodity crop production more
generally. As site of globally important agricultural commodity markets and
millions of forest farmers Sumatra is an ideal region for the study of
agroforestry. Research is focused in two forest farmer settlements in Sumatra's
Bukit Barisan mountain range. Both settlements cultivate agroforests that
provide a range of valuable commodities. Preliminary data analysis shows that
the social ecology of agroforests allows forest farmers flexible integration
into global agricultural commodities markets. To better characterize this
agroforestry adaptation and practice, Mr. Gilbert will use participant
observation, in-depth interviews and an agroecological survey. Ecological
changes will be described by constructing a Geographic Informations Systems
database of land use. This research will contribute to understanding of the ways
rural people respond to political and economic influences, and the ways these
responses may drive ecological change.