* 1524607
* Collaborative Research:  L.E.A.R.N.ing to Build STEM Research Communities - A Proposal to Strengthen, Expand, and Disseminate a Successful Retention Model
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* William Kwochka, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 557,362.00

A previous NSF-supported project has resulted in high retention and improved GPA
for STEM majors at the University of Central Florida. In an effort to expand on
this work the institution has partnered with investigators at the University of
NC-Wilmington (a primarily undergraduate, public institution) and Florida
Atlantic University (a research-1, public institution) to study the ways in
which a community built on disciplinary research will affect the retention of
first-year students in STEM. The participants will live together in a learning
community, take courses together, and work as research apprentices in faculty
laboratories. This model, which has been shown to be particularly effective with
students from underrepresented groups and first generation majors, will be
adapted to include strategies for retaining transfer students through to
graduation as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core elements of the UCF model are
the development of an academic research community that provides students with
hands-on learning opportunities, access to faculty and trained graduate student
and peer research mentors, and integration into student life through a wide
variety of academic, social, and service activities. This project will address
three research questions that are central to the national goal of increasing the
number of high quality STEM graduates who go on to graduate school and into the
workforce: (a) Can the UCF research community model be adapted successfully to
accommodate a transfer student population? (b) What factors within a STEM
research community influence transfer student success and impact transfer
student retention? And (c) To what extent is the retention success of a current
model replicable at other, public institutions? Formative and summative
assessment will focus on the efficacy of the model on student retention and
success in STEM for the different student populations (first-year and transfer)
and at different institutions. The plan will use a mixed-method approach to
assess the effectiveness of the proposed educational tools and educational
content in fulfilling the desired learning outcomes, from both educators' and
participants' perspectives. Student retention and GPA will be compared to
matched cohorts. The findings from this project will be presented at state and
national meetings such as the Florida Statewide Symposium on Engagement in
Undergraduate Research and the Council on Undergraduate Research biennial
conference. Results will also be submitted to the Journal of College Science
Teaching.