* 1524598
* AGS-PRF: Gravity Wave Multi-Scale Interactions and Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Katrina Bossert, Bossert                 Katrina
* Fellowship Award
* John Meriwether
* 01/31/2018
* USD 172,000.00

Gravity waves (GWs) play important roles in Earth's weather and climate due to
their impact on the mean winds throughout the atmosphere. Smaller-scale GWs with
large amplitudes likely play a major role in these overall dynamics, but
currently very little is known about their statistics and influences.
Additionally, these GWs are essentially unresolved and not accounted for in
large-scale models. This proposed research will address these science questions,
which represent a significant need within the Aeronomy community. For this
purpose the PI will utilize combined measurements from the Advanced Mesosphere
Temperature Mappers (AMTMs), resonance lidars, and radars located at the Arctic
Lidar Observatory for Middle Atmospheric Research (ALOMAR), at Bear Lake
Observatory (BLO) in Logan, UT, and these instruments deployed together during
the recent DEEPWAVE airborne and ground-based field measurement program at New
Zealand. These earlier correlative measurement capabilities, funded by NSF, have
demonstrated an excellent potential to quantify GW momentum fluxes, and the GW
characteristics that account for these fluxes, to a degree not possible with
traditional airglow imager or wind profiling radars or
lidars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will result in quantification of
multiple cases of multi-scale MLT dynamics that advance the understanding of
their various effects. These analyses will also be used to guide numerical
studies of these dynamics to further quantify their influences and aid efforts
to parameterize such dynamics in large-scale models. This research will foster
beneficial collaborations between the MLT measurement and modeling communities,
as well as provide an opportunity for collaboration on GW coupling between
different areas of the atmosphere from the troposphere up through the MLT
region. Since multi-scale dynamics also occur throughout the atmosphere and
oceans, and likely in other planetary atmospheres, this research would benefit
efforts to understand key GW roles in all of these fluid systems. The research
will be carried out under the mentorship of Dr. Dave Fritts at GATS, inc.,
Boulder. Additionally, the PI will continue to mentor undergraduate students
from the nearby University of Colorado, providing opportunities for new students
to learn more about atmospheric science.