* 1524387
* Petrogenesis of Hawaiian Tholeiites: Constraints from Non-Traditional Stable Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Shichun Huang, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2019
* USD 249,780.00

This award will support an early career investigator to study the application of
non-traditional stable isotopes, a novel tool, in the fields of high-temperature
geochemistry and petrology. The ultimate goal of the project is to better
understand the origin of Hawaiian volcanism. The proposed research involves
educating and training graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art
analytical techniques and their applications to geosciences. The project will
also help this early-career scientist build a state-of-the art laboratory that
will support the research of a number of researchers and students not only at
his own institution but also in other institutions allied to the Nevada System
of Higher Education. The analytical geochemistry laboratory overseen by this
investigator will serve a broad area of earth and environmental sciences, as
well as to serve as regional infrastructure in an EPSCoR state. Finally, the
proposed research will leverage previous NSF investments by using samples
recovered from previous NSF funded programs, such as Hawaii Scientific Drilling
Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth's mantle is thought to be composed of
olivine-rich peridotite. However, the major element characteristics of some
ocean island basalts (OIB), such as some Hawaiian lavas, cannot be produced by
partial melting of peridotite. A variety of models have been suggested to
explain the SiO2 variation in Hawaiian lavas, including melt-mantle reaction
model, dacite magma model, and secondary pyroxenite model. On a global scale,
Hawaiian lavas define the high-SiO2 endmember of the OIB compositional-isotopic
spectrum. Consequently, understanding the origin of SiO2 variation within
Hawaiian lavas is important in understanding the petrogenesis of global OIBs.
Lavas from Mauna Kea, Koolau and Kahoolawe define two endmembers of the
compositional-isotopic spectrum of Hawaiian lavas. The investigator proposes a
detailed and systematic Mg and Fe isotopic study of Mauna Kea and Kahoolawe
lavas to resolve this question. Koolau lavas have been extensively studied for
Mg, Fe and Ca isotopic compositions. This effort expands on an ongoing study of
the Ca isotopic compositions of these samples. It is suggested that non-
traditional stable isotopic studies based on major elements such as Ca, Mg, and
Fe may provide clues as to the nature of the compositional and isotopic
variations shown in Hawaiian lavas. In the future, such approach can be applied
to global OIBs to constrain their petrogenesis.