* 1524743
* Collaborative Research: Earthquake Gates: Linking Earthquake Rupture Length to the Dynamics of Restraining Double Bends on the Altyn Tagh Fault
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Benchun Duan, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 165,739.00

The length of a fault rupture generally controls the magnitude of a large
earthquake. Unusually large, rare, and unexpected earthquakes overwhelm
mitigation measures and the societal capacity to respond, leading to a cascade
of disastrous effects. In order to assess the potential for such rare events,
this study calibrates how effectively geometrical complexities of a fault impede
earthquake rupture propagation. The project, carried out in close collaboration
with Chinese researchers, integrates field observations of fault geometry and
slip behavior of the Altyn Tagh fault in China, one of the longest active
strike-slip faults on Earth, with numerical rupture simulations to predict the
range of potential earthquake sizes along a major intracontinental strike-slip
fault. The outcome of this research will be a means to assess the likelihood of
rare, unusually large events. The project will advance desired societal outcomes
through: (1) full participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
STEM; (2) improved well-being of individuals in society through a new
understanding of earthquake rupture processes; (3) development of a diverse,
globally competitive STEM workforce through training of graduate and
undergraduate students; and (4) increased partnerships through a strong
international collaboration with Chinese scientists and international research
experiences for students. The project is supported by the Tectonics Program and
NSF's International Science and Engineering program.

The research project will develop and apply techniques to integrate field
observations of fault geometry, kinematics, and slip behavior with numerical
rupture simulations to predict the range of potential earthquake sizes along the
central Altyn Tagh fault over a length (800 km) that well exceeds the longest
recorded continental strike-slip earthquake (420-450 km). The central Altyn Tagh
fault fault is divided into segments by four restraining double bends (Aksay,
Pingding Shan, Akato Tagh, and Sulamu Tagh) that are each hypothesized, based on
their geometry, to stop most, but not all earthquake ruptures. Multi-cycle
spontaneous dynamic rupture models show that these earthquake gates may be open
or closed to a particular direction of rupture propagation depending upon fault
geometry and stress conditions inherited from prior earthquakes. Prior research
showed that dynamic rupture effects (resulting from seismic wave propagation
from the rupture front) and interseismic stress relaxation (off-fault
deformation) both contribute to geologically testable patterns of along-strike
earthquake slip and cumulative slip-rate gradients. This project will apply
these rupture models and geologic tests to the Pingding Shan double restraining
bend, which appears to be a relatively nascent structure along the Altyn Tagh
fault. A thorough field campaign will collect new slip rate, slip-per-event,
fault kinematic, and structural data to constrain a multi-cycle rupture model
for the Pingding Shan restraining double bend. Models will be developed that
couple all four of the major restraining double bends of the central Altyn Tagh
fault, and the ensemble behavior of this geologically-calibrated model system
will be investigated to determine the likelihood of rare, exceptionally long
earthquake ruptures.