* 1524041
* Collaborative Research: Middle Pleistocene Hominin Behavior and Paleoecology at Farre, Chalbi Basin, Northern Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Kevin Uno, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 40,000.00

The African early Middle Pleistocene saw the emergence of archaic Homo, the
expansion of hominin brain capacities to near-modern dimensions, and the first
appearance of a battery of sophisticated new technologies. And yet, as
relatively few African localities sample this important timeframe (i.e. the
period from c.781-500ka), the specific details regarding the timing, setting,
and dynamics that underlie the emergence and early evolution of these advances
remain poorly understood. With an estimated minimum age of c.600-500ka, recent
paleoanthropological discoveries at the open-air site of Farre, located in the
Chalbi Basin of northern Kenya, may add important new data relevant to these
issues. In this project, an interdisciplinary team of investigators will conduct
a two-year archaeological and geochronological study to better understand the
age and contents of the Farre site. Broader impacts of the project include the
opportunity to build research collaborations across universities, museums, and
research centers, research and training opportunities for students and junior
faculty, and public education and conservation outreach at the field site and in
the U.S. During two seasons of paleoanthropological fieldwork at Farre, the
investigators will expand preliminary excavations to further document the
presence of in situ archaeological materials, increase the sample size of
diagnostic artifact forms and fossil taxa, refine the geoarchaeology and
paleoenvironmental setting of the site; and refine the geochronology of site.
Finds from preliminary excavations include artifacts consistent with both Early
and Middle Stone Age technologies, coupled with fossil taxa suggesting an age in
excess of 500ka. Farre may thus help bridge a long-standing gap in the record of
this paleoanthropologically-important region, refine our understanding of the
emergence and early evolution of important technological capacities, and place
inferred hominin adaptations within local, regional, and global
paleoenvironmental contexts.