* 1524665
* Formation of Magmatic-hydrothermal Veins: Interpreting Quartz Textures and Vein Mineral Assemblages in the Butte, Montana porphyry Copper System
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* James Watkins, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2020
* USD 379,932.00

Magmatic-hydrothermal fluids in the crust transport and deposit ore metals in
some settings, and in other settings, they feed hot water into high-temperature
geothermal systems used to produce electricity. Exactly how minerals precipitate
in these environments is not well understood because the processes operate at
depths and on timescales that are not accessible to direct observation. To
understand how, when, and where rock fractures form and then fill with minerals,
especially quartz, the investigators in this study are examining veins in a
large ore deposit exposed on Earth's surface. Studies supported by this award
consist of mapping the vein pattern, and determining the mineral assemblages,
then imaging the textures of crystals, measuring the properties of fluids
trapped in the crystals, and determining the abundances of trace elements within
those crystals. These measurements reveal the temperature, depth and growth
histories of the crystals.

In this study, the large and well characterized hydrothermal system in Butte,
Montana serves as a natural laboratory for investigating how magmatic-
hydrothermal veins fill with quartz, sulfides and magnetite. The mechanisms and
timescales of vein formation are addressed by (1) mapping the distribution of
quartz-dominated veins and variations in alteration of the host rock adjacent to
these veins, (2) analyzing quartz vein textures and compositions using a suite
of analytical tools (SEM, SEM-CL, SEM-EBSD, and EPMA), (3) estimating
temperature and pressure of mineral formation using trace element and fluid
inclusion thermometry, and (4) conducting hydrothermal quartz growth experiments
in the laboratory to assess the influence of crystal growth rate on the Ti-in-
quartz thermometer. The combined data set addressing SEM-CL textures (mottled
vs. banded euhedral), EBSD (addressing crystal orientations), fluid inclusion
homogenization temperatures, and the P-T interpretations of Ti-in-quartz, Zr-in-
rutile and Ti-in-biotite from EPMA will constrain the interplay of fluid flow,
heat transfer, and quartz precipitation in ways that provide new insights into
how magmatic hydrothermal systems work.