* 1524488
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The integration of visual and auditory information in tone perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Yan Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2017
* USD 13,890.00

Languages vary in how they use the pitch of voice to convey meaning. In a tone
language, pitch is used to differentiate word meanings. For example, in Mandarin
Chinese, the syllable ma said with a steady high tone means 'mother', but said
with a falling tone it means 'to scold'. Tone languages represent 60%-70% of the
world's 6,000 languages; about 20% of them have tones that sound very similar to
each other and are difficult for non-native speakers to distinguish. More and
more people around the world are learning tone languages because of
globalization, international business, migration, and cross-cultural
communications. In the United States, the number of college students studying
Chinese alone was over 61,000 as of 2013, and the number is likely to surpass
134,000 by 2050. As the economy of the United States has become increasingly
international, the demand for foreign language proficiency is stronger and
stronger, and many less commonly taught tone languages such as Vietnamese and
Thai have attracted a large number of learners. However, learning a tone
language is challenging. Research has shown that, in general, people have
difficulties distinguishing and pronouncing tones in a foreign language and that
this hinders cross-cultural communication, as miscommunication arises due to
mispronunciation. Thus, better learning of tone languages would help the
American business community in trade with China and other areas where tone
languages are spoken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is the
process for learning tones in Cantonese, a language with tones that are
difficult for non-native speakers to distinguish. Specifically, this project
aims to investigate whether non-native speakers can benefit from providing tone
marks, a set of symbols to show pitch contour, in learning to distinguish and
produce Cantonese tones. The research will be conducted in 3 locations: the
United States, Thailand and Hong Kong, where native speakers of American
English, Mandarin, Thai, and Cantonese are easily found. In the United States,
native speakers of American English and native speakers of Mandarin will
participate in a listening-based tone learning experiment to learn to hear and
produce the contrasts of Cantonese tones with or without the help of tone marks.
Although both Cantonese and Mandarin are varieties of Chinese, they have
different tone systems. While Mandarin has four tones (high, mid rising, low-
dipping and high falling), Cantonese has six (high, mid, low, high-rising, low-
rising and low falling). Studies have shown that Mandarin speakers have
difficulties learning Cantonese tones. The same experiment will be conducted in
Thailand with native speakers of Thai. Native speakers of Cantonese in Hong Kong
will participate in the experiment to provide a comparison case. The
investigators will assess whether the addition of tone marks can result in
substantial improvement in distinguishing and producing Cantonese tones by the
non-native speakers. The investigators will also assess whether people from
different language backgrounds exhibit different learning patterns and whether
they can achieve native-like results. The findings from this research will
provide insight into how foreign language learners integrate visual and auditory
information during non-native sound learning. The results will also show how
human beings use visual and auditory information in speech processing in
general. This study will also have the potential to improve the teaching of tone
languages. If tone marks are proven to be helpful, they can easily be included
in teaching materials and used as a teaching method for better tone-learning
outcomes.