* 1524917
* The Innovative Science Teaching Institute at Broward College: A College-Wide Effort to Improve Student Success, Learning, and Minority Achievement in Introductory Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Michael Pullin, Broward College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 418,834.00

This is a 2-year pilot of an institutional transformation program. The pilot
will prepare 6 full-time STEM faculty and 10 part-time adjunct STEM instructors
to shift to evidence-based teaching. The 6 faculty will redesign their courses
during a 6-week summer professional development institute. The new innovative
approaches to teaching science courses will be disseminated to&lt;br/&gt;10
adjunct faculty, also through the use of summer workshops. A particular strength
of the project is its unique theory of change that includes the part-time
adjunct instructors as a central element of its transformation plan. This
college already provides professional development opportunities to adjunct
instructors through the Adjunct Faculty Institute. Because many community
colleges depend significantly on part-time adjunct instructors, this model is
important to develop and investigate. The participating faculty and instructors
will be supported by learning assistants. The learning assistants will be drawn
from former students who have already earned their degrees and are working as
tutors at the Broward Academic Success Center. The work will be guided by an
advisory committee that includes external experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be assessed to determine the impact of the course redesign effort
on student success and student learning. The project will also investigate how
changes in student behaviors and attitudes are related to improved learning and
grades and how those relationships vary with the type of undergraduate student.