* 1525086
* A CEREUS (Consortium Exchanging Research Experiences for Undergraduate Students) Approach to Assessing Ecological Responses in the Southern Appalachians to Environmental Change
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Anna Hiatt, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 67,617.00

Phenology, the study of seasonal biological events, tracks the effects of both
year to year climate variability and long-term environmental change on both
local and global ecology. It has considerable potential for serving as a base
for research studies by undergraduate classes and developing cross-campus
studies. Several recent studies, including the President's Council of Advisors
on Science and Technology (2014), and Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education (a 2011 document representing the views of over 500 biology faculty
and administrators) cite the importance of undergraduate research for retaining
science majors and helping students better understand key concepts and develop
crucial competencies. Four institutions, the University of North Carolina at
Asheville, Appalachian State University, East Tennessee State University, and
Warren Wilson College, are combining forces to create common gardens and to
develop modules that can guide students' research studies to address potential
impacts of global change at multiple levels of the biological hierarchy, from
genes to ecosystems. The cooperating institutions are unique in character,
diverse in their student bodies, and located in varying climate zones. The
project will contribute to our knowledge about ecological issues and will expand
the ways in which institutions can combine forces to increase the STEM knowledge
and competencies of their students. Environmental change issues to be
investigated include monitoring effects of invasive exotic removal techniques on
herbs, shrubs, vines, and trees within the areas studied (studies for lower
division courses), and exploring questions about the spread of potentially
invasive exotic plants, using a combination of GIS (Global Information Systems)
mapping, herbarium collections, and online databases (upper division courses).
The collaborating institutions will create and beta-test modules, identify and
mitigate barriers to successful implementation of curricular changes, and
disseminate curricular changes. The modules will have a direct impact on the
learning of over 2000 undergraduates per year, including non-STEM majors. They
will be developed and partially administered by undergraduate and graduate
research students, and will be instrumental in developing pedagogical expertise
for faculty members. The ability of modules to impart botanical knowledge while
encouraging higher-order cognitive processes, advancing quantitative literacy,
teaching analytical techniques, honing scientific communication skills,
cultivating positive student attitudes towards plants and STEM, and improving
persistence and graduation in STEM majors will be assessed using a mixed method
approach (quantitative and qualitative data collection). Results will begin to
document the effects of global change on an understudied but important bioregion
while developing a future workforce with solid STEM training. This project is
funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education, in support of efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.