* 1525047
* EAGER: Testing the Roles of Zygotic Selection and Sperm Competition in Transmission Bias in Astyanax
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Richard Borowsky, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

It has been accepted that the characteristics of sperm are determined by the
diploid genotype of the male producing them. However, recent and unexpected
findings indicate that the phenotype of a sperm cell may also be influenced by
its own genotype. This innovative project examines the degree to which the
haploid genotypes of sperm cells affect their individual characteristics and the
relative importance of sperm competition versus selection post-fertilization in
causing biases in transmission of alleles from one generation to the next. It
will provide basic information to illuminate a previously unsuspected but
potentially important avenue for natural selection in evolution. The expected
results have the potential to open up an important new line of research in sperm
biology. They are expected to have broad implications in developmental biology,
evolutionary biology, and for improvements in reporductive technologies in
humans and domestic animals.

This research investigates the epistatic interactions among genes observable in
hybrids between two incipient species of freshwater fish (Astyanax spp.).
Previous work has shown that sperm from hybrid males pass along biased subsets
of alleles and allelic combinations derived from unlinked genes. This
observation suggested the hypothesis that the phenotypes of individual sperm (in
this case fertilization efficiency) are determined by their individual
genotypes, i.e., the probability that a package gets delivered depends upon what
it contains. Consistent with this hypothesis are preliminary studies that show
that sperm subpopulations - defined by differences in swimming ability or by
their response to a chemical challenge - differ significantly in allelic
content. This research tests whether the observed transmission biases are indeed
caused by sperm competition or whether there is a contribution from zygotic
selection, post fertilization. Single sperm will be genotyped from embryos
formed using intracytoplasmic sperm injection. This will allow different sub-
populations of sperm (e.g. slow versus fast swimmers) to be compared for allelic
content. Additionally, the offspring of hybrid X non-hybrid individuals will be
genotyped, allowing for the detection of transmission biases. The hypothesis
predicts that biases will be restricted to families derived from hybrid males
but not from hybrid females.