* 1525316
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Cytoskeletal Dynamics on the Mechanical Behaviors of Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Michael Murrell, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2018
* USD 266,983.00

Cells actively change their shape during essential life processes, from cell
division to migration. Their ability to do so depends upon their mechanical
properties and their ability to generate mechanical forces, which are mediated
by the internal scaffolding of the cell (cytoskeleton). Far from a static
structure, the cytoskeleton is highly dynamic, as it is constantly assembled and
disassembled, yet maintains the shape of the cell continuously. Without
precedent in modern engineering, little is known regarding how the internal
dynamics of assembly and disassembly within this material impacts the mechanical
properties of the material itself. Nor is it understood how cells use this
relationship to generate forces and change its shape, as occurs throughout its
lifetime. To explore these relationships, the research team will engineer
simplified, non-living versions of cells where the internal dynamics of the
cytoskeleton can be controlled precisely and its impact on mechanics and "cell"
shape can be measured quantitatively. In parallel, they will use computational
simulation to uncover how the modulation of internal dynamics manifests in
mechanical changes of the cytoskeleton, providing insight into the development
of new biologically-inspired materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The F-actin
cytoskeleton provides the structural and mechanical support that maintains cell
shape and mediates force production during essential life processes including
cell division and migration. The F-actin cytoskeleton is also highly dynamic,
constantly assembling and disassembling, renewing itself in minutes. However,
how the renewal of the F-actin cytoskeleton (turnover) impacts the time-
dependent mechanical properties of the cell, and its capacity to generate
mechanical forces is uncertain. Also uncertain, is how these mechanical changes
in the F-actin cytoskeleton regulate the dynamics of cell shape change.
Connecting the dynamics of F-actin turnover to the mechanical behaviors of the
cell has been difficult because the biochemical factors that control turnover
are regulated internally through complex and overlapping pathways. To reduce
this complexity, the research team plans to reproduce shape changes within
simplified, biomimetic cells in vitro, engineered from purified proteins and
lipids, whose biochemical composition is controlled precisely. With this
"bottom-up" approach, the complicating influence of biochemical and genetic
regulation by living cells is eliminated, facilitating the determination of a
quantitative relationship between F-actin turnover, and the resultant mechanical
and morphological changes in the "cell". In parallel, they plan to conduct
computational simulations to determine the molecular mechanisms by which the
kinetics of F-actin turnover influence cytoskeletal mechanics, force production,
and the experimentally observed changes in cell shape.