* 1525056
* Gateways-ND: Advancing Learner-Focused Instruction to Catalyze Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Jared Ladbury, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,632,673.00

This project, "Gateways-ND: Advancing Learner-Focused Instruction to Catalyze
Student Success," will improve student learning by implementing an innovative
and comprehensive model for the professional development of faculty and
instructional staff at the college level. Project goals are to increase
instructor use of evidence-based active-learning strategies and analytics that
increase teaching effectiveness, to enhance student-learning outcomes, to
increase retention in STEM fields, and to improve student attitudes toward STEM
learning. The project will significantly improve the understanding and
effectiveness of 150 instructional staff at North Dakota State University (NDSU)
who, during the project period alone, will support over 12,500 first-year
students in first-year STEM courses. Changing the nature of teaching and
learning at NDSU will have a broad impact on the state and beyond by preparing
future graduates with the STEM knowledge and abilities needed to meet state
employment needs and able to grapple effectively with important economic and
social issues that have an impact on North Dakota and the nation, such as oil
and gas exploration, health care, and
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gateways-ND will significantly improve the
culture of STEM Education at North Dakota State University (NDSU), strengthen
faculty teaching skills, and increase student learning outcomes and retention by
providing professional development workshops, faculty learning communities,
resources, and support for the faculty who teach gateway STEM courses. Faculty
will learn to use proven active, collaborative, learner-focused pedagogy, and to
utilize robust data analytics about student learning to guide their teaching.
Faculty members will participate in a two-year professional development (PD)
series, including a one-week intensive teaching workshop, monthly Faculty
Learning Community (FLC) meetings, training in use of data analytics, mid-year
follow-up, and a second year of advanced professional development. Gateways-ND
research activities will examine relationships between high-impact teaching
practices and improved student outcomes (i.e., learning outcomes, retention in
STEM majors, and attitudes toward STEM learning). Project-based research will
also examine faculty beliefs regarding teaching strategies before and after
participation in professional development. Institutional cultural transformation
will impact over 12,500 incoming students enrolling in gateway courses during
the 5-year grant period.