* 1525932
* AF: Small: Fair Division at Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Ariel Procaccia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The mathematical study of fair division dates back to the 1940s. Nowadays the
literature encompasses provably fair solutions for a wide variety of problems,
many of them relevant to society at large. But, to date, very few fair division
methods have been implemented. Building on its rich history, the field of fair
division is poised to impact society on a grander scale, for example, via
Spliddit (www.spliddit.org), a fair division website created by the PI. The
overarching theme of this proposal is that the advent of fairness at scale gives
rise to novel algorithmic challenges, revolving around the design of methods
that are practical, widely applicable, and provably fair. Solutions to these
challenges call for a synthesis of ideas from theoretical computer science and
microeconomic theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of Spliddit plays a
key role in the project: Insights arising from the research will be implemented
to improve Spliddit's publicly accessible methods. Moreover, new applications
will be added in order to further widen the website's reach. The project also
includes plans to enhance Spliddit's educational content through the creation of
instructive videos, thereby making the website a valuable learning and teaching
resource. Finally, the project contains plans to make a societal impact that
extends beyond Spliddit. In particular, the PI will work with California school
districts to develop a fair method for allocating unused
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a technical level, the thrust of the project is
twofold. (i) Dividing indivisible goods: One of five applications currently
available on Spliddit, the division of indivisible goods is a notoriously
difficult problem from a fair division perspective. To obtain a provably fair
method, Spliddit relies on the notion of maximin share (MMS) guarantee. While
exact MMS allocations may be infeasible, the project explores several notions of
approximation. The project also explores the feasibility boundary of MMS
allocations. Foundational algorithmic challenges lie at the heart of these
research directions. (ii) Sharing credit: Spliddit's credit calculator fairly
determines the contribution of each individual to a group project, using a
method developed by de Clippel et al. Perhaps the method's most compelling
guarantee is impartiality: a player's report does not affect her own share of
the credit. Dividing credit for a scientific paper, with the goal of fairly
ordering the authors by contribution, is an especially attractive potential
application; but there is no guarantee that players will not be able to affect
their position in the resultant ranking. The project aims to circumvent this
obstacle via randomization and approximation.