* 1525915
* Collaborative Research: Cretaceous Vertebrates from Madagascar: A Window into the Biogeographic and Plate Tectonic History of Gondwana
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Patrick O'Connor, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 39,091.00

Cretaceous Vertebrates from Madagascar: A Window into the Biogeographic and
Plate Tectonic History of Gondwana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David Krause,
Stoneybrook, EAR-1528273&lt;br/&gt;Patrick O'Conner, Ohio University,
EAR-1525915&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is jointly funded by the
Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology Program (EAR/GEO) and the Africa, Near East
&amp; South Asia Program/Office of International Science and Engineering
(OD).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Explanation&lt;br/&gt;The latter half of the Mesozoic Era witnessed profound
changes in the configuration of landmasses that comprised the southern
supercontinent Gondwana, with dramatic consequences for the associated
vertebrate faunas. Madagascar lay near the center of Gondwana as it fragmented
into its component parts. This proposal seeks to continue a project designed to
discover and describe vertebrate fossils in a sequence of Cretaceous strata on
the island, to analyze their paleobiology, to place them in phylogenetic and
geologic context, and to employ them in testing biogeographic and plate tectonic
hypotheses related to Gondwana as a whole and Madagascar in particular. PIs work
in the Cretaceous of Madagascar is only at the very beginning of reaching its
potential. To date, they have quintupled the previously known species diversity
of Late Cretaceous vertebrates from the island and have discovered some of the
most complete and spectacularly preserved specimens of Late Cretaceous
vertebrates from the southern hemisphere and, indeed, the world. Many new taxa
have been named and described. But much remains to be done in the vast expanses
of paleontologically and geologically unexplored Cretaceous rocks of Madagascar.
Many taxa are known by only fragmentary remains; many others are still to be
discovered. With continued work, PIs are confident that Madagascar's Cretaceous
vertebrate fauna will become one of the best known and best contextualized from
the southern hemisphere and one of the primary standards against which other
Gondwanan faunas of Cretaceous age are compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;PIs propose to continue collecting terrestrial and
freshwater vertebrate fossils of latest Cretaceous age from the Berivotra Study
Area of the Mahajanga Basin of northwestern Madagascar, which continues to
produce exquisite material of poorly known taxa and specimens of new taxa.
Although they have published many detailed anatomical, functional, and
phylogenetic analyses of taxa known from this basin, many more have been
initiated and remain to be completed (in particular, on albuloid and amiid
fishes, crocodyliforms, pterosaurs, sauropod and abelisauroid theropod
dinosaurs, birds and other paravian theropods, and mammals). Some of this work
will entail histological sampling, thus enabling a comparative analysis of
ecosystem-scale, inter-element histological variation within single vertebrate
skeletons and testing of hypotheses related to possible responses and growth
history adaptations of taxa that are phylogenetically constrained, but which
exhibit a wide array of morphological and functional specializations.
&lt;br/&gt;PIs also propose to continue developing newly discovered field areas
in the Mahajanga Basin, which are yielding new taxa of roughly the same age but
from different paleoenvironmental settings. Finally, they propose to expand
their efforts into the Morondava Basin of western Madagascar, where brief
expeditions in 2010 and 2012 yielded important finds and demonstrated the
potential for many more from strata older than those yielding fossils in the
Mahajanga Basin. Discoveries from these earlier horizons will provide a deeper
temporal context with which to address biogeographic and plate tectonic
hypotheses. Indeed, PIs discoveries continue to have profound implications for
the biogeographic history of the extant and extinct Malagasy fauna and for the
relative importance of dispersal and vicariance during Gondwanan fragmentation.
One of their overarching goals is to provide a key building block for
reconstructing Gondwanan biogeographic history in the form of a temporally
controlled, well-sampled vertebrate fauna from the Cretaceous of Madagascar
analyzed in a rigorous phylogenetic framework, and within the context of
accurate paleogeographic reconstructions. &lt;br/&gt;It remains a priority to
conduct detailed stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and taphonomic studies of all
sampled horizons in order to provide temporal control as well as
paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic context. More specifically, PIs propose to
conduct: (1) a comprehensive analysis of Maevarano Formation taphonomy that will
provide taxonomic summaries and maps for each major quarry, and will detail the
preservation of the Maevarano Formation?s exceptionally-preserved vertebrate
record; (2) a comprehensive report on the geochemistry and micromorphology of
exceptionally-preserved paleosols and associated fluvial sediments in the
Masorobe and Anembalemba members of the Maevarano Formation, which will provide
critical insights into paleoclimate; (3) a study focused on trace fossils
discovered in the Maevarano Formation, specifically back-filled burrows
associated with an entombed carcass (subterranean scavenging); and (4) a study
clarifying and formalizing the lithostratigraphy of Upper Cretaceous horizons in
the Morondava Basin.