* 1525109
* FIRSTS (Foundation for Increasing and Retaining STEM Students) Program: A bridge program to study the sociological development of science identities
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Sudhir Nayak, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2021
* USD 538,900.00

FIRSTS (Foundation for Increasing and Retaining STEM Students) is an extended
summer bridge program for incoming students that continues through their first
semester at college. The overall goals of this program are to help students from
underserved populations transition to the rigors of the STEM curriculum and
gather both qualitative and quantitative data on the reasons financially needy
students elect to leave STEM disciplines. Rather than simply filling content
gaps, FIRSTS will use the remediation of study skills in a interdisciplinary
summer course, extensive mentoring, and the development of a science identity to
improve success in STEM disciplines. In addition to student-focused strategies,
the program also will incorporate faculty development in the improvement of
teaching methods and mentoring through participation, training,
interdisciplinary interactions, and discussions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIRSTS
will leverage the existing college-funded programming that is focused on
predominantly underrepresented minority students from regions of historic
poverty and will carefully pilot an expansion to include School of Science
students with similar profiles. This program will deploy best practices for at-
risk students, while focusing the research on understudied questions related to
the impact of socioeconomic status, intersecting science and other identities.
As such, FIRSTS will represent the unique data-driven collaboration between the
School of Science and the School of Humanities and Social Sciences on pedagogy
and research. If successful, the data from this project will allow other
departments, colleges, and universities to incorporate a developmental
philosophy in their existing STEM retention strategies.