* 1525061
* Collaborative Research: Simulation-Based Policy Analysis for Reducing Ebola Transmission Risk in Air Travel
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Ashok Srinivasan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

When Ebola has spread widely, it is known that much of the spread is through
infected passengers that travel by air, to then spread Ebola far afield from the
site of their infection. Understanding how Ebola spreads during air travel is
critical in effectively dealing with this type of spreading. To help gain this
understanding, the researchers on this project will build fine-scale simulation
models for infection spread during air travel in order to identify the causes of
infection spread, as well as procedures and policies that will limit its spread
without major disruption to air travel. The super-computing based applications
that researchers propose to create will provide useful insight to decision
makers - such as medical responders, policy makers etc. dealing with Ebola
spread during air travel. The models are intended to be applied at the level of
individual flights, so that the spread of Ebola can be understood for a
particular flight while it is in the air, and procedures developed that will
limit the infection risk for everyone on that flight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
air-transport model, which operates at the level of individual flights, will be
integrated with a phylogeographic model (that captures the historical processes
responsible for the existing geographic distributions of individuals) in order
to analyze the spread of infection between geographic regions when potentially
infected populations are being transported into, out of and across regions, by
air travel. The result of this work will help identify policy as well as
operational solutions to reduce the risk of a pandemic, and also set up scalable
software capabilities on a readily available infrastructure that can be used to
address the current Ebola pandemic, as well as respond quickly to new
emergencies. This proposal integrates the PIs combined expertise in modeling
human movement in planes, modeling the spread of infections, building a software
infrastructure for decision support, and large-scale parallel computing. The
models will be integrated using the Complex Systems framework (CSF, developed by
a member of the proposing team) that provides a comprehensive decision support
environment for analysis. Through this project, and in addition, CSF?s
scalability will be enhanced to petascale machines, and methods will be
developed to reduce the large computational cost of these simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this work will provide valuable insight to
policy makers. In particular, fine grain questions regarding plane travel can be
asked and answered, such as: (a) the risk air travel has on disease spread to
neighboring regions (b) can a change to another type of a plane lead to reduced
risk of transmission? (c) Do certain seating arrangement or changes to boarding
and disembarkation processes reduce the likelihood of transmission?