* 1525847
* Flying With Swallows: A Project to Improve STEM Education at Moreno Valley College and Beyond
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,12/31/2019
* Diane Marsh, Riverside Community College District/Moreno Valley Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 12/31/2019
* USD 249,999.00

Moreno Valley College of the Riverside Community College District has received
an NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human Resources
Design and Development tier award for a project entitled Flying With Swallows,
which will integrate undergraduate research experiences and activities into the
curricula of Biology and Chemistry courses at the institution. The subject of
the multi-disciplinary research studies will be cliff swallows (Petrochelidon
pyrrhonota) that migrate to the area from South or Central America to breed. The
abundance of the swallows on campus during the breeding season will engage the
interest of the student community. Flying With Swallows will follow two lines of
investigation. The Ecosystem Survey will monitor the presence of all birds, with
an emphasis on cliff swallows, as well as mammals, reptiles, and insects on the
campus. This year-round data collection will generate a dynamic "living" map
available on the college website. The Ecosystem Investigation will study the
environmental impact of human activity on the swallow population. The swallows
will be used as monitoring organisms in biological magnification studies.
Students will conduct analyses of a variety of samples for the presence of
pollutants and potentially pathogenic microorganisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flying With Swallows is based on the research literature
demonstrating that undergraduate research experiences have a positive impact on
the persistence of STEM students to graduation. The FWS research experience will
be aligned with the expected student learning outcomes for the biology and
chemistry courses to ensure that students are acquiring the necessary
disciplinary content knowledge, while enhancing their global awareness and
critical thinking and communication skills. Project evaluation will include
monitoring student progress, as well as surveys and interview procedures to
inform future development of the project. The results of these evaluations will
expand knowledge of best practices for the infusion of undergraduate research
into the curricula of colleges and universities nationwide, but will be
particularly relevant for the integration of undergraduate research into the
curricula of community colleges, Hispanic Serving Institutions, and other
Minority Serving Institutions.