* 1525472
* TWC: Small: Memory Analysis and Machine-Code Verification Techniques for Multiprocessor Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Warren Hunt, Jr., University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,999.00

Due to the ever-increasing complexity of both hardware and software, it is
becoming harder to ensure the reliability of high-level programs. The project
will develop tools that permit programmers to mechanically verify software via
machine-code analysis. The proposed research will similarly advance the science
of software analysis, together with the development of rigorous tools capable of
performing industrial software verification. The tools are actively being used
by industry for hardware specification and analysis. The proposed research will
similarly advance the science of software analysis, together with the
development of rigorous tools capable of performing industrial software
verification. The tools are important in particular for verifying security
properties of systems such as medical, financial, and transportation systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project extends existing specification and analysis
efforts by using the specification of the x86 processor's instruction-set
architecture (ISA) to mechanically verify user-level machine-code programs. The
specification is extended to allow verification of multiprocessor/multi-threaded
programs and operating system code. The goal is a capability to ensure that
programs hosted on multiprocessors are correct with respect to behavior,
security, and resource requirements. The focus is on a single machine-code
model, since that can be sufficient for analyzing all programs, irrespective of
the source language, as long as they compile down to the supported processor
platform. This eliminates the need to build, maintain, and validate different
verification frameworks targeting software from different sources. Machine code
executes on contemporary computer systems with complex memory hierarchies:
memory semantics are complicated by caches, memory protection mechanisms,
multiprocessor/multithread memory sharing, store buffers, transactional memory
mechanisms, memory synchronization mechanisms, and memory update delays. This
complexity leads to important memory-related research issues that will be
addressed in order to reason about machine-code program execution. Examples are
the correctness of address translation (including access rights management) and
the formalization of a realistic memory consistency model. This goes well beyond
capabilities provided by existing static-analysis tools in order to address
these sorts of problems.