* 1525486
* SHF: Small: Effects of Noise in Ultimate CMOS:  Modeling and Simulation Frameworks, Noise-Immune Circuit Designs, and Experimental Validation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Alexander Zaslavsky, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 365,637.00

With the recent advances in integrated circuit technology, devices and their
operating voltages will continue to shrink. This aggressive scaling trend has
the consequence of drastically reducing the total number of electrons on each
circuit node, making the circuit much more susceptible to thermal noise making
new approaches to estimating noise behavior in these circuits necessary. Also
the need for error mitigation resulting from such noise is especially pressing
for logic circuits operating using very low supply voltages, designed for ultra-
low power applications, where higher error rates are expected due to the reduced
noise margins. The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students,
include members of underrepresented groups and will thus help enlarge the
workforce in information and communication
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the noise immunity
of ultimately scaled silicon based logic through three interrelated thrusts. The
first thrust will focus on the experimentally validated prediction of thermally
induced and voltage-noise induced error rates in these circuits. The second
thrust involves development of a new simulation framework for analyzing
transient effects due to noise. This new framework will be capable of capturing
rare failure-inducing events 1 to 3 orders of magnitude faster than conventional
simulation techniques. Based on the findings obtained from these two initial
thrusts, new noise-immune logic gate structures that confer additional noise
margin will be developed. Moreover, these results will be used to design a new
synthesis tool flow, that automatically determines where and how to optimally
use these noise-immune logic gates to reach desired delay, power, and
reliability requirements.