* 1525372
* SHF: Small: Memory Persistency: programming paradigms for byte-addressable, non-volatile memories
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Thomas Wenisch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,996.00

For over a decade, researchers in industry and academia have sought new
techniques to store data so vast amounts of data can be stored inexpensively and
accessed quickly. Today, computer systems typically have three kinds of data
storage: rotating disks for cheap-but-slow, long-term, bulk data storage; main
memory for fast, but expensive access to data applications are actively using;
and FLASH, which behaves much like rotating disks, but offers somewhat faster
access at a higher price per bit. However, we are now at the cusp of
availability of new storage technologies that offer performance close to that of
main memory, but can store data durably?that is, when the computer is powered
off?at a cost per bit between Flash and main memory. These new non-volatile
memory devices add a new layer to the computer system data storage hierarchy
between memory and FLASH. Within a decade, systems incorporating these new non-
volatile memories will become widely available. Indeed, as cost and
manufacturing processes improve, such memories may become the preferred storage
for small devices in the ``Internet of Things'' and become critical to
performance and recoverability in cloud systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new
memories open up the possibility to explore new formats and structures for
storing data across computer system power failures. Unlike disk and FLASH, data
in non-volatile memories can be accessed at very fine granularity?individual
data items (e.g., bytes)?rather than coarse-grained blocks of data. This fine-
grain access enables the development of data structures that reliably store data
even if power fails unexpectedly, but with greater performance and simplicity
than data storage on disk or FLASH. Existing computer main memory systems have
not been designed with durability across power failures in mind, since the data
is lost when power fails, and therefore do not try to maintain any specific
order in which data is written to memory. However, controlling this order of
writing data is critical to allowing a system to recover and continue operation
if power fails while writes are in progress. This research project will develop
new ways for programmers to efficiently and easily design high-performance data
structures that can recover from unexpected failures by carefully controlling
the order in which data is recorded. The research will be performed in close
collaboration with industry, and integrated with the principal investigators?
course offerings in operating systems and parallel computer architecture.