* 1525077
* Collaborative Research: PROfessional Development and Uptake through Collaborative Teams (PRODUCT) Supporting Inquiry Based Learning in Undergraduate Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Timothy Archie, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2021
* USD 605,386.00

Education research continues to produce evidence that teaching methods that use
active-learning strategies yield improved learning outcomes and student success
across the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines.
Yet, many college mathematics classes are not yet taught using such strategies.
To address this problem, the project, "PROfessional Development and Uptake
through Collaborative Teams (PRODUCT): Supporting Inquiry-Based Learning (IBL)
in Undergraduate Mathematics through Workshops, Research and Capacity-Building",
is designed to increase institutional capacity to offer professional development
for instructors. The active learning strategy of focus, known as "inquiry-based
learning" (IBL), places emphasis on student creation, exploration,
communication, collaboration, and experimentation with mathematical concepts,
under the mentorship and guidance of an instructor. Building directly on
previously funded work that produced and studied a successful professional
development workshop model, this project will develop multiple new teams to
conduct workshops and outreach activities on IBL teaching strategies (known as a
"train the trainers" propagation model). Research conducted alongside the
workshop activities will contribute to knowledge about effective strategies for
encouraging use of active learning approaches such as IBL, and for supporting
instructors as they learn to apply and adapt these approaches in their own
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRODUCT will conduct 12 four-day intensive IBL
workshops, as well as 15 short workshops and five Professional Development (PD)
Preparatory Meetings, and will host a Professional Development Summit for
mathematics faculty developers. Through these activities, PRODUCT will directly
provide professional development for 320 undergraduate mathematics faculty,
adapt and improve IBL PD materials, develop multiple new teams of faculty
developers who will be prepared to engage additional faculty in the future, and
develop a framework for building professional development capacity. A research-
with-evaluation study will provide formative feedback, study the process and
outcomes for development of the professional development teams, gather data to
benchmark workshops led by new teams against a model known to be effective, and
investigate the classroom practices of workshop participants to understand how
the professional development experience shapes their teaching. The project will
produce new knowledge about scaling up professional development programs through
a careful and collaborative process to prepare teams of faculty developers and
provide them with well-supported leadership experiences.