* 1525590
* Testing the Impact of a Multi-Year, Curriculum-based Undergraduate Research Experience (MY-CURE) in the Geosciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Joseph Allen, Concord University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2019
* USD 176,007.00

This project will examine how an authentic, multi-year research experience
embedded within a 5-course sequence impacts the progressive professional
preparation of undergraduate geoscience students. Multiple evidence-based
studies published in the STEM education literature continue to affirm that
participation in undergraduate research results in numerous cognitive, personal,
and professional gains among STEM students. Recently emerging results suggest
that longer-term experiences increase these benefits and are needed for more
sophisticated skills to mature. It is challenging, however, to offer long-term
experiences to large numbers of students via commonly used approaches. For
example, curriculum-embedded research is typically short term, and longer-term
independent study projects are often too resource intensive to reach beyond a
select number of students. The investigators will test a more scalable model
that provides a long-term unified experience while simultaneously reaching a
broader cross section of students. The project team will immerse all geoscience
majors in a thematic multi-year research project embedded within the core
curriculum, including a summer geology field course. The investigators will
examine the development of (1) research skills such as data acquisition and
analysis, (2) personal gains such as student confidence and the ability to think
like a scientist, and (3) communication skills to both scientists and the
general public. The latter addresses both oral and written communication as well
as the emerging use of social media for science communication. By carefully
following student progress over 2 years, the team expects to capture when and
how these skills develop and mature and what aspects of the experience are key
to this development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The authentic research experience
focuses on (1) the rupture dynamics of earthquakes in and the longer-term
rheological evolution of an exhumed Proterozoic age shear zone in the Colorado
Rockies, and (2) the petrology of the rocks which host the shear zone. The field
area is studied during an existing summer field course. Students will begin a
project in their first sophomore-level geoscience course and continue with the
same research project for 5 consecutive courses culminating at the summer field
course. The student projects will advance the understanding of physical and
chemical processes associated with earthquake rupture at the multi-kilometer
scale near the base of the seismogenic zone where large earthquakes nucleate.
This project will be based at a primarily undergraduate institution with an
unusually large percentage of first-generation and low-income students in rural
Appalachia. This will allow the study of outcomes achieved by an underserved
population of students and compare them to national studies with different
student demographics. Since the curriculum incorporates the development of
communication skills, additional impacts include preparing the next generation
of scientists to effectively convey science to the general public through face-
to-face outreach and the use of social media.