* 1525476
* STARSS: Small: Collaborative: Zero-Power Dynamic Signature for Trust Verification of Passive Sensors and Tags
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 153,332.00

As passive tagging technologies like RFID become more economical and ubiquitous,
it can be envisioned that in the future, millions of sensors integrated with
these tags could become an integral part of the next generation of smart
infrastructure and the overall concept of internet-of-things. As a result,
securing these passive assets against data theft and counterfeiting would become
a priority, reinforcing the importance of the proposed dynamic authentication
techniques. This research project investigates dynamic hardware-software
authentication techniques on passive RFID sensors and tags based on zero-power
timing and synchronization circuits.

This project explores dynamic anti-counterfeiting and hardware assurance
techniques based on zero-power timers. The operation of these timers are based
on physics of quantum-mechanical tunneling of electron transport through the
oxide layer and through synthetically introduced oxide-traps. The hardware-
software authentication strategies being explored include: (1) Born-on-Date
timing strategy where the response of the timers will be synchronized across
different trusted RFID sensors/tags and any deviation from an expected response
will be used to isolate counterfeits, (2) Tamper-sensitive timing strategy where
the timer are used to detect any snooping or tampering of the trusted RFID
sensors/tags, and (3) Dynamic authentication strategy where the timers are used
to generate hashing functions that will be difficult to reverse engineer. The
project develops a cross-disciplinary educational forum between the electrical
engineers and computer scientists in the area of hardware-software trust
verification.