* 1525225
* Collaborative Research: Engaged Student Learning - Design and Development Level II: Using a Cyberlearning Environment to Improve Student Learning and Engagement in Software Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2015
* Ingrid Buckley, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 11/30/2015
* USD 89,670.00

Due to the ubiquitous nature of software in the 21st century there is a great
and increasing demand for software developers and programmers in the US. Both
Computer Science (CS) and Information Technology (IT) academicians and
practitioners agree that a comprehensive strategy to improve the number and
quality of 21st century CS/IT workforce is needed. This project will assist
colleges and universities in producing more well-qualified software developers
through the use of a cyberlearning environment that builds on and extends
WReSTT-CyLE (Web-Based Repository of Software Testing Tutorials), a
cyberlearning environment for software testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will: (1) investigate the impact that students' use of WReSTT-CyLE, at a
cross-section of academic institutions, has on their software testing skills;
(2) develop a theoretical framework of learning and engagement strategies that
best support improvement of students' knowledge and skills in software courses
for diverse student groups; (3) transform WReSTT-CyLE into a domain-independent
cyberlearning environment for software and programming courses (SEP-CyLE) and
repeat (1) above using SEP-CyLE for software courses; and (4) conduct biannual
workshops to expose instructors to how SEP-CyLE may be used in the classroom to
support pedagogy. The research in (1) will include mixed methods studies with
both qualitative and quantitative components.