* 1525673
* Redesigning General Chemistry- Implementation of Emporium Learning for Enhancing Basic General Chemistry Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,10/31/2019
* Sayo Fakayode, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 10/31/2019
* USD 582,607.00

In an effort to address the national need to improve student learning in
chemistry, this IUSE: EHR project will adapt the Emporium Learning model, which
has led to increased retention for students through early mathematics courses
and first-year chemistry courses. This pedagogy replaces the traditional
classroom with a learning center featuring interactive software and on-site,
personalized assistance from instructors. The project will expand on a pilot
study that resulted in higher grades in the first semester of general chemistry
for Emporium students (40% made a grade of A) compared to students in
traditional courses (5% made a grade of A) at North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University (NC A&amp;T). The impact of this curriculum will also
be studied at North Carolina Central University, another Historically Black
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After an initial assessment, the PI team will
identify core concepts and algorithmic skills in general chemistry that each
student must master. The Emporium students will then be provided with the
results of this assessment. During class time they will use an online system to
consider examples and do practice problems in modules covering topics that they
have not mastered, with immediate instructor feedback. This project will
investigate whether or not the Emporium model will improve students' deeper
learning in gateway chemistry courses. Student in Emporium courses and in
traditional courses will take common exams, including standardized pre-and post-
course tests, and provide feedback through surveys. Formative evaluation will
serve to uncover unexpected barriers and identify changes and improvements that
should be implemented. Summative evaluation will provide information about
whether the intended outcomes have been achieved and what, if any, unintended
outcomes have resulted from the project. The results of this work, including
learning materials will be disseminated through a digital newsletter to other
Historically Black institutions and propagated through annual Emporium Learning
faculty workshops hosted at NC A&amp;T. Results will also be presented at
national and regional meetings of the American Chemical Society and be submitted
to the Journal of Chemical Education.