* 1525229
* Collaborative Research: Understanding free-surface scattering in an anisotropic medium with active and passive seismic methods at the Homestake Mine, South Dakota
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2017
* Victor Tsai, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2017
* USD 15,878.00

Seismologists and exploration geophysicists utilize what are commonly called
seismic waves to image the Earth?s interior. In fact, the major tool used for
oil and gas exploration today is the seismic method, which use seismic waves
comparable to sound waves to image the earth. How seismic waves propagate is
also of fundamental importance to understanding of how earthquakes work. The
standard models used to describe seismic wave propagation in both the academic
world of seismology and the oil and gas industry make two simplifying
assumptions that will be tested in this project: (1) the Earth?s surface acts
like a mirror when seismic waves interact with it, and (2) material properties
are isotropic meaning physical properties that control seismic wave propagation
are not dependent upon the direction a wave is propagating. Both assumptions are
known to be frequently wrong, but unraveling the when and how has proven
experimentally difficult. This is an experimental proposal to address some of
the shortcomings in previous data. The experiment is possible only because of
the availability of a unique facility that has become accessible in the past few
years called the Sanford Underground Laboratory in Lead, South Dakota, that is
located within the Homestake Mine. Homestake was once the deepest gold mine in
North America, but has now been converted to a facility for underground science.
The project builds on an existing collaboration between physicists at the
University of Minnesota and geophysicists at the California Institute of
Technology and Indiana University. That group is currently operating a unique
three-dimensional passive seismic array with sensors in the underground and on
the surface. This project extends that project by adding a component of ?active
source? data acquisition. That is, the current array is much like a passive
sonar array listening for transients (earthquakes and mining explosions) and
measuring background noise fields. This project centers on the use of
controlled, manmade sources to supplement the listening mode. The active source
data will provide strong added constraints on the physics of the process not
possible with the listening mode alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
the reseachers will collect three types of active source experimental data. (1)
A novel experimental geometry called Horizontal Seismic Profile (HSP). This is a
variant of a method commonly used in oil and gas exploration with vertical
boreholes, but in this case the borehole is human sized and approximately
horizontal. (2) an upside down reflection survey. This is much like reflection
profiling using in the oil and gas industry, but the data will be collected in a
mine drift to study how waves are reflected by the free surface. (3) Is a
surface active source experiment where they will use an accelerated weight drop
source to put a controlled pulse into the ground to be recorded by the
operational passive array instruments. Analysis of these data will center on
addressing two fundamental questions about the nature of seismic wave
propagation. (1) How are seismic waves scattered by Earth?s free surface and the
related complexity exploration geophysicists commonly call the weathered layer?
(2) How good are existing theoretical models of anisotropic wave propagation and
related models for how heterogeneity at scales smaller than a wavelength yield
anisotropic behavior? The weathered layer problem will be addressed directly by
the upside down reflection survey and HSP experiments and indirectly by analysis
of passive array particle motions. The active source data will be modeling using
a Kirchhoff integration forward modeling method using high resolution topography
and a 3D geologic model under development by Sanford Underground Laboratory. The
combined active and passive data will yield what is likely the most
comprehensive data set per unit volume ever assembled to understand the scale
dependence of anisotropy. A critical reason is the outstanding control provided
by the observations collected by the mine and now being assembled for the
research community by the Sanford Underground Laboratory. The HSP data will
provide clean signals isolated from the free surface effect. Anisotropic
parameters from these data will be measured using phase velocity measurements
for P and the split S modes qS1, and qS2. Particle motion methods will provide
an independent measure of S wave splitting. The surface source data will provide
a dense volume sampling of azimuth dependence of propagation speeds. These data
will be used to test if the entire rock volume of Homestake can be described as
a uniform anisotropic medium or needs to be treated as a heterogeneous,
anisotropic medium.