* 1525217
* Collaborative Research: Engaging Introductory Astronomy Students in Authentic Research through Citizen Science
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Elizabeth Wehner, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 5,076.00

This project will build upon the infrastructure of Zooniverse.org to create
authentic research experiences for introductory astronomy students. Education
research indicates that including authentic research in science classes improves
attitudes towards science and scientists in a diverse cross-section of students.
The curriculum materials will be tested and refined at a broad spectrum of
institutional settings before dissemination.

Introductory astronomy generally provides students little insight into the
realities of being a scientist. This project will address this deficiency by
introducing an authentic research experience for students into the astronomy for
non-majors curriculum. It will utilize the classification and meta-data
exploration capabilities of the Zooniverse platform. The proposed course
curriculum will support students in building foundational research skills and
practices through a series of in-class activities and a semester-long group
research project. These activities will employ a state-of-the-art online
platform to explore data collection, manipulation, and interpretation within the
core topics in the curriculum. The project team will assess student learning and
attitudinal gains through traditional in-class testing and conceptual
questioning that is embedded within the Zooniverse online environment, as well
as student interviews. This includes assessing the impact of the research
experience on students' understanding of the nature of science, conceptual
astronomy learning gains (e.g. the Zooniverse Astronomical Concept Survey,
Prather et al, 2013), and interest in pursuing a STEM major. The team will also
assess the impact of different implementations of the online platform as well as
the ease of implementation of the new curricular materials in a variety of
institutional settings, course structures, and content focus. They will use the
insight gained to develop the most effective curricular and training materials.
All curricular materials, instructional guides, online Zooniverse tools, and
underlying code will be widely disseminated.