* 1525990
* CIF: Small: Advanced Ion Channel Models for Neurological Signal Processing -- Theory and Application to Brain-Computer Interfacing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Azadeh Vosoughi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 185,000.00

The investigators are studying the scientific theory and engineering
consequences of the electrical noise signals generated by neurons inside the
brain. They are developing a deeper understanding of this neuronal noise
primarily to improve brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), which enhance the quality
of life of patients with various paralyzing disabilities such as Lou Gehrig?s
disease. By understanding the statistical characteristics of the background
noise, they are able to reduce its interference with the conscious signal
generated by the brain of the paralyzed patient. This creates a much more
reliable control signal for wheelchairs, customized internet browsers, and the
home environment. In addition, the investigators are applying their advanced
neuron models to gain insight into non-diseased brain tissue and the processes
by which it creates and transmits information. This promises to have significant
implications for understanding the functioning of both natural and synthetic
neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators have
developed a novel mathematical and stochastic model for neuronal ion channels
that takes into account quantum mechanical and thermodynamic considerations. The
principle of entropy maximization applied to a population of these quantum ion
channels in thermal equilibrium explains the ubiquitous presence of the so-
called 1/f-noise in neural and electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings. The
parameters derived from these models are combined with a new signal processing
paradigm called octave-averaged spectral rectification to dramatically reduce
the interfering effect of 1/f-noise on EEG signals. As a result, the stimulus
frequencies of an experimental type of brain interface called steady-state
visual evoked potential (SSVEP) BCIs can be increased into the high-gamma band
above 30Hz. This dramatically reduces the negative side effects of these SSVEP
BCIs and makes them of practical use for the first time to paralyzed patients as
well as heads-up displays for pilots and surgeons, and high-performance game
control.