* 1525943
* AF: Small: Is the Simulation of Quantum Many-Body Systems Feasible on the Cloud?
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Dan Marinescu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2019
* USD 385,434.00

Simulating quantum mechanics with its unique effects such as superposition,
interference, and entanglement is a hard problem for classical computing systems
including supercomputers and computer clouds with a very large number of
servers. To efficiently simulate large quantum-mechanical systems using a
computer cloud one has to overcome major obstacles. This research investigates
optimal algorithms for contracting tensor networks which arising in the study of
condensed matter physics. These algorithms minimize the required communication
between the nodes of the computer cloud and exploit its hierarchical
organization. The broader research objective in this effort is to optimally
exploit the architecture of hierarchically organized systems for big data
applications that exhibit fine-grained parallelism.&lt;br/&gt;This research
project aims to find new efficient methods for simulating large quantum systems
that are important for quantum information processing, condensed matter physics,
materials science, and chemistry. Its goals are to design and implement novel
parallel and distributed simulation algorithms optimized for cloud computing
environments such as Amazon Web Services and the National Science Foundation?s
future cloud for scientific computing. The ultimate motivation of this project
is to enable researchers world-wide to significantly push the boundary in terms
of the size of quantum systems that they can simulate reliably and within a
reasonable time and with a reasonable budget. While the research mainly
concentrates on efficient algorithms and their implementation for the study of
properties of condensed matter systems, it also attempts to derive generic
strategies to other classes of applications, for instance, in artificial
intelligence and in machine learning.