* 1525601
* Building a Big Data Analytics Workforce in iSchools
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Dongwon Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 537,617.00

The significance and importance of this project resides in the introduction of
big data analytics into the education landscape. There is increasing demand for
skilled personnel in big data industries, but existing big data curricula at the
university level focus primarily on students with a strong computational
background, ignoring a large segment of students who might otherwise pursue
education and training in this vital area, but who will be faced with big data
issues in the workplace. This project aims at addressing the national demand for
professionals with knowledge in big data and broadening the pool for a big data
analytics workforce. Part of this effort will involve research as to whether the
newly developed learning modules are more effective at increasing students' big
data competencies, e.g., knowledge, skills, and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop three
innovative learning modules. These modules will be designed to: (i) utilize both
group-based and contextualized learning methods and (ii) be applicable and
accessible to students majoring in disciplines outside, but related to main-
stream computer science (e.g., iSchools). The first module will involve digital
exercises where students will be asked to develop their own narratives about the
relevance and significance of big data in solving real-life problems and will be
expected to become knowledgeable of, and proficient with, big data concepts and
applications. The second module will be more technical in nature and will allow
students to discover the efficacy of big data concepts in solving practical
problems in information security. Finally, the third module will introduce more
advanced topics in big data mining, such as examining a large amount of complex
data to unearth important patterns and knowledge, and introducing how to
interpret the results to arrive at appropriate decisions in a specific context.
Analysis of the research question surrounding the learning effectiveness will
employ quasi-experimental designs that use pretests and posttests with control
groups. Students will choose a course section without knowledge of which section
will include the new learning modules. In analyzing the data, a hierarchical
linear modeling approach will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the
intervention.