* 1525090
* NeTS: Small: Can Disaggregation and Silicon Optical Interconnect Technology Co-exist?
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Shayan Mookherjea, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 496,739.00

About one hundred billion data packets (equivalent to a few thousand
Encyclopedia Brittanicas) are transmitted every second from a typical office
building. Bottlenecks or breakdowns in modern communication networks instantly
impact air travel, healthcare, financial markets, education and entertainment,
and national security - in short, every aspect of modern life. To increase
bandwidth for the coming decade without commensurately increasing energy
consumption, engineers are now using photons (light) rather than electrons
(voltage) to carry data between computers. In the near future, photonics may
also be used to communicate between microchips inside computers, or between
microprocessors and memory. This project addresses a emerging research challenge
in ensuring the scalability, control and effective management of massive
optically-connected networks such as warehouse-sized data centers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disaggregation replaces motherboard bus architecures with
communication networks such as Infiniband and PCIe, thus enabling scalability
and controllability, but requires the network to deal with new types of data
flows that span several orders of magnitude in bandwidth and latency
requirements. These requirements are not compatible with the type of silicon
photonic chips that have been designed so far. This project will use silicon
photonics to more effectively enable disaggregation within data centers;
leveraging key strengths of optical communications compared to traditional
electronic wires: the ability of light of different colors to pass through each
other without interference, thus enabling different logical interconnections in
a network across the same physical network topology. To test and develop this
concept, silicon photonic microchips will be designed and fabricated in
collaboration with industry and/or government organizations that host silicon
photonic foundry resources. The performance of these innovative communication
chipsets will be studied in a optical networking testbed.