* 1525239
* S3: Science Symposium to engage STEM students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Janice Straley, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 462,011.00

This project, Science Symposium to Engage STEM Students (S Cubed), is designed
to expand science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) interest and
involvement of rural and Native Alaskan students through two principal linked
activities: participation in the Sitka Whalefest, a non-traditional, informal
science symposium, and a STEM credit course that capitalizes on the resources
provided by the fest. The Whalefest features talks by nationally and
internationally recognized scientists whose presentations interweave their
scientific expertise with current global marine science issues. The college
credit course will challenge students to analyze the nature of the links the
fest creates between citizens (including themselves) and prominent marine
researchers (including thinking of themselves in these roles). This project will
use strategies to institutionalize this kind of learning into the small college
setting and measure its potential for scaling up to larger universities. It will
take science out of the classroom and engage a rural population in STEM in an
innovative way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The S Cubed project will explore the
potential benefits of science symposium attendance by undergraduates from
minority serving institutions, particularly those serving rural populations in
Alaska and Washington. It will introduce undergraduates to the way in which
science symposia/festivals make science relevant, and accessible. By developing
and instituting a college course around a science symposium, this effort hopes
to improve the numbers of rural and underserved students who declare STEM
majors. Using upperclassman mentors, who have already declared their majors, S
Cubed will investigate how the amount of time students have with professional
marine scientists during the conference translates into engagement in STEM
educational pathways. It will also measure how student interest in STEM
disciplines during a conference translates into a declaration of a STEM major or
promotes interest in a related STEM career pursuit. Primarily qualitative
methods will be employed for these investigations, so that the cognitive and
cultural learning processes, local and historical practices, and challenges of
pedagogical design spread across social settings can be deeply understood.
Ethnographic observations, interviews, and surveys will be conducted throughout
the course-scaling up and refinement phases with the faculty instructors, as
well as with a small focal cohort of undergraduate students throughout their
participation in the course. The colleges involved in this activity include
Peninsula Community College, Ilisagvik Tribal College and the University of
Alaska, Southeast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.