* 1525024
* AF:  Small: Efficient Algorithms for Querying Noisy Distributed/Streaming Datasets
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Qin Zhang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 444,320.00

This project aims to study the design of efficient query algorithms for noisy
datasets in distributed and streaming applications. Noisy data is universal in
today's world. Imprecise and varying references to the same real-world entities
are ubiquitous in scientific and commercial databases. This noise poses
significant obstructions to accurate data analytics. As an example of "noisy
data," consider YouTube videos. YouTube tracks the views of individual videos.
However, there are frequently many similar versions of the same event and
answering a basic question such as "How many people viewed this event?" is
challenging using current techniques. This project will provide new techniques
and insights to combat the noisy nature of large datasets, and hence will
enhance our ability to process the ever-increasing quantity of business and
scientific data. The products of this project will be integrated into a trilogy
of graduate and undergraduate courses on algorithms, databases, and data mining.
The PI will disseminate research outcomes by giving talks at
conferences/workshops, universities, industrial labs, as well as online
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this project tries to answer the
following question: can we run distributed and streaming algorithms directly on
the noisy datasets, resolve the noise "on the fly", and retain communication and
space efficiency compared with the noise-free setting? The PI plans to study
statistical, relational and graph problems. This project has the potential to
impact a wide range of active research areas in theoretical computer science,
including distributed and streaming algorithms, group testing, compressed
sensing, communication complexity, clustering, and locality sensitive hashing.