* 1525103
* Virtual Biology Lab 2.0: improving and implementing an inquiry-based educational resource
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Thomas Jones, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,433.00

A growing body of evidence indicates that computer simulations can be
particularly effective tools for developing a student's conceptual understanding
of STEM topics and for engaging students in problem solving. The significance of
this project is that it will provide an open, interactive, and biologically
realistic environment around which faculty can design their own curriculum and
can adopt various vehicles for delivering it (e.g. interactive lecture examples
and in-class experiments, pre/post lab exercises, or full simulation-based lab
exercises). The model themes of Virtual Biology Lab (VBL) directly address four
of the important components of biology undergraduate education as highlighted in
Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: two of the core concepts,
evolution and biological systems and two of the core competencies, the ability
to apply the process of science and the ability to use modeling and simulation
when gathering data and analyzing biological processes.

The VBL website, www.virtualbiologylab.org, developed under a previous NSF award
currently hosts 20 simulation models of 'classic' experiments and concepts in
ecology and evolutionary biology, all of which are free for use for educational
purposes. The models promote inquiry by providing open environments in which
students can manipulate parameters and observe the effects on simulated
populations. The site averages over 2800 unique sessions per month, but existing
models only run on PCs. This phase will expand accessibility to all web-
platforms, and continue to provide free use of models. The developers will: 1)
redevelop current and new models in HTML5 maintaining accessibility for the
foreseeable future; 2) consult educators during model development maximizing
their efficacy as learning tools; 3) robustly assess simulation models as
learning tools; 4) create a professional website to host the models and
facilitate a community of users; and, 5) raise awareness of the resource among
biology faculty. The assessment of the learning experience will involve several
hundred students from three institutions (a selective R1 university, a regional
university, and a community college). The study will compare learning gains of
students using the new and old interfaces. A matched pair design will be used to
determine if a more modern game-like interface enhances, detracts from, or does
not affect student learning. Answering this question is important because
considerable time and effort in software development can be spent keeping up
with the state of the art. In addition, this would add general data on the
efficacy of simulation models as learning tools.

This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A
Call to Action (http://visionandchange.org/files/2013/11/aaas-VISchange-
web1113.pdf).