* 1525006
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Unified Feedback Control and Mechanical Design for Robotic, Prosthetic, and Exoskeleton Locomotion
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Jessy Grizzle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,022.00

There is a pressing need for wearable robots, e.g., prostheses and exoskeletons,
which improve the quality of life for individuals with limited mobility -
devices that work symbiotically with human users to achieve stable, safe and
efficient locomotion. At present, approximately 4.7 million people in the United
States would benefit from an active lower-limb exoskeleton due to the effects of
stroke, polio, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, and cerebral palsy, and
by 2050 an estimated 1.5 million people in the United States will be living with
a major lower-limb amputation. Yet current wearable robotic devices do not
address this growing population's needs since they are bulky, heavy, noisy, and
require large batteries for even short duration use, while implementing
predominately hierarchical control algorithms. Impeding innovation in this
domain is the expensive and slow traditional design-build-test approach that
ignores the tight coupling between hardware specifications and control algorithm
performance. The vision of this work is to provide a methodology---inspired by
advancements in robotic locomotion---that allows lower-limb prostheses and
exoskeletons to meet real-world requirements through the co-design of the
electromechanical and feedback systems. The transformative nature of this work,
therefore, stems from its ability to realize wearable robots that synergize with
humans to achieve increased mobility, providing a template for the growing
robotic assistive device industry and potentially improving the quality of life
of millions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the vision of this work, the
overarching research goal is to create a new unified control and design
framework that will allow for the efficient and stable locomotion of robots,
prostheses, and exoskeletons. A key aspect of this control methodology is the
ability to continuously mediate between different objectives enforcing stability
and safety in an efficient manner through force-based interactions among
(wearable) robotic devices, their environment and the user. The resulting
framework will be utilized via control-in-the-loop mechanical design of
prostheses and exoskeletons with stringent design requirements, tested
experimentally on a novel humanoid robot, and clinically evaluated through human
subject trials. This work is, therefore, guided by the following specific goals:
(1) develop a unified online optimization-based control framework for (wearable)
robotic locomotion that efficiently mediates stability, safety and force
constraints, (2) create a feedback loop between formal control synthesis and the
mechanical design of wearable robots that satisfy stringent performance
requirements, (3) accelerate clinical testing by translating controllers
formally and experimentally from bipedal humanoid robots to prostheses and
exoskeletons. As a result of these research goals, this work has the potential
to create the next generation of robotic systems that enable stable, safe and
efficient human mobility.