* 1525737
* Building Recruiting and Inclusion for Diversity (BRAID) in the Computer Science Major: A Longitudinal Research Study
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Linda Sax, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,936,540.00

In an effort to improve an understanding of how computer science (CS)
departments can successfully diversify their undergraduate enrollments, this
project will support the longitudinal follow-up of students taking introductory
CS courses at fifteen (15) universities across the country. All fifteen CS
departments have a stated commitment to diversify their major and are
participants in the Building, Recruiting and Inclusion for Diversity (BRAID)
initiative. BRAID institutions have committed to a set of approaches to increase
diversity within CS departments, including modifying introductory courses to
make them more attractive and less intimidating to underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the ways in which introductory
courses promote interest and persistence in CS, with a special focus on what is
most successful for women and underrepresented minority students. Students will
be surveyed while taking the introductory course about their experiences in the
courses as well as their self-perceptions, perceptions of CS, major choice
selection, and career plans. This research will extend a baseline data
collection project currently being done into a longitudinal study. Students from
the baseline study will be followed beyond the introductory courses and surveyed
annually through the spring semester of the 2018-2019 academic year. Doing so
will allow the research team to assess student experiences beyond the
introductory course, such as involvement in CS extracurricular activities, as
well as measure a variety of outcomes, such as student enrollment patterns
(e.g., choosing CS as a major or minor) and career plans, across time. Findings
from this study will provide policy-makers, higher education administrators,
faculty, and the general public with new knowledge about the most effective ways
to recruit and retain more individuals into the computing field. Further, this
study will provide additional knowledge about how to diversify computing by
increasing the number of women and underrepresented minorities who complete CS
majors and minors.