* 1525817
* AF: Small: Geometric Methods for Network Science
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Subhash Suri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 599,875.00

Analyzing the spread of an epidemic, evaluating the vulnerability of Internet-
based infrastructures, modeling dynamics of opinion in online social networks,
understanding interconnections in the brain, and interactions between genes --
all these tasks are, in an abstract setting, struggling to understand large-
scale, complex networks of interlinked nodes. These networks are complex not
only because of their scale---social networks and the Internet-of-Things span
billions of nodes and even coarse information maps of the brain involve many
millions of voxels and pathways---but also because they entail complex, noisy,
and time-varying behavior---the structure of links in social networks or
connections in brain is poorly understood, and virtually all real networks are
subject to non-linear dynamics. The abstraction of graph theory, in which any
nodes can be linked, leads to algorithms that become computational bottlenecks
on the graphs for these large and messy networks. This project advocates that
embedding complex networks in a geometric space gives a framework to apply the
use of geometric methods for fast, scalable and approximate analysis of complex
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three research thrusts:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) theoretical investigation of geometric embeddings for 'scalable
network analysis:' to better understand theoretically why certain graphs appear
(empirically) to embed nicely in low-dimensional spaces, discover natural graph
properties that cause large distortions, and design efficient and scalable
algorithms for constructing low-distortion embeddings.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
probabilistic embeddings for 'uncertain graphs:' to evaluate how the spatial
richness of geometric embeddings capture the link uncertainties inherent in
virtually all practical graph models, and&lt;br/&gt;(3) embedding of graphs in
two-dimensional plane for 'information cartography:' to embed complex graphs in
the two-dimensional plane to reveal important structural themes.&lt;br/&gt;These
thrusts complement each other, since network analysis invariably requires both
an initial quantitative part---estimating various network statistics by highly
efficient algorithms that are enabled by the embedding of the entire network---
followed by a qualitative presentation---displaying those network aggregates and
substructrures in a visual context to create an informational
cartogram.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will significantly
broaden the applicability of geometric algorithms to network science, and to
modern data sets in general. The project touches upon many topics in theoretical
computer science and mathematics including discrete and computational geometry,
non-Euclidean geometry, probability theory, graph drawing, and information
cartography.