* 1525527
* STARSS: Small: Collaborative: Specification and Verification for Secure Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Randal Bryant, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 153,333.00

There is a growing need for techniques to detect security vulnerabilities in
hardware and at the hardware-software interface. Such vulnerabilities arise from
the use of untrusted supply chains for processors and system-on-chip components
and from the scope for malicious agents to subvert a system by exploiting
hardware defects arising from design errors, incomplete specifications, or
maliciously inserted blocks. This project addresses the problem by developing
foundational techniques and tools for formal and semi-formal specification and
verification of security properties of hardware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses gaps in the current specification and verification processes
for hardware designs. Given a design and a (possibly informal) specification,
the approach first identifies signals that correspond to high-integrity or
confidential parts of the design, such as privileged mode flags or secret keys.
The approach uses this information to perform critical signal analysis,
specification generation, security-aware specification analysis, and test
characterization and augmentation. These steps are iterated until a suitable
level of security assurance is attained. The methods build upon formal
computational engines for Boolean reasoning, symbolic simulation, and model
checking. The project is evaluated using case studies based on processor cores
and non-processor blocks, where each case study includes both offensive and
defensive components. Tangible results will include theories, threat models,
software tools, benchmarks, and case studies. Results from the project are
incorporated into courses and textbooks written by the PIs to teach students how
to design systems with a security mindset.