* 1525884
* Kulia: Chaminade University I-USE Program
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Helen Turner, Chaminade University of Honolulu
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Chaminade University is an undergraduate university with a special mission of
serving Native Hawaiians and students from the US-affiliated Pacific Islands.
This Kûlia (Hawaiian: to strive) project will offer innovative educational
approaches to prepare the next generation of Hawaiian and Pacific Islander
scientists to lead the development of practical and policy-based solutions to
Pacific regional challenges. These innovative approaches include a focus on "big
data" and the curricular infusion of indigenous knowledge to promote a
culturally-inclusive learning environment for cutting-edge science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kûlia is an inter-institutional effort (The Chaminade
University of Honolulu and the University of Hawaii at Hilo) that will leverage
domain science, diversity/equity and data science expertise. The project will
address the IUSE aims of improving STEM-learning environments, broadening
participation, and building a professional STEM workforce for tomorrow. Three
specific activities will be undertaken. First, the two semester introductory
biology courses required of all science majors at Chaminade will be converted to
authentic, semester-long, research classrooms, with the goals of: promoting
early engagement in research classrooms and creating a research mindset for
students; increasing student persistence in science majors; closing an initial
gap in the existing inquiry-based curriculum; and providing a vehicle for crowd-
sourcing faculty research projects. Second, authentic, semester-long,
culturally-inspired research projects, will be piloted in senior biology
courses. These research classrooms will be framed by indigenous Hawaiian
traditional knowledge. Third, recognizing that skills in big data manipulation,
analytics and visualization are central to success in tomorrow's scientific
workplaces, a core set of data lifecycle modules will be embedded throughout the
curriculum and tools will be developed for assessment of student competencies in
gathering, organizing and analyzing large, complex data sets. Kulia will provide
new tools for small undergraduate institutions, especially Minority Serving
Institutions, to confront the emerging digital disparity that threatens to
exclude their students from access to, and success in, tomorrow's STEM careers.
To help assess the effectiveness of this suite of curricular innovations the
project will employ several approaches including use of the Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) survey and the Student Assessment of
Learning Gains (SALG) instrument.