* 1525992
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: EVADE: Evidence-Assisted Detection and Elimination of Security Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Timothy Wood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 266,000.00

Today's software remains vulnerable to attack. Despite decades of advances in
areas ranging from testing to static analysis and verification, all large real-
world software is deployed with errors. Because this software is either written
in or underpinned by unsafe languages, errors often translate to security
vulnerabilities. Although techniques exist that could prevent or limit the risk
of exploits, high performance overhead blocks their adoption, leaving today's
systems open to attack. To address these problems, we propose a new approach:
evidence-assisted detection and elimination of security vulnerabilities (EVADE).
EVADE will prevent security vulnerabilities from compromising a system . The
challenge, and the goal, is to make it efficient in time and space, and to make
it practical for deployment. EVADE will produce detailed reports for developers
to reduce the time and effort required to fix their applications. By blocking a
wide range of attacks and automatically pinpointing vulnerabilities, EVADE will
dramatically increase the security of application software running on servers
and desktop platforms, and it will enable a new class of post-attack security
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach is a novel one that spans
the traditional research boundaries of runtime systems, operating systems, and
virtual machines. EVADE will run unmodified applications in a coordinated
framework that will perform selective forensic analysis before any output is
committed, blocking exploits from compromising their host and making it possible
to pinpoint errors with low overhead. The EVADE runtime system will place
lightweight tripwires at random locations in memory that can be quickly
validated to detect malicious behavior. Within an application, these take the
form of signatures placed on the stack and in the heap, while at the hypervisor-
level EVADE they may protect the system call table or other crucial data
structures. The EVADE VM will divide execution into incrementally-checkpointed
epochs. At each epoch boundary, before any system state is committed, the EVADE
virtual machine will indicate to the EVADE runtime system which pages have been
modified, letting it perform checks to identify vulnerabilities. EVADE will thus
dramatically increase the security of vulnerable applications with extremely low
runtime overhead, and will assist developers in locating vulnerabilities when an
exploit does occur.