* 1525925
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research:Variation-Resilient VLSI Systems with Cross-Layer Controlled Approximation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Sachin Sapatnekar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

Applications driven by human-computer interactions through the five human senses
are projected to underpin the next generation of computing. For many of these
applications, occasional small errors are often not only acceptable but also
bring opportunities for building lighter, cheaper, and more robust systems that
use less energy and may have a longer battery life. This project will study how
to advance computing technology by allowing deliberate imprecision in hardware
implementations through the notion of approximate computing. The outcomes of
this project will be a set of design techniques for approximate computing that
can become a key component of hardware computing technology, potentially
benefiting systems ranging from high performance computing for big data
analytics and low power implementation for internet of things. This project will
also provide an opportunity for training students with the latest design and
computing technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research goals of this project
are to create new approximate computing techniques to optimize a system at all
stages of its life, from design-time to runtime, which can enable cross-layer
control of performance-power-precision trade-offs. The research agenda consists
of several components. First, new error models with different accuracy-
complexity trade-offs will be developed. Second, new design-time optimization
techniques, especially hardware resource scheduling and binding in high-level
synthesis, will be studied with consideration of approximation, variation, and
runtime circuit reconfiguration. Third, compile-time and operating-system-level
task mapping/scheduling algorithms will be investigated to make the best use of
circuits with various precisions. Last but not least, runtime precision control
techniques will be explored in conjunction with dynamic voltage and frequency
scaling in order to achieve a smooth trade-off between power and user
experience.