* 1525831
* Collaborative Research: Intellectual Diversity and Critical Thinking Skills in Service Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Stuart Kellogg, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 566,698.00

In an increasingly globally connected world, solutions to real world problems
are complex in nature and often outside the boundaries of traditional practice.
Thus, future practicing engineers need to be supported through educational
systems that teach them not only technical skills, but professional skills such
as awareness of social and cultural implications of their designs, understanding
and appreciation of diversity, and additional skills in project management,
collaboration, and effective communication. The EPICS (Engineering Projects in
Community Service) program is an example of an innovation in engineering
education which has been shown to present engineering in context, prepare
students for the profession, impact their engineering identity, as well as
significantly improve the diversity of those participating. In this project, an
EPICS program is being established at the South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology (SDSMT). A unique aspect of this program is that it is
institutionalizing existing collaborative design opportunities with a tribal
college, the Oglala Lakota College and establishing 50% of the design projects
to meet critical needs of stakeholders on the Pine Ridge Reservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is investigating the impacts of service
learning on participating students' intellectual diversity, critical thinking
skills, and attitudes towards sustainability, social awareness, stakeholder
involvement in engineering design by applying advanced assessment tools,
including the Herrmann Brain Dominance Inventory, Reasoning About Current Issues
Test, and the Lancaster Approaches to Studying Questionnaire. This project will
increase critical thinking skills, engage culturally and intellectually diverse
students, and improve student attitudes concerning their engineering studies and
engineering as a profession.