* 1525431
* RI: Small: Efficient Statistical Computing on Riemannian Manifolds with Applications to Medical Imaging and Computer Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Baba Vemuri, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 455,177.00

This project develops efficient incremental algorithms are proposed for
computing averages and other statistical quantities of interest from pools of
data incrementally acquired. Many existing data acquisition and processing
methods have reached a level of sophistication so as to be able to acquire
and/or synthesize data that reside in curved spaces such as spheres,
hyperboloids etc. As such data have become ubiquitous in many Science and
Engineering fields, need for efficient statistical analysis of these data has
emerged as an area of significant importance. Further, in this era of massive
and continuous streaming data, samples of data are acquired sequentially over
time. Hence, from an applications and computational efficiency perspective, the
desired averaging algorithm ought to be amenable to incremental updates to
accommodate the newly acquired data over time. The developed algorithms can be
applied different applications, such as face recognition from videos, action
recognition, trajectory averaging and clustering from videos, image and video
restoration, pattern clustering and classification, etc. In the context of
diagnostic medical imaging, methods developed in this project can be used to
automatically discriminate between various disease classes, such as Parkinson's
and Essential Tremor which are distinct types of movement
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates a general framework
for recursive computation of the intrinsic mean and the principal geodesic
analysis on several commonly encountered manifolds such as the manifold of
symmetric positive definite matrices, the Grassmann, the Stiefel manifolds, the
hypersphere, the manifold of special orthogonal matrices, and several others.
The research team applies the developed recursive framework of computing
statistics from manifold-valued data to several tasks namely, atlas computation
from diffusion MRI in Medical Imaging, inter-class discrimination between sub-
types of a neuro-degenerative disorder using diffusion MRI, face and action
recognition, image and shape retrieval in Computer Vision applications.