* 1525295
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Socio-Political Consequences of Producing Workers through Migration and Training
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Lina Fruzzetti, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,128.00

Government funded and initiated development policies and programs can be key
drivers of both domestic and international migration, both in the United States
and abroad. The goals and effects of such policies and programs vary depending
on the target population. For ethnic minority women, recruitment into domestic
and personal service labor is common. Because of the intimate nature of such
work, it is often accompanied by training programs designed to prepare workers
to meet the requirements of both the government and employers. However, little
is known about how the programs achieve their goals, how they transform ethnic
minority women into desirable employees, and how that transformation affects the
women themselves, particularly given that employment in these sectors is prone
to instability, unpredictability, and vulnerability. The anthropological
research funded by this award is designed to fill this gap by following a cohort
of such women through their migratory journeys, interactions with government
officials, involvement with government funded programs, and labor in the care
sector.

The research will be conducted in India by Brown University doctoral student
Andrea L. Wright, under the supervision of Dr. Lina Fruzzetti. India is ideal
for these research questions because, unlike the United States, all locations in
the labor chain are in one country, which facilitates control of variables for
data collection and analysis. The researcher will focus on women from the
northeastern state of Manipur who migrate, with government encouragement and
support, over 2000 miles south to the city of Bangalore for training and
employment. Because of the violence and discrimination that such women have
experienced in Bangalore, they present a particularly compelling research
population. The researcher will monitor a selected group of women throughout the
training course and into their post-training employment. She will collect data
using a mixed methods approach, including: participant observation ethnography;
semi-structured interviews with a representative sample of all stakeholders
(government official, trainers, trainees, employees, industry representatives,
non-governmental organizations, families) in both Manipur and Bangalore; focus
group interviews; event analysis of relevant industry fairs; document analysis;
and analysis of trainees' work diaries. The results of this research will
contribute to social science theory of how and why workers of a specific type
are created through targeted training. Results also will provide policy makers
with information they need to design programs that serve the needs of those who
are trained as well those who sponsor the training.