* 1525421
* Mobile Summer Institutes: Creating Points of Transformation in Post-Secondary STEM Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,09/30/2018
* Michelle Withers, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 09/30/2018
* USD 295,907.00

The National Academies Summer Institutes (SI) began in response to the 2003
National Resource Council report BIO2010: Transforming Undergraduate Education
for Future Research Biologists and, with support from the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, have evolved from one site in 2003 to six sites in 2015, each
conducting five day workshops to engage university faculty in adapting effective
teaching approaches as revealed by recent educational research. The Mobile
Summer Institutes (MSIs) are an innovative variation on the SI. They respond to
the call for the need for all students to experience science courses that
reflect current advances in science and teaching approaches and technologies
that science education researchers have proven to be effective, as stated in the
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (2014) and Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education, a 2011 document representing the
views of over 500 biology faculty and administrators. The MSIs use Henderson's
model of Four Categories of Change Strategies and add three new components to
the current SI pedagogical training format: 1) peer evaluation to foster
acquisition of reflective practices by participants; 2) a strategic planning
workshop to leverage the newly acquired STEM reform vision and expertise
supplied by the mobile institutes; and 3) a workshop for local administrators to
foster awareness, buy-in and support for STEM reform initiatives by
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSIs will travel to college campuses to
train participants in active learning methods and strategies for peer-evaluation
that will allow them to provide feedback to one another so that they may
continually improve their implementation of the active learning strategies in
their classrooms. Participants will take part in workshops that will facilitate
the development of plans to address specific institutional barriers that may
inhibit educational reform on their own campuses. Workshops will also be held
for local administrators to foster administrative support for the education
reform initiatives that participants undertake. Finally, participants who have
some prior experience in reforming their own classrooms will be trained to
present the summer institute workshops so that, after being involved in two
(MSIs) on their campuses, they can direct summer institutes on their campuses,
thus increasing the impact of the MSIs beyond the project period. The host
institutions will thus become nodes for diffusion of a common framework for
educational reform within their growing local network of schools in addition to
connecting with the greater SI community. The current project is essentially a
proof of concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education in support of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to Action
http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.