* 1525816
* Engineering and Education Partnership: Preparing the Next Generation of Cross Disciplinary Trained STEM Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Thomas Siller, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 654,304.00

When the preparation of the next generation of STEM teachers is discussed in
education circles, few think of teachers earning an engineering degree as a
pathway to entering the teaching profession. Teachers prepared with an
engineering degree are well equipped to help young learners "connect the STEM
dots" through design, problem solving, experimentation, making, and
understanding the balance between the designed and natural world in which they
live. STEM learning is often abstract and STEM subjects are too often taught in
isolation without reference and meaningful connections. This project broadens
the STEM learning landscape by emphasizing integrated STEM (iSTEM) teacher
preparation that includes integrated design (iDesign) across STEM subjects by
not only preparing a new breed of engineering trained teachers, but also by
redesigning the traditional STEM teacher preparation model to include cross STEM
discipline teacher preparation that emphasizes content border crossings and
prepares teachers to work in cross functional diversity teams in schools. The
project will result in the integration of new design projects in the engineering
curricula for pre-service STEM teachers and a new cross-discipline STEM methods
course that will serve as a model for other institutions to adopt. Thus, it will
make a substantive contribution to improving undergraduate education.

Preparing teachers through an engineering degree pathway and cross-training STEM
teachers opens a whole new perspective to STEM teaching, learning, and research.
Research conducted in this project is designed to unpack and measure two new
inventive frontiers in STEM learning; 1) STEM associational fluency and 2)
teaching and learning in cross-functional STEM diversity teams. STEM
associational fluency in teachers is the teacher's ability to fluidly and deeply
apply STEM content and contexts while designing and delivering instruction.
Scales designed and tested include the expansion and refinement of an iSTEM
scale to measure STEM associational fluency in teachers. Teaching and learning
in cross functional design teams incorporates teams of STEM teachers from the
varied STEM disciplines learning to blueprint (make explicit) disciplinary
grounded content, co-plan, and design integrated design (iDesign) interventions
that require students to apply cross cutting STEM content, concepts, and
practices within a design or problem-based learning context. A new iDesign scale
to measure and assess teachers' cross-functional iDesign interventions will be
designed and tested. Other colleges and schools of engineering seeking to open
up career pathways for their students will have benefit of the research, tools
and strategies generated through this project. Ultimately, making engineering
undergraduate students aware of the possibility of a teaching career at the K-12
level will have profound impact on the number and quality of teachers of STEM
disciplines at the pre-college level in the future.