* 1525820
* TWC: Small: Understanding Anti-Analysis Defenses in Malicious Code
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Saumya Debray, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 546,740.00

The problem of cyber-security encompasses computer systems of all sizes and
affects almost all aspects of our day-to-day lives. This makes it fundamentally
important to detect accurately and respond quickly to cyber-threats as they
develop. This project aims to develop techniques and tools that can accelerate
the process of understanding and responding to new cyber-threats as they
develop. The authors of malicious software (malware) usually try to make the
malware stealthy in order to avoid detection. In many cases, this involves a
variety of techniques aimed at hindering analysis efforts by security analysts;
we refer to such techniques as anti-analysis defenses. When confronted by such
defenses, security analysts have to identify and disable them in order to
observe and understand its real behaviors and thereby develop countermeasures.
Current approaches for doing this are slow and cumbersome. This project aims to
develop highly general, efficient, and robust automated techniques for speeding
up the process of identifying and understanding anti-analysis defenses in
malware, with the goal of providing security analysts with tools that can help
them respond quickly to new cyber-threats as they
develop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Malicious software (malware) usually employs a
variety of anti-analysis and anti-tampering defenses to hinder analysis and
reverse engineering. Currently, neutralizing such defenses requires a lot of
manual intervention and is therefore tedious and time-consuming. This project
develops semantics-based techniques to automate most or all of this effort and
so accelerate the process of identifying and neutralizing such defenses. The
project focusses on analyzing programs that employ a variety of anti-analysis
and anti-tampering defenses. In particular, the project will focus on the
following research questions:&lt;br/&gt;* Detection. How do characterizations of
environmental observations translate to detection algorithms for anti-analysis
defenses? How can the detection algorithms be made general?&lt;br/&gt;*
Precision. What factors affect the precision of such detection algorithms? How
can the precision be improved?&lt;br/&gt;* Performance. Sophisticated analysis
of low-level code can be expensive. At the same time, the high volumes of new
malware that are encountered make it important for analyses to be efficient. How
can such detection algorithms be made efficient enough to be
practical?&lt;br/&gt;*Stealthy Defenses. How can environment checks be made
statically and dynamically stealthy? What are the implications for anti-analysis
detection algorithms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order for such anti-anti-analysis
techniques to have longevity, it is important that they be general, i.e., make
as few assumptions as possible about the nature or form of the defenses that may
have been applied. To this end, the project will articulate explicitly the
assumptions underlying the techniques it develops. This can be expected to
suggest new directions for research by indicating where assumptions may be
weakened or removed. The potential contributions of this research are both
technical and societal. The ability to more easily neutralize anti-analysis
defenses deployed by malware will allow security researchers to respond to new
and emerging malware threats quickly. This will have the effect of limiting the
scope of the damage caused by such malware, and improve the security and
reliability of our cyber-infrastructure. Additionally, the project will involve
graduate and undergraduate students in all aspects of the research and thereby
contribute to the development of a highly skilled workforce. Finally, software
developed as part of the project will be made available to the broader research
community, thereby assisting and supporting other research projects in this
area.