* 1525691
* Summer STEM Teaching Experiences for Undergraduates from Liberal Arts Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Victor Donnay, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,137,727.00

There is a well-documented national need for K-12 teachers with substantial
content knowledge in the several STEM disciplines. In this regard, undergraduate
STEM majors from liberal arts institutions are an under-tapped pool of potential
STEM teachers. The Summer STEM Teaching Experiences for Undergraduates (TEU)
program will provide undergraduate STEM majors from liberal arts colleges and
universities with an immersive summer experience in secondary mathematics or
science education. The TEU program will encourage these students to explore
careers in K-12 STEM education via a high quality discipline specific pedagogy
course integrated with a teaching practicum with a focus on urban education.
Owing to the small size of many liberal arts institutions, a key challenge they
face is how to provide their undergraduate STEM students with high quality
courses and experiences that are focused on mathematics or science pedagogy. The
TEU program is designed to fill this need. The mathematics TEU model has been
piloted during the summers of 2013-2015 at Brown University as part of the Brown
Summer High School program. Through this TEU project, the mathematics pilot will
be joined by the science TEU. The project, led by faculty from Barnard College,
Brown University, Bryn Mawr College, Trinity College and Vassar College will
contribute to the intent of the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education-EHR
effort in adding to the understanding associated with engaging STEM majors from
liberal arts institutions in the K-12 enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
five summers, a total of 120 undergraduates (24 per year) will be recruited from
a national network of sixty-one liberal arts institutions to take part in the
6-7 week TEU program. Each summer twelve undergraduate students will participate
in the mathematics TEU program to be held at Brown University and twelve will
participate in the science TEU program to be held at Trinity College. The
teaching practicum, designed and taught by the TEU participants working under
the supervision of master teacher mentors, will provide a summer enrichment
course to approximately 1250 local high-need urban secondary students drawn from
the Providence area and from the Hartford Middle Magnet Trinity College Academy.
The TEU provides participants with the option to receive credit for the 60 hour
pedagogy course. TEU participants will undertake a STEM leadership project at
their home institution during the following academic year. TEU project
investigators will engage in design and development research to explore the
extent to which the TEU model, consisting of an immersive summer experience and
teacher leadership project, affects the participants' preparation for teaching.
Specific beneficial learner outcomes to be examined include: preservice teacher
pedagogical knowledge, efficacy, effectiveness, and leadership. The research
will employ a multiple-case study approach and a mixed-effects model to analyze
the cumulative data. The data will include pre- and post-tests of participant
knowledge of core course content, observational data, surveys and self-
assessments collected from all participants, as well as semi-structured
interviews and collection of artifacts of teaching from a smaller subset of TEU
participants. What will be learned through the TEU model, and attendant
educational research, will provide evidence for wide adoption and will
contribute to the broader impacts of this project.