* 1525609
* SHF: Small: Improving Memory Performance on Fused Architectures through Compiler and Runtime Innovations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Frank Mueller, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 470,000.00

During the past decade, accelerators such as Graphics Processing Units (GPUs)
have entered the area of general-purpose computing. They are now widely used for
achieving high performance in scientific simulation, business analytics, image
processing, and many other application domains. Their effectiveness however has
been largely constrained by narrow and slow interconnections to multicore CPUs.
Instead of such disjoint memories for multicore CPUs on one side and GPUs on the
other, contemporary architectures are adopting an integrated design:
Conventional CPUs and co-accelerators are integrated on the same die with access
to the same memory. The integration provides new opportunities for synergistic
execution on CPUs and GPUs, but can also intensify resource contention within
the memory hierarchy. The implications yet remain to be
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to systematically explore the
new challenges and opportunities of the integration, especially for compilers
and runtime systems in governing program transformations and maintaining them at
runtime for data locality, task partitioning and scheduling. The PIs propose to
advance the state of the art by promoting synergistic execution in support of
data sharing while creating spheres of isolation between CPU and GPU execution
to mitigate resource contention of non-shared data. The proposed techniques
include a set of novel compiler transformations, concurrent program control and
data abstractions, and systems mechanisms that foster&lt;br/&gt;sharing and
reduce cross-boundary contention depending on memory access patterns with
respect to shared hardware resources. This synergy between compiler techniques
and the runtime system has the potential to significantly improve performance
and power guarantees for co-scheduling program fragments on fused architectures.