* 1525937
* CHS: Small: Touchscreen Computer Interfaces for Working Dogs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Melody Jackson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,352.00

For nearly a century, assistance dogs have improved the lives of thousands of
people with disabilities. These working dogs, which include hearing dogs, guide
dogs, service dogs, and medical alert dogs, can provide independence and
significantly enhance quality of life. Recent research has shown that the dogs
can interact with wearable technology to communicate important information to
their handlers, such as a tornado siren sounding. However, in a home
environment, they rarely wear their service dog vests or harnesses even though
the need for clear communication between dog and handler still exists. The main
goal of this research is to explore fundamental aspects of touchscreen
interaction for dogs, to support communication between working dogs and their
handlers or other humans. Project outcomes will extend the state of the art in
virtual touchscreen interfaces to animals, which is a new domain. The work will
contribute to the new field of Animal-Computer Interfaces, providing us with a
better understanding of the physical and cognitive abilities of dogs, and to
what extent they can interact with humans through technology. In addition to the
direct impact of further improving the quality of life for people with
disabilities, the technologies developed as part of this research will
ultimately benefit all users; pet dogs could be trained to use a touchscreen to
request to go out, or to alert their owners of an intruder on the property,
while medical alert dogs could directly summon help through a touchscreen.
Providing dogs with the ability to express specific needs to a handler could
benefit the dogs as well, enhancing their safety and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her team will examine and adapt usability
analysis and design techniques from the human field, such as Fitt's law and
Power Law of Practice, to animal interactions, expanding the body of knowledge
in interactive computing. They will explore the physical and cognitive abilities
of dogs to interact with touchscreens, as well as determining what dogs can
sense and comprehend from virtual displays. Three specific objectives will be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To examine factors in the design of dog-
appropriate touchscreen affordances and to create corresponding design
guidelines for developing touchscreen interfaces for working dogs. The PI will
experiment with size, color, shape, and placement of icons to determine what
dogs can best comprehend. She will also test the limits of canine cognitive load
in remembering and differentiating patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To create a
working dog touchscreen interface prototype and perform a formal usability study
with a variety of working dogs. Building on the results of the first objective,
the PI will create a touchscreen system and design a training protocol to
familiarize working dogs with touchscreen tasks. She will then perform a study
employing usability metrics grounded in human interaction theory to develop
fundamental canine-computer interaction theory for virtual
displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To perform a technological probe field case
study in the home of an assistance dog and handler to evaluate the effectiveness
of a touchscreen system for a working dog. Using the findings from the first two
objectives, the PI will create a system and perform an ethnographic study in a
home-use scenario.