* 1525503
* Peer-Assisted Team Research (PATR): A Method for Early Undergraduate Research
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,01/31/2021
* Louise Hainline, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 01/31/2021
* USD 529,968.00

Undergraduate research is a high-impact practice that increases retention,
fosters academic performance and scientific literacy, increases motivation to
study science, and raises STEM graduation rates. This project will test an
innovative, cost-effective method, Peer-Assisted Team Research (PATR) that will
involve more students in undergraduate research experiences earlier in college,
improving their scientific reasoning abilities and STEM self-efficacy. Trained
peer leaders will supervise student teams as they design and conduct
increasingly complex research studies on interdisciplinary topics. PATR students
will master scientific reasoning and seeing themselves as "people who do
science," becoming more motivated and taking more STEM courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PATR is an adaptable template useful in a variety of
institutional settings: general education and introductory major's courses, STEM
classes without labs, and co-curricular activities such as science clubs.
Brooklyn College is collaborating with four other branches of City University of
New York to evaluate the effectiveness of the PATR method in a variety of
settings. The project's intellectual merit resides in the method's grounding in
proven STEM pedagogy and current cognitive research. The project's broader
impacts stem from enabling more students to participate in undergraduate
research experiences, thus fostering a well-trained, diverse work-force. PATR is
an adaptable, scalable and cost-effective method that prepares students for
faculty-mentored research. The project will generate data using behavioral
assessment and standardized test instruments to determine if students
participating in PATR are developing the higher-level abstract reasoning
abilities required to plan and carry out research, compared with control
students.