* 1525836
* NeTS: Small: Network Function Virtualization Using Dynamic Reconfiguration
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Lixin Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 512,772.00

Over the past decade, a wide-ranging collection of network functions have been
used to accommodate the needs of network users. A diverse set of network
functions, including firewalls, security filters, and quality of service
enhancers have been implemented using increasingly complex techniques. These
functions are used to support predictable, high performance in data and
multimedia network environments. To promote flexibility, there has been recent
interest in replacing dedicated network hardware with programmable network
functions. This approach, called network function virtualization (NFV), allows
for the rapid adaptation of network services as security and performance
requirements change. NFV allows network administrators to support different
network policies by using appropriate programmable network functions on demand.

In this project, a new hardware-based approach to NFV construction that provides
scalability and programmability, while supporting significant hardware-level
parallelism, will be developed. The computing platform will use a field-
programmable gate array (FPGA) to implement numerous NFV operations that can be
customized to specific network flow needs. As the number of required functions
and their characteristics change, the hardware in the FPGA can be reconfigured
to support the updated requirements. The management of the deployed classifiers
and traffic management functions will be performed by a resource manager which
is executed on an accompanying microprocessor. The researchers will create a
series of software tools and hardware modules to evaluate the approach,
Architectural resources will be managed by a new resource allocation algorithm
that will allow for the effective use of the available FPGA area under NFV
performance constraints. This algorithm will run periodically to allow for
dynamic rebalancing of FPGA resources.

Broader Impact: Two specific programs to broaden the impact of the work will be
developed. These efforts will include a new undergraduate curriculum in network
function virtualization focused on scalable real-world systems and a student-run
research workshop which will allow students to present their work. FPGA and
networking companies will be encouraged to use this technology in new product
development.