* 1525726
* Collaborative Research: Cognitive skills and early learning from interactive media
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Tiffany Pempek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 356,434.00

The past decade has seen rapid growth in media use by infants and toddlers, and
in marketing of educational media products for young children, yet researchers
know little about how the use of media such as smart phones and tablets
influences young children's development. For older children, educational media
can foster school readiness through increased cognitive, language, and social
skills, making it a valuable intervention tool for promoting successful school
entry. For infants and toddlers, these benefits are less evident. Toddlers do
learn from interactive media such as mobile applications under some
circumstances, but the specific conditions that result in learning from screen
media remain unclear. The studies supported by this grant are designed to
identify whether, how, and for whom screen media can be educationally valuable.

Two studies will explore: (1) the relation between children's gaze patterns and
whether they learn while watching video and (2) the cognitive skills that
predict toddlers' ability to learn from different media. The investigators will
test how well toddlers (24-36 months) learn from different media, utilizing
innovative approaches such as head-mounted eye tracking, which enables
researchers to observe where children look while completing tasks. Of particular
interest will be the extent to which individual differences in visual attention
and cognitive skills predict toddlers' capacity to transfer from various screen
media to real-life problems. It is expected that toddlers will learn more from
video that is interactive, especially when interactive features help children
focus attention on important information. It is further hypothesized that
younger toddlers and those with poorly developed cognitive skills will benefit
most from these applications. This work will inform the mechanisms by which
screen-based learning occurs (or fails to occur) and address variability in
toddlers' success in learning via electronic media. By establishing how and for
whom screen media support learning, results from these studies may also inform
the development of scalable, cost-effective interventions that capitalize on
mass media to reach millions of children, especially those at risk of school
failure.