* 1525032
* Investigating Student Learning and Metacognition in Flipped Classroom and Interactive Lecture Environments in General Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Donna McGregor, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2019
* USD 265,731.00

There is substantial evidence that many science teaching methods that actively
engage students are more effective than traditional, didactic teaching methods
(i.e., lecturing), in which students are typically passive. However, there are
gaps in our knowledge regarding the types of active learning environments that
are most effective for particular contexts. This Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE) project at Lehman College and Hunter College of the City
University of New York (CUNY) will investigate chemistry students' learning in
two different active-learning environments: a flipped classroom format and an
interactive lecture format. In the flipped classroom format, students learn new
content outside of the classroom by reviewing learning objectives and viewing
video content developed by course instructors, and spend their time in the
classroom refining and applying their knowledge to chemistry problems under the
guidance of the instructor. In the interactive lecture format, students listen
to short lectures of 15-20 minutes followed by peer instruction sessions in
which students answer questions posed by the instructor (using personal response
systems known as clickers) and discuss them with their peers. These two formats
both aim to engage students more deeply in learning chemistry and developing
skills such as monitoring their thinking as compared with traditional lecture
formats. Chemistry faculty at Hunter College and Lehman College will leverage
their experiences developing and implementing these general chemistry courses
with diverse student populations over the last five years, and collaborate with
CUNY's Director of the Center for Advanced Study in Education, to study and
compare the effectiveness of these two active learning formats.

To contribute to a better understanding of the effectiveness of flipped
classroom and interactive lecture formats for enhancing student learning and
metacognition, the investigators will conduct two types of studies. First,
investigators will analyze archival data from previous implementations in
general chemistry at Hunter College, including student exam performance and
course completion rates, and compare the results across the two active learning
formats. Second, the project team will conduct new efficacy studies in which
students taking general chemistry at both Hunter and Lehman Colleges will be
randomly assigned to a flipped classroom or interactive lecture format. The
project team will analyze student-level performance data on both formative and
summative assessments and, investigate whether particular cohorts of students
learn better using a flipped classroom or interactive lecture format. In
addition, the investigators will explore the extent to which students'
metacognitive and self-regulatory behaviors change over time for each format.
Finally, they will examine students' use of online homework and video resources,
and determine how these are related to student learning. The diversity of the
student populations across many dimensions at Hunter and Lehman Colleges of
CUNY, which are also Hispanic-serving institutions, makes them excellent
contexts in which to study the effectiveness of different active-learning
formats for a variety of students. The results of this research are expected to
inform science faculty members about the effectiveness and best practices
associated with two popular active-learning formats, and to contribute to the
development of instructional design principles for undergraduate science
courses.