* 1525412
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Leveraging Intra-chip/Inter-chip Silicon-Photonic Networks for Designing Next-Generation Accelerators
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 266,000.00

A little over a decade ago, GPUs were fixed-function processors built around a
pipeline, dedicated to rendering 3-D graphics. In the past decade, as the
potential for GPUs to provide massive compute parallelism became apparent, the
software community developed new programming environments (CUDA and OpenCL) to
leverage these massively parallel devices. Today, the leading graphics vendors
tailor their GPU designs for general-purpose high-performance computing by
providing higher compute throughput. While GPUs are able to provide high
computational throughput by launching a large number of threads, memory
bandwidth and system power continue to be limiting constraints for a number of
applications.

This project proposes to explore the use of silicon-photonic link technology to
design the intra-chip and inter-chip networks in future GPU/APU systems with the
goal of addressing the memory bandwidth constraint. In particular, we will
investigate the potential of the silicon-photonic networks to efficiently
support the memory hierarchy of a heterogeneous design, which integrates a CPU
and a GPU (i.e., an Accelerated Processing Unit (APU)) that share the same
memory address space. To this end, using state-of-the-art cycle-based
simulators, we will evaluate a range of memory hierarchies and intra-chip/inter-
chip silicon-photonic network architectures while running a demanding set of
workloads that require high memory bandwidth. Additionally, this work will
explore the limits and opportunities to leverage the high-bandwidth density and
low latency of the silicon-photonic networks to architect the next generations
APU devices that can provide better compute throughput. It is anticipated that
the results of this research will clearly demonstrate the advantages of using
silicon-photonic intra-chip/inter-chip networks in the memory hierarchy of GPU
and APU devices. To catalyze and sustain research in this area of APUs and
silicon-photonic networks, an open-source simulator that supports intra-chip and
inter-chip silicon-photonic networks will be made available to the wider
accelerator/networking research communities.

At a broader level, this work bridges the gap between the heterogeneous systems
community and the on-chip/off-chip networks community and opens multiple
opportunities for education and outreach.