* 1525276
* CIF: Small: Active data screening for efficient feature learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Waheed Bajwa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 160,000.00

Advances in sensing and data acquisition technologies make it easy to generate
vast quantities of data that must be stored, communicated, processed, and
understood. This data may be of variable quality and the nature of the data may
vary over time -- this variability can cause difficulties for existing
approaches to efficiently represent the data. Current methods use economical
representations of the data in terms of a smaller number of properties, or
features, of the raw data. Standard feature representations such as Fourier and
wavelet representations may not be efficient at representing the data from these
new acquisition technologies. One paradigm to overcome this mismatch is the
data-driven approach, in which an algorithm processes the data to learn a novel
and efficient feature representation for the given data. While these are more
useful, such approaches may not scale well to massive data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work designs new methods for data-driven feature
learning that are scalable and robust to noisy, time-varying data. It proposes
an "active screening" approach to learning new features; the data processing
algorithm uses a low-complexity criterion to screen for useful and informative
points for feature learning. Advantages of active screening include a reduction
in the computational and storage overhead as well as the ability to reject
outliers or other spurious and misleading data. The investigators develop active
screening methods for consistent estimation under generative models for the
data, analyze the tradeoff between representation and classification in active
screening for discriminative dictionary learning, and extend the active
screening analysis to distributed settings for distributed dictionary learning.
They investigate the promise of these methods on two large-scale
electrocardiography (ECG) datasets of 170+ patients. This work combines ideas
from statistics (feature screening) and machine learning (active learning and
selective sampling) to design efficient representations of complex signals from
massive data sets and may inform the design of new data acquisition technologies
by incorporating screening ideas into the technologies themselves.