* 1525671
* IUSE: Understanding and Supporting Mechanical Engineering Undergraduate Student and Faculty Engagement with an Active, Blended and Collaborative (ABC) Learning Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2020
* Jennifer DeBoer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,400,000.00

Retention of engineering undergraduates, in particular during the sophomore and
junior years, is a major national concern. Active learning classroom techniques,
Blended online and in-class materials, and Collaborative learning environments
have each shown some promise of improving engineering student outcomes. However,
these promising tools are seldom deployed together and rarely utilized in core
disciplinary classes. This research program will rigorously study the Purdue
Mechanics Freeform Classroom (Freeform), an Active-Blended-Collaborative (ABC)
structure that has experienced anecdotal success for the last six years. The
research team will collect data from multiple sources to understand the student
and instructor experience, the importance of disciplinary content and
institutional setting, and the juxtaposition of Freeform with students' and
instructors' other courses. The project will explore Freeform at Purdue West
Lafayette and two other diverse campuses: Purdue University Calumet and Trine
University, which serve underrepresented populations that are disproportionately
affected by stopout. This study will generate useful outcomes for other
interested program adopters, including online course templates and video
creation strategies, student study guides, and faculty orientation workshops.

Empirical studies indicate that Active, Blended, and Collaborative learning
structures (ABC) each enhance achievement and retention in undergraduate STEM.
To date, these tools have not been combined, nor have they been widely deployed
in disciplinary core classes in the middle two years that are major sources of
underperformance. This research program will study Purdue's Mechanics Freeform
Classroom (Freeform), a pedagogical framework that fully merges ABC tools in
sophomore year Dynamics and has experienced success in improving pass rates. The
project's goals are to better understand (a) the student experience in using ABC
tools and classroom structures, (b) mediating individual characteristics of the
faculty, discipline, and institution, and (c) the way Freeform operates in the
context of students' and instructors' other courses. Using an iterative process
of research and implementation, the project team is testing Freeform in its most
mature implementation (Dynamics), as well as in other mechanical engineering
courses at Purdue and at partner institutions: Trine University and Purdue
University- Calumet. The team will collect a rich array of qualitative and
quantitative data from both faculty and students, including attitudinal,
cognitive, and behavioral metrics. This will provide valuable and novel insight
into how to implement ABC environments in diverse disciplines and institutions
over a sustained time period.