* 1525553
* AF: SHF: Small: Adaptive molecular computation using buffered strand displacement networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Matthew Lakin, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 465,911.00

Learning and adaptation are fundamental processes in living systems. Human
beings are clearly capable of learning complex concepts, but even unicellular
organisms such as bacteria are capable of adaptive response to external stimuli.
This suggests that synthetic systems of biomolecules could, in principle, be
developed to enable sustained operation and exhibit similar adaptive behaviors.
Thanks to advances in the tools developed in the fields of biotechnology and
nanotechnology, it is now becoming possible to engineer such systems in the
laboratory. This project will study the design and experimental implementation
of synthetic DNA-based information processing systems that exhibit adaptive
behaviors such as learning. Successful completion of this research will enable
future development of synthetic biochemical systems capable of sustained
operation, which could have practical applications such as long-term health
monitoring, as well as providing insights into the biochemical basis of learning
in biological systems. The project will support training and education of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study learning and adaptation in synthetic biochemical systems implemented using
DNA strand displacement reactions. In DNA strand displacement reaction networks,
multi-strand DNA "gate" structures are used to process information that is
encoded using single strands of DNA, by binding to freely-diffusing single
strands and releasing other single strands into solution in response. In this
project, a particular class of DNA strand displacement gates known as "buffered
gates" will be developed. A buffered gate is one where a large quantity of gates
start in an inactive state and a subset are activated to carry out their
computational task: once each gate is consumed, in addition to its usual outputs
the gate also releases a strand to activate a new gate from the buffer, so the
population of active gates remains roughly constant. In this project, buffered
gate systems will be studied in simulation and in the laboratory. Crucially,
buffered gate systems in which one gate controls the availability of activating
strands for another buffered gate will be studied. This will enable information
to be stored and updated with the molecular system, thereby enabling adaptive
behavior. This concept will be used as the fundamental design building block to
implement molecular computing systems capable of adaptive behavior in response
to externally-provided input signals. The goal of this project will be to
design, simulate and implement molecular logic systems that demonstrate adaptive
behavior, for example, implementing supervised learning algorithms.