* 1525541
* Improving Polar Data Access and Communication
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Corey Garza, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 83,801.00

Improving Interdisciplinary Data Access and Communication: Through professional
development and the creation of data tools, the PIs will reduce the logistical
costs of bringing polar science to students and educators. The PIs propose to
provide opportunities to build the capacity of polar scientists for
communicating and engaging with diverse audiences. They will also create
scalable, in-person and virtual opportunities for educators and students to
engage with polar scientists and their research through data visualizations,
data activities, educator workshops, webinars, and student research symposia.
The desired product is a set of data rich instructional materials and customized
professional development trainings that virtually expand access and opportunity
to engage more educators and their classrooms in polar science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over three years, the PIs will: 1) Conduct three
communication and diversity workshops for a total of 60 polar scientists and
provide opportunities for scientists to practice and apply the information
presented; 2) Develop a social media/web program dedicated to promoting polar
research and education and outreach programs; 3) Develop activities that engage
students with real polar data and a set of adaptable data visualization tools
that allow students to interact with these data; 5) Develop and implement 10
online educational webinars and 3 in-person half-day educator workshops; 6)
Conduct 4 weeklong educator professional development workshops; 7) Run 4
symposia nationally for approximately 1200 students to present their polar
research investigations to polar scientists; 8) Foster the use of real polar
data in undergraduate teaching through the Community College Undergraduate
Research Initiative (CCURI) to increase students' data skills and knowledge of
polar science; and 9) Create an asynchronous e-course that highlights polar
science research and uses data in teaching for science
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will improve the communication
capacity of the polar science community. It will help bring real-world datasets,
models, and simulations into the classroom and make scientific data from the
poles and information about polar research widely available and useful to
various audiences. The project will engage under-represented and underserved
students in polar scientific research and many of the materials created and
connections between scientists and educators are likely to be sustainable. This
effort supports NSF/PLR goals to diversify the research community and improve
access to information on polar research.