* 1525393
* Facilitating Improvement in Undergraduate STEM Instruction: Providing A Research-Based Foundation for the Emerging Class of Change Initiatives Involving Teams
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Charles Henderson, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2020
* USD 467,684.00

This project examines empirically the use of teams across the US in initiatives
to successfully increase the use of evidence-based teaching practices in
undergraduate STEM. It directly addresses the IUSE program goal of improving the
knowledge base for increasing the use of evidence-based teaching and learning
practices in undergraduate education. The background perspective for this
project is the shift in the dominant theory of institutional improvement. For
many years, standard practice by those practitioners in the STEM higher
education community seeking to improve undergraduate instructional practices has
been to seek funding for the development and dissemination of curricular
materials and associated instructional practices. These practitioners have
predominantly operated alone or in small groups. There is a growing consensus
among STEM educators that relying on the principal investigators' efforts to
disseminate their own improvements often does not lead to widespread propagation
among other educators. For this reason, newer STEM education improvement
initiatives are moving towards change strategies focused on encouraging entire
academic departments and institutions to increase their use of evidence-based
teaching. Increasingly, instructional improvement projects supported by grants
are doing this by engaging teams of faculty instructors, graduate student
teaching assistants, and post-graduate researchers to collaboratively redesign
content and instructional approaches in STEM undergraduate courses, drawing on
many of the effective approaches that have been developed over the last several
decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will&lt;br/&gt;- Develop a national
census of undergraduate STEM initiatives using team-based approaches to change;
&lt;br/&gt;- Synthesize survey and interview data to identify categories that
distinguish among team-based approaches; and&lt;br/&gt;- Conduct a meta-
synthesis-- connecting the categories that emerge from this analysis with extant
literature from a wide range of disciplines related to team learning,
organizational team structures and processes, and models and theories supporting
teams. &lt;br/&gt;This project offers substantial value to the research
community by exploring and testing theory from a wide range of disciplines.
There is a wide range of configurations among the teams used in STEM teaching
improvement initiatives. Teams vary in terms of size, composition, goals,
leadership, and process. Improved understanding of how effectively teams work
for particular goals and outcomes, what kind of leadership and facilitation is
needed to keep them vital and on-task, and what kinds of relationships,
communication, and collaborative work are necessary for them to reach their
goals will bolster the effectiveness of institutional and community
transformation efforts. Application of this knowledge has the potential to
create improved broader impacts from NSF grants and other improvement
initiatives. This project receives co-funding from NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR)
program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.