* 1525953
* III: Small: Indexing, Querying, and Visualizing Big Spatial and Spatio-temporal Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Mohamed Mokbel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,768.00

This project conducts research, develops requisite knowledge, and builds
software infrastructure to support data management for Big Spatial and Spatio-
temporal Data. This is a response to the recent explosion in the amounts of
spatial and temporal data produced by several devices that include smart phones,
space telescopes, and medical devices. Applications using such data and in an
urge need for the research of this project include studying climate data that
deals with Terra bytes of monthly spatio-temporal satellite data, understanding
the brain's architectural and functional principles through modeling brain
neurons as spatial data, and analyzing billions of monthly geotagged social
media contents for event detection and analysis. The project packages all its
developed components into a full-fledged free open-source system, available to
the research and developers communities in large. Besides its impact on
industry, this project will have significant broader impact across multiple
segments of society that include graduate and undergraduate student education by
using this project software as a vehicle for their research, outreach to K-12
students through simple map visualization APIs, curriculum development through
test labs inside the developed software of this project, and tutorial
presentations in domestic and international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is an the urge need to support big
spatial data, such need is hampered by the lack of specialized systems,
techniques, and algorithms. Although big data is well supported with a variety
of general purpose distributed systems, none of these systems provide any
special support for spatial or spatio-temporal data. The only way to support big
spatial and spatio-temporal data in current systems is to either treat it as
non-spatial data or to write code wrappers around existing non-spatial systems.
However, doing so does not take any advantage of the properties of spatial data,
hence resulting in sub-par performance. This project tackles this research gap
by providing a native support for spatial and spatio-temporal data inside
general current big data systems. In particular, the project exploits three main
research topics, namely, indexing, querying, and visualization of big spatial
and spatio-temporal data. In terms of indexing, the project builds novel,
generic, and scalable spatial and spatio-temporal index structures for Hadoop
Distributed File System (HDFS), which is the de facto storage layer in most
nowadays big data systems. In terms of querying, the project develops novel
query processing techniques for range queries, nearest-neighbor queries, and
spatial join, that take advantage of the spatially indexed HDFS to support
various query operations on big spatial and spatio-temporal data. In terms of
visualization, the project develops new scalable techniques to visualize big
spatial data as single- or multi-level images. Publications, technical reports,
open-source software, and experimental data from this research are disseminated
via the project web site (http://www.cs.umn.edu/~mokbel/BigSpatial).