* 1525435
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Fog Networking: Architecture, Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Sangtae Ha, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 249,966.00

The past 15 years have seen the rise of the cloud, along with a rapid increase
in Internet backbone traffic and more sophisticated cellular core networks. Some
of the responsibilities of these: (1) data centers, (2) backbone IP networks,
and (3) cellular core networks, are now 'descending' to be among, or near, the
end users, i.e., to the edge of networks. Fog networking is an architecture that
uses one or a collaborative multitude of end-user clients or near-user edge
devices to carry out a substantial amount of storage, communication and
management. Engineering artifacts and applications that reflect such an
architecture include 5G, home/personal networking, and the Internet of Things
(IoT). It has thus become both feasible and interesting to ask the question:
"What can be done on the network edge?" Can it carry out a substantial amount of
storage (rather than storing data primarily in large-scale data centers),
communication (rather than routing traffic always through the backbone network),
and network measurement and control (rather than controlling primarily at
gateways like those in the LTE Core)? Potential benefits of fog networking
include real-time processing, client-centric objectives, pooling of local
resources, rapid innovation with affordable scaling, and feasibility to operate
on encrypted and multipath traffic.

There is no shortage of challenges in fog networking, including the following to
be tackled in this project: traversing the boundary between centralized and
distributed system architectures, steering the global behavior caused by
collective client actions, incentivizing client participation, and using
redundancy to achieve resilience on the network edge. Among a large and diverse
set of topics in fog networking, this project focuses on two themes: (1) Client-
driven measurement and inference, including real-time inference of network
congestion conditions. Clients can combine local measurements from multiple
sources to infer congestion in real time and use these insights to, for
instance, optimally preload content at uncongested times. Implementation is
achieved by turning client-side SDKs from an app development tool to a network
control element. (2) Client-based control and configuration, including control
of network connectivity and secure storage. On a fast timescale, client/edge
devices can actively optimize their network connectivity by switching between
heterogeneous networks, while on a longer timescale, they can relieve network
congestion by selectively throttling their data rates. Beyond network
connectivity, client-based software can also enhance storage security and
reliability by scrambling, shredding and spreading data to different storage
spaces.

Broader Impacts: Among this project's industry collaboration, curriculum
development, mentoring and outreach are the following highlights. (1) Fog
Consortium. Fog networking has the potential to tip the balance of power in the
overall IT ecosystem. The PIs help create a Fog Industry-Academia Consortium,
which will promote the ideas of fog networking and host outreach events and
internship matching open to academia and industry. (2) MOOC. The PIs will offer
a new course on "Fog Networking and the Internet of Things," both online and in
in-person classes. (3) Community outreach. The PIs will maintain a research
website, including a database of papers on fog networking, that is currently
hosted at fogresearch.org.