* 1525178
* SHF:  Small:  Causal Foundations of Statistical Fault Localization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2021
* H. Andy Podgurski, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2021
* USD 497,500.00

The goal of this research is to improve the effectiveness of automated
techniques that seek to locate the faults in software that caused observed
failures (malfunctions) to occur during testing or operational use, so the
faults can be repaired. This goal is important because properly functioning
software is critical in business, communications, national security,
transportation, science, and many other activities. The desired improvements are
to be achieved by employing methodology that has been developed recently, across
several disciplines, to enable the causal effects of various kinds of
treatments, exposures, or interventions (e.g., medical treatments) upon outcomes
of interest (e.g., diseases) to be estimated accurately and without bias. If
successful, the proposed research has the potential to help software developers
to efficiently localize and repair faults in their products, thereby preventing
harms such as economic loss, injury, and even death. The research will also help
to disseminate sound causal inference methodology in the software engineering
community. More specifically, the research will investigate and improve the
foundations of causal statistical fault localization (CSFL), including the form
of causal models, the abstraction of causal states, and the handling of
iteration. A value-based approach to CSFL will be developed, which involves
profiling and analyzing the values of program variables, and this will be
integrated with predicate-based CSFL, in order to more accurately estimate the
failure-causing effects of program elements. A new approach to CSFL will be
explored that employs multilevel statistical models to integrate execution data
of different types and granularity levels, both for a given program version and
across versions. Meta-analysis techniques will be applied to the set of
suspiciousness scores obtained with CSFL, in order to take account of features
of the score distribution and of factors that predict the credibility if
individual scores. Also to be investigated is how the problem of selection bias
affects SFL techniques in different settings and how it can be mitigated.
Finally, the research will explore the potential value of case-control
methodology for improving the cost-effectiveness of SFL in scenarios where
software failures are infrequent.