* 1525574
* Systemic Transformation of Evidence-based Education Reform (STEER)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2022
* Hikmat BC, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,975,896.00

This project seeks to transform the culture of STEM departments in research
universities by balancing the values of research and teaching. It accomplishes
this by rewarding the adoption of evidence-based teaching strategies by faculty
and graduate students. The project helps these educators to adopt these
practices through training programs, work assignments, and support structures.
The increase in student learning and retention will lead to improved rewards and
prestige for faculty. The project also focuses on the special needs of under-
represented groups and of students transferring from community colleges. The
ultimate goal of transforming institutional culture is to increase the retention
and preparation of STEM majors and to produce a greater number of STEM graduates
who are well prepared for life, citizenship, and careers. The project is
centered at the University of South Florida. This University is partnering with
Hillsborough Community College, which provides a large number of transfer
students. Implementation will be guided by the extensive planning conducted over
the past two years, supported in part by an NSF WIDER planning grant. This
process resulted in the development of a systemic approach to creating a culture
that balances research and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of change
guiding this project is a combination of bottom-up and top-down strategies
described in the research literature, notably the work of Adrianna Kezar. This
project will produce new research knowledge about deliberate institutional
change in the form of validation, testing, and efficiency assessment of the
underlying change strategies. Six explicit change strategies are being
implemented. These have been found to represent effective approaches to cultural
change in research-intensive STEM departments. A Transition Implementation
Leadership Team (TILT) has been formed to lead these efforts. This team is
broadly representative of faculty, administrators, and staff. The change
strategies include: partnering with a feeder community college to improve STEM
student transfer and success; establishing interdisciplinary and departmental
retreats that foster convergence in course design and adoption of evidence-based
teaching; supporting faculty development; focusing initially on gateway courses
then on other STEM courses; revising university policies to enhance the rewards
for improved teaching; and training Graduate Teaching Assistants and student
advisers. The project will provide an analysis, interpretation, and synthesis of
the results of its change efforts in formats understandable and useful for non-
scientists in order to stimulate policy formulation by local, State and Federal
agencies. A second knowledge goal is to develop understanding of the key
elements driving change in a generalized context that is useful as an adaptable
model for other colleges and universities to guide their self-improvement
efforts.