* 1525623
* Project SEA Change: Using Social Connectivity to Improve Quantitative Literacy and Transform Undergraduate Science Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* William Midden, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2022
* USD 3,067,656.00

Quantitative literacy skills are important indicators of civic engagement and
social equity, and they contribute to successful progress and college degree
attainment. Because of the importance of quantitative literacy skills, the fact
that 20-30% of the US adult population (college graduates included) exhibit
weakness in these skills is of profound significance for society. Project SEA
Change is a cooperative venture of Bowling Green State University and Owens
State Community College to increase students' success in STEM undergraduate
education by improving students' quantitative competence and logical reasoning
skills. Since mathematics is the primary barrier to college completion, this
project will have a transformative impact on undergraduate education by
increasing degree attainment at both two-year and four-year levels, and
increasing access and transfer from community college to a four-year school for
students from low-income backgrounds and first-generation college students. In
so doing, the project will broaden the diversity of voices within the STEM
community, and create a more STEM-literate society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
SEA Change will achieve its goals of improving the quantitative literacy skills
of undergraduate students in STEM courses through the following strategies: (1)
widening implementation among faculty members and teaching assistants of high-
fidelity research-based instructional strategies; (2) improving social support
for and connectivity among STEM transfer students; (3) offering an "emporium-
style" learning model that integrates self-paced computer instruction with on-
demand, one-on-one tutoring; and (4) strengthening collaborative leadership
among administrators and faculty in support of stronger STEM education. The
project will employ social network analyses, in combination with professional
development activities, student learning communities, and high-profile
interdisciplinary initiatives, to test the power of subgroups to promote rapid,
large shifts in the use of evidence-based teaching practices, reduce the
"transfer shock" experienced by community college students, and deepen the
commitment of students to mastery of mathematics. The research efforts embedded
in the project will contribute to knowledge of effective approaches to
organizational change that foster deeper student learning.