* 1525642
* TWC: Small: Linking the Unlinkable: Design, Analysis, and Implementation of Network Flow Fingerprints for Fine-grained Traffic Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Amir Houmansadr, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,682.00

Network traffic analysts are currently unable to link network flows across wide
area networks to determine the origin of a network traffic flow, which is
critical in understanding sources of attacks. This project is developing a novel
technique for linking network flows, called flow fingerprinting, that could help
help network defenders identify the origin of a network-based attack or help law
enforcement track the source of criminal activity. The work could also reveal
weaknesses that must be addressed in systems that protect users online
anonymity.

This project investigates network flow fingerprinting for traffic analysis. The
project has three main research thrusts: First, using coding theory in the
design of network flow fingerprinting systems that are tailored for various
networking applications. Second, performing rigorous theoretical analysis of
flow fingerprints in order to identify their limitations and capabilities, as
well as to devise optimum fingerprinting systems under specific threat models.
The analysis thrust uses information theory and detection and estimation theory.
Third, identifying real-world application scenarios for flow fingerprints, and
implementing the devised flow fingerprinting systems in such real-world
scenarios to assess their usability and challenges. Specifically, the project is
evaluating the use of flow fingerprints in compromising large-scale, distributed
anonymity networks like Tor.