* 1525920
* NeTS: Small: Enabling High-Quality Mobile Crowdsourcing with Lifestyle-aware and Energy-efficient Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Jian Tang, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 354,431.00

The success of a crowdsourcing application highly depends on whether a capable
crowd can be recruited to undertake the corresponding tasks. For most
applications, the cost is also a big concern. Recent research has been focused
on incentive mechanisms for mobile crowdsourcing, which determine how to recruit
a crowd mainly based on their prices/costs. However, scant attention has been
paid to capability of the recruited crowd, i.e., the quality of services/data
each individual mobile user and the whole crowd are potentially capable of
providing. The project team aims to design a new lifestyle-aware approach for
mobile crowdsourcing. The basic idea is to maintain a (relatively) stable set of
mobile users and learn to gain a comprehensive view of their life patterns
(i.e., their capabilities) such that once a mobile crowdsourcing task is
received, a good crowd, whose capabilities well match the task, can be quickly
found. The proposed research will significantly improve quality of mobile
crowdsourcing services and reduce their energy usages, which can substantially
benefit mobile crowdsourcing service providers and users, and more importantly,
is good for global environment. Moreover, the proposed project is expected to
fill the literature gap and inspire more research along this
line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project to enable high-quality
mobile crowdsourcing by designing a novel and holistic solution for crowd
recruitment, which utilizes an energy-efficient framework for learning
lifestyles of mobile users via smartphone sensing, and then employs lifestyle-
aware algorithms and incentive mechanisms for crowd recruitment. To achieve the
above objective, the proposed research is organized into three cohesive research
thrusts: Thrust 1 Energy-efficient Lifestyle Learning: a unified and energy-
efficient framework will be developed to learn lifestyles of mobile users by
characterizing their behaviors and habits, and predicting their future
activities; Thrust 2 Lifestyle-aware Crowd Recruitment and Incentive Mechanisms:
Quality of Crowd (QoC) models and lifestyle-aware algorithms will be developed
for effective crowd recruitment; Thrust 3 Implementation and Performance
Evaluation: the proposed approaches will be implemented on a smartphone sensing
platform and will be validated and evaluated via extensive simulation and
experiments.