* 1525343
* Collaborative Research: Beyond Active Learning: Learning Assistant (LA) Supported Pedagogies in Large Lecture Science Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Jeffrey Boyer, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2020
* USD 359,740.00

The University of Colorado at Denver, North Dakota State University Fargo, and
Florida International University have received an NSF Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education: Education and Human Resources Design and Development tier award
to observe, characterize, and interpret the active learning methods employed in
a large sample of Learning Assistant (LA) supported and non-LA supported science
courses at the three universities. The research will investigate how active
learning methods and undergraduate LA support contribute to the learning gains,
achievement, retention, and persistence of over 10,600 Biology students, 8,800
Chemistry students, and 7,600 Physics students during each year of the four-year
project. The Project will provide critical evidence on active learning as it 1)
examines a large number of students and faculty in three STEM disciplines
(Chemistry, Biology, and Physics) at three large public universities, 2)
provides deep understanding of how active learning and LA support promotes
student success, 3) examines student success through a variety of measures, 4)
provides critical insight into the learning of underrepresented/minority (URM)
students in STEM, and 5) directly informs the large International Learning
Assistant Alliance, which currently consists of fifty-five (55)
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is based on the strong
evidence that the implementation of active learning methods in undergraduate
science courses can lead to increased student outcomes, including retention and
persistence to graduation. It is based also on the evidence that LAs can support
the use of active learning methods in the large lecture science courses. While
examining the interaction of active learning methods and Learning Assistant
support in undergraduate science courses, the PI team will seek answers to the
following four research questions: What are the activities employed in
undergraduate science courses? How can these activities be understood in terms
of a cognitive process framework? How are LAs involved in supporting these
activities? How does engaging in these activities with and without LA support
contribute to student level outcomes? Observational data will be collected at
both the course and student levels, using both extant instruments (e.g. the
Classroom Observation Protocol for Undergraduate STEM) and new student survey
instruments that probe student perceptions of instructional effectiveness. In
addition student learning outcome data will be gathered using established
concept inventories (e.g. the Force Concept Inventory). The results of this work
will contribute to our knowledge on student learning and interaction in STEM
classrooms and on effective strategies to retain students in STEM disciplines.