* 1525390
* Sleep Disruption as an Amplifier of Aggressive Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Zlatan Krizan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 483,364.00

It is vitally important to understand what leads to aggressive behavior, given
the negative impact of aggression on individuals, relationships, and society.
While research has documented some eliciting conditions that can precipitate
aggressive behavior, there has been little attention paid to the role that a
lack of sleep may play in modulating aggression. Proper sleep is a pre-requisite
for optimal social and emotional functioning and sleep disruption is
increasingly common; however, the role it plays in social behaviors such as
aggression is largely unknown. This project will test a novel theoretical model,
which posits that sleep restriction can cause increases in aggressive thoughts,
emotions, and behaviors. The research will elucidate important social
consequences of sleep restriction, test whether the effects are driven by
changes in cognitive functioning, and ultimately illuminate how sleep disruption
contributes to impaired social adjustment and behavioral problems.

The proposed research will test how emotional, cognitive, and self-control
responses to sleep restriction may contribute to aggressive behavior.
Participants will be randomly assigned to either follow their regular sleep
routines or to restrict their sleep by 4 hours over two working days.
Afterwards, they will return to the laboratory where their emotional and
behavioral responding will be examined. A series of experiments will examine
potential consequences of sleep restriction on different measures of anger,
hostility, and aggressive responding, as well as cognitive abilities to plan and
reason. This research will enable novel linkages of well-established
neurobehavioral effects of sleep disruption to complex emotions and social
behavior. Ultimately, given that sleep is a modifiable risk factor, a better
theoretical and process-based understanding of how aggression is affected by
sleep disturbance will enable more effective intervention strategies for
individuals at-risk for aggressive behavior (e.g., offenders) and for social
institutions motivated to reduce aggressive behavior (e.g., schools).