* 1525509
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Impacts of Mechanized Agriculture on Smallholders and Landscapes in the Central Amazon Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 08/16/2014,12/31/2015
* Robert Walker, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2015
* USD 11,498.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the social and
environmental implications of smallholder displacement by mechanized soy farming
for an important agricultural frontier in the central Amazon Basin. Mechanized
soybean farming has recently crept towards the Amazon Basin, and there is
growing concern about the consequences of this expansion on the rainforest. Past
research generally has focused on environmental impacts, namely deforestation
via direct encroachments and indirect land-use change at a regional scale. As a
result, less is known about the welfare impacts of soybean expansion or about
more localized and nuanced land-change outcomes, particularly those associated
with smallholder displacement. The doctoral student will focus on social and
environmental processes stemming from such displacements in the central Amazon
near the city of Santarem. He will conduct research that seeks to describe the
circumstances under which such displacements occurred, such as whether land was
sold at fair market value or was transferred without adequate compensation via
coercion. The student also will address land changes associated with soybean
expansion in the central basin. To this end, he will study the conversion of
primary and secondary rainforests on properties transferred from smallholders to
soybean interests, and he will examine the deforestation occurring in new
frontiers created by the in-migration of smallholders from areas of soybean
consolidation. Research methods will include a survey of smallholders in order
to describe the process of land transfer and to ascertain their destination
choices upon land transfer to soybean interests as well as analyses of remotely
sensed imagery to determine land-change impacts.

This project will address social processes and complex interactions involving
multiple agents and their subsequent impacts on the Amazon landscape. The
project will contribute to development of land-change science, which has been
long dominated by a paradigm focused on land managers acting in isolation. This
project will help expand this paradigm by showing how multiple land-change
outcomes occurring on properties sold and on newly acquired holdings can result
from a single land sale, and it can describe how land change occurs as a result
of multiple agents and social processes impacted by power relations. Project
results should have policy implications, because little is known about the
welfare effects of soybean mechanization, particularly with respect to
smallholders. Information generated by this project should contribute to policy
debates regarding ways to balance development and the environment in the Amazon.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish an independent research
career.