* 1525490
* SEU Living Learning Community/Active Learning (LLCAL) Project
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Richard Kopec, Saint Edward's University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,608,224.00

St. Edward's University in Austin, Texas, will conduct a significant
transformation of the first-year experience for all beginning college STEM
majors by creating multiple activities to enrich students' learning and college
experience, enhance the likelihood of academic success, promote students'
satisfaction with, persistence in, and completion of STEM degrees, and prepare
students for STEM careers. A Summer Bridge Program to prepare entering students,
STEM-Living Learning Communities for first-year students, and course-based and
summer research experiences will enrich student learning. Faculty will also
shift the pedagogical approach in STEM first-year courses in biology, chemistry,
mathematics and computer science to feature more active, experiential, and peer
learning strategies. Selected second-year STEM courses will be developed to
provide further opportunities for students to engage in STEM research and
improve their communication skills. The project will provide liberal arts
colleges like St. Edward's with a useful model for strengthening student success
in early STEM courses, a period that is important to student retention and long-
term success in STEM study. As an Hispanic-serving institution, St. Edward's is
especially well-positioned to model and study the impact of these interventions
in the experiences of Hispanic and women students, who are underrepresented
nationally among STEM graduates.

Key project components include: residence hall-based STEM Living-Learning
Communities, pedagogies emphasizing group interaction within first-year gateway
STEM courses, summer research experiences, sophomore course experiences designed
to maintain community cohesiveness and increase students' research and
communication skills, course scheduling designed to create student cohorts, and
faculty workshops and a faculty learning community to support the use of new
pedagogical strategies. The project's research program will study the effect of
these interventions, including the impact of cohort scheduling on student
learning outcomes in STEM, the influence of shared cohort living on
collaborative learning, and the impact of elements of the sophomore program.
This program focuses on scientific communication, ethics, and entrepreneurship
with the aim of increasing students' retention and academic success. In
developing and evaluating the impact of a set of innovative interventions
designed to deepen STEM learning in the first two years, the project will
provide models and lessons to all institutions seeking ways to strengthen the
success of STEM undergraduate students, especially students from
underrepresented groups.