* 1525044
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Practical Security Protocols via Advanced Data Structures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Roberto Tamassia, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 166,654.00

Data structures have a prominent modern computational role, due to their wide
applicability, such as in database querying, web searching, and social network
analysis. This project focuses on the interplay of data structures with security
protocols, examining two different paradigms: the security for data structures
paradigm (SD) and the data structures for security paradigm (DS). The objectives
of this project are, in the SD paradigm, to provide security and privacy both
for data elements in data sets and also for the inter-relationships and
distributions between such data elements, such as links between nodes in a
social network, and, in the DS paradigm, to develop new data structures to
improve the efficiency of algorithms for security and/or privacy applications.
The project explores methods for achieving these objectives include algorithm
design, theoretical analysis, rigorous proofs of security and correctness, and
experimental validation of claims of practicality. This research focuses on the
security and cybersecurity uses of three advanced data structures: tree
structures, invertible Bloom filters and cascading tables. The project advances
knowledge on (a) authenticated data structures and verifiable query execution
within the SD paradigm, and (b) secure deduplication, searchable encryption, and
privacy-preserving memory allocators within the DS paradigm.