* 1525692
* CAREER: A new and pragmatic framework for modeling and predicting conditional quantiles in data-sparse regions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/30/2014,08/31/2018
* Feifang Hu, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 298,474.00

Quantile regression provides a valuable semiparametric tool for modeling the
conditional quantiles of a response variable given predictors. However, making
inference for quantile regression is challenging in data-sparse regions such as
at low or high quantiles with quantile levels close to 0 or 1. In the proposed
research, the Principal Investigator (PI) aims to develop theory and methodology
for quantile regression in data-sparse regions, which opens up a significant new
direction in quantile regression. For estimating extreme conditional quantiles
of the response distribution, the PI plans to develop extrapolation methods
based on a novel application of the extreme value theory. In data sparse areas,
the formulation of models plays a critical role. The PI will study models with
different levels of complexity, which calls for different techniques for
quantifying the tail quantiles. New theory and methods for joint quantile
estimation and inter-quantile shrinkage will be developed to improve statistical
efficiency by sharing information across multiple quantile functions. The PI
will also study tail quantile regression for dependent data, where the common
understanding about the impact of dependence on statistical inference needs to
be re-examined. As a result, new and efficient methods to incorporate tail
dependence will be proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important
problem in many fields is the modeling and prediction of events that are rare
but have significant consequences. Unexpectedly heavy rainfall, large portfolio
loss, and dangerously low birth weight are some examples of rare events. For
such events, scientists are particularly interested in modeling and estimating
the tail quantiles of the underlying distribution rather than the central
summaries such as the mean or median. The proposed methodologies will have broad
and valuable applications in studies of rare events in climate sciences, risk
management in finance, studies of infant birth weights, and prediction of
insurance claims. The PI will integrate research and education by developing
advanced topics courses, engaging graduate and undergraduate students,
especially those from under-represented groups, in the project, and reaching out
to the K-12 education levels by training high school teachers.