* 1525966
* Effects of Maternal and Paternal Responsiveness on Infant Attention and Language Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Julie Gros-Louis, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 230,381.00

Babies vary significantly in their rate of language acquisition during the first
few years of life. Disparities in language development and vocabulary growth in
particular can have long term impacts for children's later academic success. How
parents interact with and respond to their babies is one factor that has an
important impact on babies' language development. However, it is unclear how
social interactions and parent responses influence developmental change in
infants. The current research will explore how parent responses to babies'
vocalizations affect the babies' visual attention in the moment as a potential
pathway to longer-term language development. Understanding the relations among
responsiveness, visual attention, and subsequent language development can reveal
how everyday social interactions support language learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mothers' and fathers' social interactions with their 6- to
12-month-old infants will be observed. Observation periods will be coded for
infant vocalization, parental responsiveness, and infant visual attention
following parental responses. The data will be analyzed for relations between
infant vocalizations and parent responses, between parent responses and infant
attention, and between observations and subsequent language development as
indexed by parental report language questionnaires administered when infants are
15 and 24 months of age. Broad hypotheses include: parent responses will affect
infant attention and this will influence language learning; parents will be more
responsive to behaviors that are more speech-like and communicative; different
types of parent responses will affect infant behavior differently --some
responses will more positively impact language development. An important outcome
of the research project will be linking parents' responsiveness and infants'
visual attention and variation in vocabulary growth to help understand
individual differences in language development. The findings will inform
theories of development by relating the dynamics of moment-to-moment behaviors
to learning and development. Furthermore, the research findings have the
potential to inform interventions or parenting advice to promote language
development in all children, particularly those who are at risk for delays.