* 1525216
* Collaborative Research: Improving Conceptual Understanding of Multivariable Calculus Through Visualization Using CalcPlot3D
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Deborah Moore-Russo, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 08/31/2019
* USD 75,464.00

The purpose of this collaborative project from Monroe Community College, Robert
Morris University, and the State University of New Your (SUNY) at Buffalo is to
use visual exploration to help students develop a deeper understanding of
multivariable calculus concepts and to conduct and publish research on the
effects of visualization on student understanding of these concepts. This
project will build upon the success of the CalcPlot3D multivariable calculus
exploration applet, an award-winning, interactive Java applet that is already
widely used across the United States to facilitate the teaching and learning of
multivariable calculus. The CalcPlot3D applet is designed to improve students'
geometric intuition about surfaces, vectors, vector fields, and curves, thereby
preparing students to understand more fully engineering and physics problems in
subsequent STEM coursework. This project will greatly enhance the use of
CalcPlot3D by creating a series of visual concept explorations for multivariable
calculus and expand CalcPlot3D to facilitate visualization of concepts in
physics, engineering, differential equations and linear algebra courses. It also
will fill a gap in the existing educational research by addressing the effects
of visualization on student understanding of three-dimensional concepts.

Three professors from these diverse institutions (community college, private
4-yr, public 4-yr) will collaborate with faculty across the United States and
Mexico to: (1) design and test a series of new visual concept explorations and
applications in CalcPlot3D to improve student understanding of multivariable
calculus; (2) expand the features of CalcPlot3D to accommodate the new concept
explorations and address applications in differential equations, linear algebra,
physics, and engineering; (3) create new visualization apps, including a new
version of CalcPlot3D, that work on more platforms, including tablets and
phones; (4) conduct and publish research investigating how student understanding
of multivariable calculus concepts changes through the use of visualization and
dynamic concept explorations; and (5) extend and diversify the user base by
disseminating project materials through papers, workshops and conferences, by
creating a Spanish language version of project materials, and by promoting the
exchange of user feedback and research. Students who participate in this project
will help populate a better prepared and more diverse workforce in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).