* 1525855
* CSR: Small: Scaling the Real-time Capabilities of Powertrain Controller in Automotive Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Aviral Shrivastava, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 449,506.00

CSR: Small: Scaling the Real-time Capabilities of Powertrain Controllers in
Automotive Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ScratchPad Memory(SPM)-based many-core
architecture is a promising concept to improve the real-time capability of
computing systems required in safety-critical applications. Demonstrating the
proposed approach for powertrain controllers is just the first step and has the
potential to enable the rapidly increasing fields of internet-of-things (IoT),
avionics, robotics, cyber-infrastructure, and much more. An open-source cycle-
accurate simulator of the SPM-based many-core processor, and a low level virtual
machine (llvm) compiler will be developed as the outcome of this research
significantly advancing this technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop architecture, compilation, scheduling techniques, and real- time
analysis to scale up the real-time capabilities of powertrain controllers of
automotive systems. Powertrain controller is a safety-critical, hard-real-time
controller in modern automobiles, directly responsible for the operation of the
engine and transmission. The complexity of powertrain control applications is
rapidly increasing in a quest to fulfill increasingly stringent regulations on
the fuel- efficiency and emissions. To meet this demand, the real-time
capability of powertrain engine control units (ECU) must also improve. Real-time
capability of a processor is essentially a measure of how many/complex/frequent
tasks can be guaranteed to finish in given deadlines. The challenge is that the
real-time capability of a processor cannot be improved by traditional
performance enhancing techniques, e.g., increasing frequency, adding more on-
chip memory, or by adding caches. This research will employ (SPMs) instead of
caches to improve the real-time capability of powertrain ECUs. SPM partitioning,
mapping/scheduling, SPM management techniques and real-time analyses for SPM-
based many-core architecture (in which each core has an SPM instead of a cache)
will be developed. This will be done for two data management schemes: one for
task-level management, where all the code and data of the task are brought into
the SPM at the beginning of the task and the other for function-level
management, which enables executing applications on processors with much smaller
SPM sizes, and can still be efficient through various compiler optimizations.