* 1525457
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Competition, Neurality and Service Quality in Cellular Wireless Access
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Saswati Sarkar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 266,000.00

The network neutrality debate has raised many issues of fair competition,
revenue generation, &amp;#8232;and the role of emerging technology. In the
current public-commodity, data-networking marketplace, different competing
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) presently have the option to act neutrally
with respect to content and application-services &amp;#8232;from remote 'content
providers' (CPs). Also, competition and cooperation issues not
directly&amp;#8232; related to neutrality need to be addressed, e.g., roaming
charges for small entrant cellular-wireless ISPs. These issues have direct
bearing on availability and prices that ordinary consumers face. To better
understand these important issues, this project aims to investigate models of
competition and cooperation that integrate economic, regulatory and networking
factors, particularly those of the still growing cellular-wireless context with
its complex channel quality dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One research thrust
is to assess if there are any real economic advantages for an ISP when acting
non-neutrally for different models of interaction between ISPs and CPs. To this
end, this project will jointly consider different types of cellular wireless
data-plans typically involving some type of quota, subscription frameworks and
advertising revenues of CPs, side-payments between ISPs and remote CPs manifest
through service-level agreements at gateways to the (last-mile) ISP, and the
physical-layer controls (e.g., transmission power) enacted by the ISP to service
the wireless traffic according to different priorities and quality-of-service
requirements. It will also consider the problem of promotion of competition
between like providers to reduce consumer costs, particularly how to regulate
roaming charges to encourage entrant cellular-wireless access providers. In
addition, the project aims to investigate how best to leverage available types
of real-world operational data, both econometric and workload (packet-traffic),
to inform the investigators' models.