* 1525652
* EngageIT: Building Capacity in Community Colleges to Recruit and Retain Underrepresented Students in Computing
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Lucinda Sanders, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2019
* USD 605,196.00

A diverse, well-educated computing and information technology (CS/IT) workforce
is vital to U.S. well-being. The unique inclusive and open-access mission of
community colleges makes them crucial points of intervention. The "EngageIT"
project at the University of Colorado at Boulder will develop and test a model
of professional development (PD) for community college CS/IT faculty that builds
their capacity to recruit and retain women and underrepresented minorities. The
project will investigate student persistence in CS/IT disciplines to measure the
effectiveness of the PD and to empower faculty with program-specific diversity
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consist of three activities: (1)
designing a scalable, research-based PD course; (2) implementing this course
with two cohorts of faculty; and (3) tracking student persistence in the
discipline as a means to evaluate PD efficacy. The project will make use of the
National Center for Women &amp; Information Technology's (NCWIT) considerable
expertise and network, including research-based recruitment and retention
practices, a 1500+ curricula repository for student engagement (EngageCSEdu), a
dedicated community college advisory board, and social scientists to support the
project. The study will use a mixed methods approach, which will enable
triangulation and synthesized data analysis that is unavailable through a simple
quantitative or qualitative study. Rubric-based assessments will provide an
objective measure of the implementation of the PD for each faculty member.
Assessing both pre- and post-PD will account for the different levels of
engagement practices the faculty may already be implementing prior to
involvement in this project. Research findings will help educators to understand
differential student persistence in CS/IT and the role faculty play in the
field's diversification, helping to provide more engaging learning environments
for diverse students, and leading to a more diverse U.S. technical workforce.