* 1525878
* First-Year Students as Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Stephen Davis, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 593,251.00

Pepperdine University has received an NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Education and Human Resources Design and Development tier award to
integrate high impact teaching practices that have been demonstrated to promote
student success into a set of first-year seminars. In collaboration with
colleagues at Whittier College, an Hispanic Serving Institution, the PI team
proposes to integrate authentic scholarly research in biology into conventional
first-year seminars, thereby invigorating and transforming introductory
coursework into a First-Year Students as Scholars Program (SAS-Program). Through
this novel approach, biology majors will be engaged in authentic research during
their first college term. At Pepperdine, a subset of those students will apply
for and receive an apprenticeship in an active research laboratory. This will
prepare those students for total immersion in research the following summer,
after which they will serve as student mentors to the next cohort of first-year
biology majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both engagement in undergraduate research
and participation in first-year seminars have been identified as high impact
practices and established as one of the most effective approaches to improving
the retention and performance of underrepresented or at-risk populations of STEM
students. Thus, the program will benefit all students involved, including first-
generation, low-income students and those belonging to underrepresented groups.
The first-year seminars will welcome students into a scholarly identity group,
engaged in authentic research that applies the scientific method to real world
problems. This experience not only will serve to orient high school graduates to
successful college life, reducing anxiety during a pivotal transition, but also
will invigorate the basic principles being learned in concurrent introductory
courses, such as chemistry, biology, statistics, and physics. The project will
use a mixed-methods approach both to investigate how well students learned and
to elicit student perspectives of the course design and implementation and how
these perspectives change over time. In addition faculty-mentors will assess
learning objectives of the first-year seminars using an Erbes' survey instrument
(Erbes 2008; Carr et al. 2013). This will allow longitudinal comparisons with
previous outcomes and focus on skills required to implement the scientific
method in "co-creating knowledge with faculty" (Chopp 2014). Examples of student
behaviors to be observed include the ability to: complete a primary literature
review, identify gaps in knowledge, design appropriate experiments to test
hypotheses, employ appropriate statistical methods, solve unanticipated
problems, interpret empirical results, etc. The results of the project's
evaluation will enhance the general knowledge within the undergraduate STEM
education enterprise of the most effective practices for the integration of
authentic research in a first-year seminar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources,
Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Education: A Call to
Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.