* 1525775
* Collaborative Research: Deep Roots: Wide-Spread Implementation of Community-Driven Evidence-Based Pedagogy
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2023
* Mark Mort, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,053,615.00

This multi-university institutional transformation project, led by the
University of Kansas, will both implement and study a model to improve STEM
education within seven universities. The ultimate goal is to propagate
widespread adoption of evidence-based instructional methods in order to improve
undergraduate STEM learning and educational outcomes for both STEM and non-STEM
students. Five American institutions funded by this grant, as well as two
unfunded Canadian institutions, will test local adaptations of the model on
their own campuses. The model is derived from research on institutional change
and quality improvement, and builds on an extensive successful initiative (known
as the Science Education Initiative, SEI) at two of the partner institutions the
University of Colorado at Boulder and the University of British Columbia. The
core approach is to support "embedded expertise" in STEM departments to catalyze
course transformation and build intellectual communities within and across
institutions, in order to share in the development of course reform. The other
participating institutions are the University of Texas at San Antonio, Indiana
University, the University of California, Davis, and Queens University in
Canada. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model of transformation involves embedding
STEM education experts (specially prepared postdoctoral scholars or faculty
leaders) in departments. These experts will collaborate with department faculty
to guide and support the implementation of research-based educational practices
in STEM courses. This extension of the SEI model supports change with a smaller
infusion of resources by developing communities of scholars around course
transformation across departments and institutions. These communities broaden
the impact of the embedded experts by expanding support and opportunities for
reflective practice for faculty, contributing to the development of a shared
vision, and encouraging a critical mass of faculty engagement within departments
needed to produce meaningful changes in the teaching environment. Seven research
universities that have been actively collaborating through the Bay View Alliance
will each implement and evaluate variations of this model on their own campuses.
The network serves two functions: 1) to build a community for intellectual
exchange and collaboration on evidence-based teaching as a key component of the
intervention itself, and 2) to permit a test of whether the intervention model
can be localized to different institutional contexts to yield widespread STEM
reform. A combination of quantitative and case study evaluation methods are
planned to identify the various dimensions and conditions that signal initial
readiness, successful approaches, and sustainable outcomes in participating
institutions.