* 1525194
* CIF: Small: Feasible Point Pursuit for Non-convex QCQPs: Algorithms and Signal Processing Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Konstantinos Slavakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,468.00

Over the last 20 years, convex optimization has become an indispensable design
and analysis tool in science and engineering. Still, many important design and
analysis problems are non-convex and NP-hard. Among them, non-convex
quadratically constrained quadratic programs (QCQPs) are nowadays often
encountered in wireless communications, networking, and signal processing.
Examples include phased-array unicast and multicast beamforming, and phase
retrieval and its applications in X-ray crystallography, optics, diffraction
imaging, astronomical imaging, and microscopy. Few methods are currently
effective for non-convex QCQPs, and only in special cases. This research
investigates several promising new approaches to obtaining and refining feasible
points for general non-convex QCQPs, and their applications in phase retrieval,
beamforming, radar, and wireless networking. The project offers rich
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate student engagement in cross-
disciplinary research, as well as freshman and K12 outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In preliminary work, a Feasible Point Pursuit - Successive
Convex Approximation (FPP-SCA) method was proposed, and initial tests revealed
exciting results ? motivating further research that comprises two intertwined
thrusts: one on design and analysis of new FPP methods and algorithms; and
another on new signal processing applications of non-convex QCQP methods. In
addition to analyzing and improving the original FPP-SCA, two new approaches are
being considered. One is derived using bilinearization, leading to alternating
optimization; the other using proportional fairness as a surrogate for max-min
fairness, leading to low-complexity FPP using an adaptively weighted cyclically
projected gradient approach. The optimality gap for fixed points of this
iteration is analyzed, pertinent simplifications are pursued for special problem
instances, and the link between max-min and proportional fairness is further
explored ? all with an eye towards improving our fundamental understanding of
non-convex QCQPs.