* 1525197
* An Intelligent Tutoring System for Organic Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Ian Gould, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 591,958.00

Building upon content and first generation electronic homework websites that
were created with prior NSF support, this IUSE: EHR project will develop an
adaptive intelligent tutoring system for organic chemistry. The critical
components of the system are (a) a student model that includes both cognitive
and affective factors, (b) a network to evaluate students' knowledge, and (c) a
meta-cognitive coach that will monitor the status of students' problem solving
skills. Previous research has shown that self-efficacy and self-determination
are the most important student-centric factors for high engagement with
electronic learning tools. The meta-cognitive coach will attempt to identify
students with poor self-regulation so that it can offer appropriate learning
strategies to promote the active development of organic chemistry problem
solving skills. The results of this research should contribute to the broader
development of intelligent tutoring systems across a variety of STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intelligent tutoring system will be
developed and disseminated along with associated course materials that guide a
method of instruction based on problem solving from fundamental organic
chemistry principles (e.g., Lewis acid/base theory; retrosynthetic analysis).
These materials together with the tutoring system are grounded in constructivist
pedagogy, wherein students construct an understanding in a strongly guided
setting, by applying fundamental principles to explain the properties and
reactions of organic molecules. The evaluation of the meta-cognitive coach will
be based on whether or not students are observed to have improved learning gains
and motivational gains (exam scores and questionnaire responses). The assessment
of learning strategy development will be done by the meta-cognitive coach
itself, which will analyze log data to determine the extent to which students'
actions conform to the learning strategy proposed. The results of this project
will be disseminated at the Bienniel Conference on Chemical Education and the
2017 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Chemical Education.