* 1525418
* NeTS: Small: Towards Efficient and Reliable Communication Infrastructure for Network Controlled Cyber Physical Systems with Application in Smart Grids
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Husheng Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Typical cyber physical systems (CPSs), such as smart grid, unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) and robotic networks, consist of physical dynamics, sensors,
communication network and controllers. The Communication network, which conveys
system measurements from sensors to controllers, plays a key role in CPSs,
similarly to the nerve system in human beings. Traditional data communication
networks (e.g., cellular networks or WiFi) focus only the delivery of data
packets, while the ultimate goal of a CPS is to control the physical dynamics
(e.g., stabilizing the voltages and frequencies in power networks). Hence, the
traditional design of communication network may not be optimal in the context of
CPSs, due to the mismatched goals of designs. This results in a pressing need to
study the design of communication networks in CPSs, which helps to enhance the
agility, robustness and efficiency of CPSs. This project studies how to
efficiently design system-dynamics-aware communication networks for CPS, which
integrates the areas of communications, networking, control, and dynamical
systems, and has applications to the important and growing field of CPS in
critical infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project specifically
addresses the following research tasks: (a) Joint Design as Hybrid Systems: The
theory of hybrid systems is used to model CPS, in which the operation mode of
communication network is modeled as the discrete state of a hybrid system, while
the physical dynamics are modeled using the continuous state. The communication
and control sub-systems are designed jointly by optimizing the hybrid system
dynamics; (b) Separate Design via Information Interface: The communication and
control sub-systems are designed separately and are bridged via designated
interfaces, such as communication quality of service (QoS) or virtual queue
mapping; (c) Coexistence with Elastic Data Traffics: The realtime data traffic
may share the same communication resource with elastic data traffics such as
Internet data. The queuing dynamics of elastic data traffic and the physical
dynamics of CPS are integrated in the same framework, and the scheduling for the
two types of traffics (elastic and realtime) is studied; (d) Application and
Implementation in Smart Grid: The principles, algorithms, and protocols obtained
in the previous two tasks are applied and substantiated in smart grids as a case
study for CPS. The voltage control in microgrid, both centralized and
decentralized, is particularly studied. They are implemented in both software
simulation testbed, in which the communication and control sub-systems are co-
simulated, and hardware testbed using USRP boards and the microgrid testbed.