* 1525904
* CIF:  Small:Toward a Stochastic Geometry for Cellular Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Martin Haenggi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2019
* USD 492,642.00

Demands for wireless Internet and voice access have continued to grow
exponentially, while the available spectrum remains scarce. As a result, novel
architectures and transmission techniques are needed for cellular networks to
improve their spectral efficiency and provide consistent and high-speed wireless
service for all users. The two key approaches to achieve this goal are increased
network density and heterogeneous network architectures, where multiple tiers of
base stations are deployed with different capabilities, depending on the user
density and traffic demands. For such networks, new mathematical models and
techniques are needed that capture their inherent randomness and heterogeneity.
Stochastic geometry is a mathematical theory that is ideally suited for such
problems. It provides both the models and the theory for the analysis of the
network performance and user experience. This project focuses on the development
of stochastic geometry-based tools tailored to the fifth generation of cellular
systems (5G), which will result in novel design insights and help identify
promising network architectures without the need for extensive and expensive
simulations. Hence it will have a significant impact on the discussions on 5G
that currently dominate the wireless industry and academic research and may even
influence the standardization process. In addition, the project devises novel
analytical techniques and makes theoretical contributions that are applicable
beyond cellular networks, and it helps train future generations of students in
emerging wireless technologies and analysis techniques.

As cellular networks become denser and more heterogeneous, the locations of the
base stations become more irregular due to restrictions on the placement and
adaptation to users and traffic. As a result, classical network models such as
lattices become outdated and need to be replaced by models that capture the
inherent randomness in the base station locations. Recently, researchers have
applied techniques from stochastic geometry for the analysis of some of the key
metrics of cellular systems, most notably the signal-to-interference ratio,
which determines the quality of the wireless connections. However, the
underlying model was mostly restricted to the Poisson point process, which is
analytically convenient but not very realistic. The analysis of more accurate
models and of advanced transmission schemes such as base station cooperation and
multi-antenna transmission has proven rather difficult. Hence there is an urgent
need to devise new models that accurately describe current and future cellular
networks and to significantly extend the set of tools for their analysis. This
proposal aims at meeting this need by applying novel ideas and recent insights
to develop new theoretical methods that expand the currently available ones in
three main directions: (1) efficient ways to obtain highly accurate approximate
results for diverse network models; (2) fine-grained and sharp results on the
experience of individual users; (3) fundamental insight into the impact of the
temporal dependence of the interference in cellular systems. The analytical
methods used include Palm theory, Tauberian theorems, series and factorial
moment expansions, and general probability theory, and the models will be
validated with actual data.