* 1525557
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Visualization Framework for Chemical Reactions
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Resa Kelly, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 265,924.00

Evidence that a chemical reaction has taken place often includes observable
phenomena such as changes in color or temperature, the appearance or
disappearance of materials or the formation of bubbles in a liquid. Students of
chemistry must explain these observations in terms of concepts that necessitate
the use of invisible particles such as atoms, ions and molecules. When students
encounter challenges to perceive or visualize in their minds the interactions
that take place between these unseen particles, learning can be hindered, and
students can become discouraged. This project will conduct research on effective
strategies to develop and present visualizations that support student learning
in General Chemistry. Students will view videos of chemical reactions that
exhibit obvious signs of chemical change. This will immediately be followed by
watching two animations that provide explanations at the particle level of the
reaction in the video. One animation will present a correct description, while
the other will contain intentional errors, and students will be asked to analyze
and resolve the differences. Ultimately, they will be asked to reflect on the
accuracy of each animation. This use of structured errors will facilitate the
acquisition of knowledge with regard to student conceptual understanding and
analytical reasoning of foundational chemical principles. The understanding and
insights revealed through this endeavor, regarding how visualizations can
enhance student success, will be of significant value to educators across a wide
range of scientific disciplines, from biology, to earth sciences, to physics and
more.

This visualization framework of videos with companion animations that employ
structured errors will challenge students to reflect deeply on their
understanding of three fundamental types of chemical reactions: oxidation-
reduction, precipitation and acid-base neutralization reactions. Several studies
will be undertaken to investigate how students respond to the video of
experimental evidence and the animations in variance to each other. Novel eye-
tracking studies will be done to examine how the viewing patterns of
participants are affected by focusing exercises that students do in connection
to their reflection on the visual components of the framework. The eye-tracking
research will then be compared to studies that examine how the animations in
variance affect the understanding the students demonstrate of the chemical
reactions, and how students connect with the animation models in relation to the
experimental evidence to revise and construct their understanding. Finally,
naturalistic studies will also be conducted to examine how students respond to
the tools in the authentic classroom learning environment. Assessment of project
products and milestones will employ both a team of advisors with areas of
expertise that span the range of research emphases in the project and an
external evaluator proficient in the development of visualizations to provide
independent perspective of the quality of the videos and animations and their
impacts on student learning.