* 1525716
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Development of Scalable Mobile Multidisciplinary Modules (SM3) for STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2015,04/30/2021
* Pavan Turaga, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 04/30/2021
* USD 481,979.00

The central idea in this project is to motivate students to pursue studies in
STEM areas by creating and disseminating scalable modules that demonstrate in a
compelling manner how math and engineering theory enables modern applications
such as those embedded in wireless devices. The goal is to motivate graduates to
create high-tech products, enter the high-tech workforce, and become innovators.
This project will promote a transformative STEM education agenda by developing
and disseminating innovative and scalable content for several courses. These
innovative products will promote a positive attitude change towards learning
STEM concepts by continuously fusing theory with high tech applications.
Objectives include developing a diverse community of users, innovative products
with mobile video-streamed content, software training modules for skill
building, e-books, and training workshops. The PIs will create and disseminate
products on multidisciplinary STEM applications in areas including engineering,
arts and media, and earth systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovative
educational modules will have comprehensive multidisciplinary content to address
diverse audiences. Modules will be packaged for mobile delivery and will be
multipurpose, multidisciplinary, and will: a) motivate students to learn theory
through compelling applications, b) engage students in implementation for skill
building and workforce creation purposes, and c) immerse diverse audiences and
stakeholders in hands-on workshops for outreach, retention, and recruitment
purposes. This project is based on collaboration between ASU and Clarkson
University and engages faculty from Johns Hopkins University, Phoenix College,
St. Lawrence University, Prairie View A&amp;M University, and Corona del Sol
high school. The project will use a mixed-method assessment process (qualitative
and quantitative data collection) to build an understanding of the impact of the
use of the modules, apps, and other tools on student learning gains, from the
individual concept level to more general knowledge about scientific and
engineering habits of mind and research practice. Assessments will be done
through electronic web tools, pre- and post- quizzes, presentations, one-to-one
interviews, and ordinary in-class testing.