* 1525596
* *Science* in the Classroom (SitC)
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Pamela Hines, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,274,487.00

This project will significantly expand the *Science* in the Classroom (SitC)
initiative (http://www.scienceintheclassroom.org), which was launched through
previous NSF funding (Awards DUE-1043998 and DUE-1224661). The most effective
science education reforms focus on engaging students in the process of science.
This project will pursue a unique approach to transforming the undergraduate
STEM learning environment, one that introduces undergraduates, at very early
stages in their careers, to important elements of the process of science:
reading primary research articles, communicating science, and engaging in a peer
review system. The project team, working with expert scientists, graduate
students, postdocs, teachers, and educational researchers, will translate
contemporary research papers, taken from the pages of the leading journal
*Science*, into tools for learning. The annotated papers and related resources
that are produced will allow students to engage with primary data sets and gain
a deep understanding of how scientists design experiments, gather and analyze
data, and present their conclusions. This approach enables students to assume
the persona of a scientist; it guides them through the scientific process of
posing questions, designing experiments to pursue those questions, analyzing the
data that returns from the experiments, and working toward new conclusions in
response to the analysis. The students also come to understand, first-hand, the
process of scientific communication, through which scientists explain their
progression from questions to experiments to data to conclusions, while also
generating the next set of intriguing questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will promote the development of transferable learning skills by
introducing cutting-edge research and primary literature into the undergraduate
classroom and by engaging students in the fundamental scientific principles of
experimental design and critical analysis. The resources that are developed by
the project will, in essence, expose students to the process of science. In
addition, the new resources will encourage students to apply and integrate their
new knowledge in the context of novel science, in place of simply learning
vocabulary words and concepts from a textbook. Besides growing and enhancing the
content of the existing SitC corpus, the new project will cultivate a "community
of practice" around developing SitC resources; develop materials and workshops
for pre-service teachers and college faculty, focusing on how to use the SitC
resources in the classroom; expand efforts to reach community college students
and faculty with the resources; and design instruments to assess the impact of
the resources on various dimensions of teaching and learning.