* 1525296
* SHF: SMALL: LUCID: Low-overhead, Unobtrusive Cache Contention Detection and Repair
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Joseph Devietti, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2020
* USD 482,422.00

Title: SHF: SMALL: LUCID: Low-overhead, Unobtrusive Cache Contention Detection
and Repair&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last decade has overseen a historic shift in
processor design towards multicore architectures. From servers to tablets,
phones and watches, processor architects are using multiple cores to achieve
performance and energy targets. Unfortunately, writing parallel code that
performs well on these processors is far from easy. The intellectual merits of
this project include developing new algorithms for finding and fixing
performance bugs in parallel code by integrating support from across the
computing stack including hardware, compilers and runtime systems. The project's
broader significance and importance is to improve the performance and energy
efficiency of parallel code, providing benefits for the users of all multicore
computing devices. This project also seeks to encourage participation from
underrepresented groups in the next generation of computer
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages recent advances in
hardware performance counters that allow for low-overhead, unobtrusive profiling
of cache contention in real systems. This performance counter information drives
new techniques for finding and automatically fixing cache contention without
programmer intervention. The research explores integrating contention detection
and repair with managed language runtimes. The researchers plan to openly
distribute the systems built for this project to facilitate examination by other
researchers and to integrate the research results into education.