* 1525028
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Computer Science Education Research Through Use of Appropriate Empirical Research Methods: Mentoring and Tutorials
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Mark Sherriff, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2022
* USD 129,413.00

The significance and importance of this project resides in its focus on
increasing the value and effectiveness of Computer Science Education (CSEd) by
providing computer science educators with the tools and the mentoring necessary
to properly evaluate novel teaching methods. As the demand for computer science
graduates increases, educators must effectively educate students at scale, which
requires innovation in teaching and learning techniques. This project will help
move the CSEd community from reflective teaching to the Scholarship of Teaching
and Learning by increasing education research rigor and replication frequency.
As a result, the computer science community will build theories and practices
about how best to educate students to meet workforce needs for computer science
talent. In the context of the NSF taxonomy of Education Research this project
resides in the Foundational Research category, i.e., one that develops
innovations in technology that will influence and inform research and
development in different contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to transform empirical CSEd research by creating and supporting a community
of CSEd researchers through: (1) creation and curation of laboratory packages to
facilitate empirical CSEd research; (2) facilitation of cohorts of 10-12
educators who are mentored in developing and executing an empirical CSEd
research study; and (3) development and presentation of tutorials on empirical
research methods at computer science and, in particular, CSEd conferences.
Laboratory packages are aids that provide researchers with a research question,
a methodology for designing and executing a study, tools and resources to
replicate the study, and results of previous related studies. The faculty
cohorts using these laboratory packages will have a more-focused interaction
during a summer session to develop their particular education research study
with a follow-up workshop to report and discuss results. Finally, the tutorials
and workshop results will allow for broader dissemination of the key concepts of
empirical CSEd research to the larger computer science community.