* 1525462
* SHF: Small: Novel Architecture Energy Harvesting for Sustainable Spot Cooling and Energy Management
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Carole-Jean Wu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 419,066.00

Increased power dissipation in computing devices has led to a sharp rise in
thermal hot spots on computer chips, creating a vicious cycle ? higher
temperatures bring higher leakage power, and higher power dissipation increases
temperature, thereby leading to thermal avalanches. To reduce the additional
power dissipation and reliability concerns caused by high temperature, current
heat management approaches apply cooling mechanisms to remove heat aggressively
as well as devise dynamic management techniques that avoid thermal emergencies
by slowing down heat generation of processors. However, current trends to
squeeze more computing power, e.g., in the form of large data centers or mobile
devices, stand in direct conflict to our ability to slow down demand for more
energy. The shrinking of transistor sizes further exacerbates the problem of
reduced energy efficiency. The solution proposed in this work is anticipated to
not only reduce cooling expenses and ambient temperatures, but also increase
energy utilization, device lifetime, and physical space utilization. The
technology developed here can be applied to a broad range of computing devices,
large or small. If the research is successful, it has the potential of having a
significant economic benefit as well as a significant, positive impact on the
environment. This is because performance improvement and power reduction of
processors under thermal constraints will have a direct impact upon the cooling
costs of huge data warehouses such as those of Google, Yahoo, Amazon, etc. Data
centers in the US consume many tens of billion kWh of electricity and generate
about nearly a billion metric tons of carbon dioxide. Even if this project
resulted in a 5% improvement in the energy consumption of a modern high
performance processor and therefore, in the millions of such processors housed
in data centers, that itself could reduce the amount of carbon dioxide released
into the atmosphere per year, and realize ten of millions of dollars in energy
cost savings. Furthermore, this energy harvesting research requires cross-
disciplinary engagement in areas such as material engineering, VLSI
architecture, system architecture, and mechanical engineering and will attract a
diverse set of student researchers. Overall, the engineering and scientific
contributions will also have important societal impacts, including the
broadening of ASU?s engineering curriculum, the engagement of graduate and
undergraduate students in research activities, the potential of creating high-
school or middle-school scientific projects, and the increased representation of
target underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the heat management
problem using an innovative approach ? rather than removing heat or slowing down
heat generation, the proposed work transforms the waste heat into reusable
energy for new applications such as self-powered spot-cooling. The main
objective of this project is to design and implement a novel architectural
framework to create the mechanisms, policies, and system support that allow
waste heat generated by computing devices to be harvested efficiently, to
achieve better energy utilization efficiency. This will be achieved by
exploiting the thermal characteristics of modern computing nodes and by
leveraging thermoelectric and pyroelectric energy harvesting materials. By
leveraging the thermoelectric and pyroelectric effects at the architectural
level, the varying spatial and temporal thermal gradients from computations are
exploited to transform processor waste heat (that otherwise dissipates) into
reusable energy. A novel application is also proposed that uses the newly
introduced energy in the form of a self-sustaining cooling system for
processors. This work evaluates the applicability of energy harvesting materials
by considering the intricate electrical properties of the materials and
heterogeneous temperature distribution of the components on a processor. The
proposed methodology is generic and can be readily adopted with commercially-
available thermoelectric and pyroelectric energy harvesting materials.
Nonetheless, with breakthroughs in the energy conversion efficiency of the
materials, the proposed framework could be applied directly with a further
improved degree of harvested energy, leading to even higher system energy
efficiency.