* 1525162
* SHF: Small: Bio-inspired ultra-broadband RF scene analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Soumyajit Mandal, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 439,733.00

The detection and analysis of structured signals in noisy and cluttered
environments is a fundamental problem in areas ranging from radio communications
to image processing and speech recognition. Biological sensory systems have been
optimized by millions of years of evolution to solve this problem with exquisite
precision and efficiency; man-made communication and signal processing systems
do not achieve anywhere near the same level of performance or even share similar
fundamental design principles. This project will try to bridge this gap by
understanding the universal information processing principles used by the
auditory system to analyze natural sounds, and then adapting them to analyze
man-made radio frequency (RF) signals. In particular, it will focus on
developing electronics and algorithms that emulate some of the amazing
capabilities of the biological cochlea (inner ear) and auditory pathway.
Graduate and undergraduate students including members of underrepresented groups
will be trained as part of this research, thus enlarging the technologically
trained workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bio-inspired approach
of this project was motivated by two observations. Firstly, the process by which
the auditory system, beginning with the cochlea, analyzes the fine time-
frequency content of sounds is both extremely precise and also highly efficient
from an algorithmic viewpoint. Secondly, audio and RF scenes are generated by
similar physics (wave propagation, absorption, scattering, diffraction, and
interference), even though the relevant velocities and time delays differ by a
factor of about a million. Thus audio and RF scenes share many of the same
characteristics, which makes it interesting to consider models of cochlear
mechanics, signal transduction, and auditory coding that are scaled to operate
at much higher frequencies. The first research goal is to build a single-chip
cochlear model that analyzes RF signals in the GHz range and encodes frequency,
amplitude, and phase information into parallel event-driven outputs that are
analogous to auditory nerve fibers. The second goal is to allow higher-level
properties, such as source locations and categories, to be efficiently extracted
from input signals by developing a robust coding framework to create compressed
representations of the cochlear outputs.