* 1525636
* Arctic Plant Phenology - Learning through Engaged Science
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Eric Post, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 566,316.00

The PI will develop and pilot a scalable strategy for involving educators in
polar research and making data from a polar research program accessible to
students. Plans include engaging grades 6-12 and undergraduate science educators
in a long-term, ongoing research project in Greenland that examines changes in
the phenology (e.g. seasonal life cycle events - in this case, the onset of
springtime plant growth) of arctic plants and how this relates to climate.
Educators and students will conduct similar observations and experiments in
their local environment and will contribute their data to the ongoing research
efforts. Participants will consist of approximately 24 middle school, high
school, and undergraduate educators from schools across a range of geographical
locations and school districts serving underrepresented and underserved
students.

The PI will conduct a workshop each year with the educators and will develop
online resources that will be available to the educators. Educators will be
engaged in an ongoing study of plant phenology at a field site near
Kangerlussuaq, Greenland, and they will learn observational and experimental
methods of studying plant phenology that they can use with their students in
their local environment. Educators from Fort Lewis College, Colorado, which is a
primarily undergraduate institution; Blue Hill Consolidated School, Maine; and
St. Paul Island, Alaska, will participate during this project. Additionally, the
development of online resources will provide access to data from long-term
research on arctic plant phenology, related lesson plans and media
representations of research activities in Greenland to an expanded network of
educators. These on-line resources will serve educational needs beyond the
duration of this project. The proposed activities present outstanding
opportunities for the involvement of student groups, including Native American
and Alaskan Aleut students, in research through hands-on training and inquiry-
based educational experiences.