* 1525367
* Sustainable Summer Bridges from Campus to Campus: Retention Models for Transitioning Underrepresented Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Ann Schmiedekamp, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,769,793.00

The impetus for the Sustainable Bridges from Campus to Campus study is to
address the urgent need to expand the pool of science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) graduates, especially African American and Hispanic students.
Long-term improvements in the pipeline of a diverse STEM workforce start with
sustaining effective bridge programs that can produce more engineering
baccalaureates. To improve retention in engineering, this study will conduct
academic enrichment programs for racially underrepresented engineering students
at three points in their career at the Pennsylvania State University--entering
freshmen, sophomores, and juniors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the study
are to (a) increase retention in engineering among racially underrepresented
students in the Penn State system, (b) develop long-term sustainability plans
for these enrichment programs, and (c) compare retention rates in engineering
depending on the campus location of the summer bridge and the student's transfer
status within the University system. The conceptual model guiding this study is
that retention in engineering is mediated by math performance in gateway courses
and the strength of the cohort learning community (based on the Tinto model and
theory). The bridges are designed to enhance both factors. Therefore to evaluate
student learning and the efficaciousness of the math-intensive bridges, pre-
calculus, calculus 1 and calculus 2 grades, and the size and quality of the
academic social network in the semester following the bridges are examined.
Matched groups is compared to evaluate the intervention. The primary outcome
measure is retention in engineering in the junior year.