* 1526835
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Robot Guides for Emergency Evacuations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Haibo He, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 282,112.00

Crowd stampede is one of the most harmful collective human behaviors. In
incidents throughout history, panic due, for example, to the outbreak of fire or
the unexpected discharge of firearms has been a greater hazard than the original
triggering events. This project supports fundamental research on the influence
of human-robot interaction on crowd dynamics, towards the design of dynamic
robot control algorithms to assist humans and prevent panic in emergency
situations. The ultimate goal of this research will be reconfigurable robot
guides that can respond to a variety of needs. These include different types of
emergency evacuation, as well as non-emergency situations involving mass
movement of crowds, such as at parades, concerts, or other large public events.
The project integrates research with educational activities through robot-
centric education and short course development. To engage the younger generation
with science and technology, the project will partner with a university
educational center and a community college for various outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to investigate
human-robot interaction in crowd dynamics, develop optimal feedback control to
regulate human flow distribution, and design robot-assisted emergency evacuation
algorithms. The research will advance the state-of-the-art in human-robot
interaction, and fill a gap in robotics research by experimentally validating
and measuring the interaction forces governing human-robot interaction in crowd
dynamics. The proposed robot motion primitive design leads to new approaches for
learning-based robot motion planning to efficiently engage humans. The project
validates the use of dynamic robot guides in real human-robot interaction
experiments in indoor environments. Simulation validation in benchmark
environments such as shopping-malls and campus buildings will also be performed,
and the efficiency of alternative robot-assisted evacuation strategies will be
evaluated. While primarily for intelligent robots, the research results are
anticipated to be cross-cutting and applicable to other areas such as
transportation, communication, and control.