* 1526665
* CHS: Small: Distributed Analogical Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Robert Kraut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2019
* USD 547,815.00

This social computing research will build a scientific foundation for
distributed analogical innovation that integrates cognitive science, social
science, design, and computer science. The results will contribute back to
theory in these source disciplines as well, including theories of analogy,
coordination, distributed innovation, scientific discovery, crowdsourcing, and
collective intelligence. Innovation in science and technology is often driven by
analogy, and opportunities for finding fruitful analogies are exploding with the
increased online availability of repositories of ideas ranging from scientific
papers to product ideas to the diverse text and video resources. However, our
ability to process this deluge of information to find and use analogies is
severely bottlenecked by individual cognitive limits, as the speed and capacity
with which individuals can learn and explore new domains have not kept up with
the rapid growth in online information from which analogies can be discovered.
Furthermore, people are hampered by cognitive biases that prevent them from
seeing and applying important parallels to solve comparable problems in
different domains. Instead of relying on a single individual to find and apply
an analogy, this research will develop methods for distributing analogical
processing across multiple individuals. The development of improved innovation
processes could accelerate technological innovation and scientific discovery,
with corresponding benefits to the economy and to
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general approach will be to conduct empirical
studies to rigorously explore and characterize the benefits and limitations of
distributed analogical innovation, and then to generalize these findings in the
context of two real-world innovation communities. Distributing innovation tasks
to different individuals could have a number of significant advantages. First,
increasing the number of people involved could increase the capacity to find and
use analogies across many domains. Second, changing the representations of
problems and solutions could help innovators see the relevance of solutions from
distant domains and reduce problems with fixation, in which people are overly
influenced by surface features. Third, by distributing the steps involved in
analogy to different people, alternative innovation paths could be explored
effectively in parallel. Fourth, disaggregating the innovation pipeline opens up
participation to many more people; one need not be an expert in a problem
domain, for example, to find analog solutions in remote domains. Fifth, in
contrast to innovation contests that reward only a small number of contest
winners, the sequential method to be used in this research allows people to
build on each other's work and doesn't waste the labor of the vast majority of
participants.