* 1526253
* NeTS: Small: Systematically and Scalably Testing Network Programs through Symbolic Exploration of Packet Dynamics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Sebastian Elbaum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 499,810.00

Network protocols and applications are an essential component of the Internet,
and they must be implemented correctly so that Internet nodes (e.g., desktop
PCs, laptops, smartphones, sensors, and routers) can correctly communicate with
one another. However, the correctness of their implementations is difficult to
test, especially under the large space of potential behavior introduced by
packet dynamics. This is because there are a prohibitively large number of
packet dynamics possibilities, and many bugs are revealed only in low
probability corner cases, such as those with specific packet delay, number of
packets, packet ordering, or packet loss and duplication. The goal of this
project is to design and implement symbolic representations and methods for
packet dynamics and the underlying network. These representations and methods
will enable the use of emerging test case generation techniques based on
symbolic execution for a systematic exploration of network protocol and
application implementations. The approach will leverage symbolic execution
capabilities of focusing on distinct input classes, in our context for packet
dynamics and network states, avoiding redundantly testing equivalent behavior,
and instead spending testing resources on packet dynamics leading to distinct
and potentially buggy behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
consists of four research tasks. First, develop symbolic representations of
common types of Internet packet dynamics, such as independent and dependent
packet delays, and packet loss rates. Second, design distributed symbolic
drivers that provide a network program under test with the illusion of
communicating over a network with symbolic packet dynamics. Third, design a
class of execution methods with mixed symbolic and random packet dynamics models
for testing a network program with a large number of packets. Fourth, evaluate
the proposed techniques and tools. The tasks will provide new insights into the
correctness of vital network protocols and applications, and what type of
representations and methods are more effective at detecting different types of
bugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key potential broader impact is the detection of
bugs in critical network protocols and applications, which may resonate well
outside the computer science community. In addition, joined efforts by members
of the networking and the software engineering communities are rare, but as
shown in this proposal could be clearly beneficial in bringing the latest
validation methodologies to bear in critical networking infrastructure, and in
pushing to the forefront of the software testing agenda the networking timing
and scale issues. From that perspective, the cross-cutting nature of this
proposal and the expected byproducts for which the investigators have a strong
record (students, data, tools, papers in top venues) will impact and generate
synergy across both communities. The investigators will hold seminars to discuss
with the systems and software engineering groups of professional and students
the challenges and results of the project. They will also continue actively
recruiting and training undergraduate, female, and minority students through
this project.