* 1526900
* AF: Small: Markov Chain Algorithms for Problems from Computer Science and Statistical Physics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Dana Randall, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Sampling algorithms based on Markov chains are used across the sciences,
primarily for approximate counting, combinatorial optimization and modeling.
These algorithms use random walks to explore a large state space, and
determining their convergence time is typically the critical step for
establishing the efficiency of many approximation algorithms using random
sampling. The primary goals of this project are identifying problems amenable to
this approach, designing provably efficient algorithms, and developing
probabilistic techniques to enable such analyses. For each of these goals,
computer science benefits from insights from related fields, especially
statistical physics and discrete probability.

The project explores strong connections between phase transitions of physical
systems and convergence rates of local Markov chains to explain the limitations
of various natural approaches to sampling. This correspondence also guides our
search for more efficient algorithms by allowing nonlocal moves or designing
Markov chains on modified state spaces. This PI will explore both aspects, by
designing methods from stronger analysis in the efficient and non-efficient
regimes on both sides of the phase transition, and by searching for alternative
non-local algorithms for sampling when local algorithms have been proven to be
prohibitively slow. Applications to be explored include the hard-core model from
statistical physics, the Schelling model of segregation from economics,
geometric sampling problems form planning and design, and sampling problems from
data science where inputs are noisy or evolving over time.

The broader impacts of this interdisciplinary work have many facets, especially
for bridging scientific fields by bringing insights from one field to another.
The PI regularly gives technical and survey talks to students and faculty across
fields, directs an interdisciplinary research center and organizes workshops and
conferences including participants from disparate disciplines. The results
disseminated by talks, publications and will be made accessible on websites. The
PI continues to be a strong advocate for women in academia, including serving as
the ADVANCE Professor of Computing, participating on equity panels, presenting
lectures to broad groups of women, and advising women Ph.D. students.