* 1526780
* CIF: Small: Challenges and opportunities of timing mismatch in multi-user wireless networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Hamid Jafarkhani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2019
* USD 553,072.00

The tremendous expansion of wireless communications has improved the quality of
life, provided economical growth, and assisted the expansion of new businesses.
At the same time, the new opportunities have created a huge demand for higher
transmission data rates and a need for designing more efficient wireless
communication networks. Understanding how to deal with timing mismatch and
imperfect channel information in communication networks is essential for
designing the wireless networks of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently,
interference management techniques have provided enormous improvements in
reliability and bandwidth utilization. These improvements are achieved under
ideal assumptions such as perfect channel knowledge and perfect synchronization.
In this project, the PIs will revisit the availability of perfect channel
information and more importantly the assumption of perfect synchronization in
multi-user wireless networks. This project analyzes the effects of timing
mismatch on the performance of multi-user wireless networks, from the viewpoint
of sampling diversity, with the aim to explore its benefits in the presence of
timing mismatch. This will lead to a theoretical derivation of optimal timing
mismatch values and the corresponding optimal timing delays, followed by the
practical design of communication systems that benefit from timing mismatch and
approach the theoretical performance bounds, under a comprehensive set of
channel models.