* 1526736
* III: Small: Network Sampling and Construction Methods for Inference and Anonymization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Carter Butts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,758.00

This project will study big network data, including but not limited to those
generated by communication using mobile devices and online social media. The
increasing availability of such datasets poses both opportunities and
challenges. On one hand, their relatively easy collection and analysis
facilitate the understanding of online human activity and the design of better
services. This, however, requires that targeted answers can be efficiently
provided based on limited (sampled or aggregated) data. On the other hand, the
combination of big data and powerful inference techniques poses privacy concerns
and an increasing need for effective anonymization techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address both aspects and will advance
the state of the art in network modeling and analysis. In the first part of the
project, adaptive link-trace sampling will be designed for ERGM inference of
network structure and/or attributes and for node-level analysis. Time series
analysis will be applied to aggregate spatio-temporal network activity data to
infer and predict patterns. In the second part of the project, novel models and
algorithms will be designed in order to generate synthetic networks that
resemble real ones with respect to target characteristics of interest. The
methods will be applied to simulation and anonymization of network data and can
improve the understanding of the tradeoff between utility and privacy in this
domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site
at: http://networkdata.calit2.uci.edu