* 1526750
* SHF:  Small:  Virtualizing Coordinated Resource Management of Flows on Handhelds with VIADUCT
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,998.00

Handheld devices such as cell phones, tablets and wearables, are gaining rapid
adoption in a ubiquitous world. Correspondingly, there is an explosion of very
demanding and interactive applications such as media streaming, interactive
games, video conferencing and social networking, that users are deploying on
such devices. Despite tremendous improvements in the energy efficiencies of
individual components found in these devices, piece-meal optimizations of
hardware components are inadequate to accommodate the demanding needs of these
applications that employ multiple CPU cores, accelerators, memory systems,
system peripherals and sensors, concurrently in very sophisticated ways. Lack of
coordination among system resources leads to low resource utilization and poor
system-level energy efficiencies when running such applications. Rather than
throw more hardware at this problem, this project proposes VIADUCT, which
allocates and orchestrates system-level resources to boost parallelism and
resource utilization for these platforms in a more energy-efficient fashion.

Recognizing that many of these applications periodically process frames of data
that need to flow in a pipelined manner through several hardware components
within soft real-time bounds, VIADUCT creates a virtual channel per flow of such
frames in an application. The channel holds resources allocated across all the
hardware components, with runtime coordination to ensure seamless frame
movements without the conventional interface inefficiencies across the
components. Fine-grain scheduling and resource management leverages knowledge of
high level semantics to provide Quality-of-Service (QoS) for each flow in the
most energy-efficient fashion. The specific research contributions are in
hardware interfaces, mechanisms and policies to chain the hardware components
for creating a virtual channel for a flow, architecting the memory system as an
efficient conduit to sustain this flow, and designing the system to sustain
several concurrent flows. The project aims to provide a holistic evaluation
testbed for such platforms amongst the broader research community, and also aims
to involve under-represented groups in the research and enhance Penn State?s
curriculum in related topics.