* 1526493
* STARSS: Small: Collaborative: Practical and Scalable Security Verification of Security-Aware Hardware Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Ruby Lee, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 133,333.00

Computers form the backbone of any modern society, and often process large
amounts of sensitive and private information. To help secure the software, and
the sensitive data, a number of secure hardware-software and processor
architectures have been proposed. These architectures incorporate novel
protection and defense mechanisms directly in the hardware where they cannot be
modified or bypassed, unlike software protections. However, due to lack of
practical and scalable security verification tools and methodologies, very few
of the proposed hardware security architectures have been commercially deployed.
This project develops a security verification methodology that is applicable to
different hardware-software security architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops security invariants and methodology that hardware architects
can deploy to check the security properties of their architectures in a scalable
and semi-automated manner. The methodology is applied to verify hardware-
enhanced isolation architectures and architectures that minimize the attack
surface in cloud computing. Verification of a secure cache's resistance to cache
side channel attacks is also investigated. Researchers and designers will have a
new method to systematically check their designs, and show to others the
conditions under which they work. Hardware manufacturers will gain assurance to
actually implement these security architectures in real products. In turn,
customers will gain assurance about the secure hardware that protects their
computations running on their devices or virtual machines running on remote
cloud servers. Security architectures are important to customers and hardware
manufacturers, however, security verification is needed to make them a reality.