* 1526964
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Creating Semantically-Enabled Programmable Networked Systems (SERPENT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Yufeng Xin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 220,087.00

Software-Defined Networking (SDN) is a new paradigm in programming the behavior
of computer networks. It opens possibilities for offering novel services and
implementing existing functions more efficiently. SDN uses a concept of a
logically centralized controller that remotely manages the behavior of multiple
infrastructure elements in the network. SDN controllers must make decisions
about provisioning network services based on a multitude of technical and
business factors drawn from the semantically rich data describing the
configuration of various resources in the network. SERPENT will develop novel
mechanisms for efficiently handling this data and enabling a new approach to SDN
controller design that is based on using queries on this data, same as many web
applications today are built using queries on large relational databases. By
allowing efficient processing and amortization of computationally complex steps
across multiple queries and the integration of many types of query constraints,
the project will allow to create complex controller behaviors that fuse together
information from multiple sources and combine structural and semantic
descriptions of resources in a seamless way, something that would be critical
for future datacenter and wide-area networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators plan to bring the approach of ontological query answering via
query rewriting and of solving path problems using a path algebra framework into
a unified model that will allow queries with both ontological (semantic) and
navigational constraints. The second major component will be developing the
algorithmic and optimization framework for answering complex networking queries
over this unified model. SERPENT will enable query optimization in two ways: (a)
problems can be solved in two phases with the heavy lifting done in one phase
producing an output that can be reused for many problems in a much more
efficient second phase. This is similar to traditional query optimization where
expensive preprocessing is employed to compute indexes, statistics which are
then used to enable efficient query processing. Using this approach for example,
the subgraph isomorphism problem which is known to be NP Hard has been made to
have efficient practical implementations. (b) design and development of
efficient representation and indexing structures for the output of the
preprocessing phase and algorithms for exploiting the representations and data
structures for efficient query processing. The investigators plan to show how
these query mechanisms that allow to express both structural and semantic path
constraints are used to create novel SDN controllers by incorporating them into
existing SDN controllers and evaluating them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. SERPENT will contribute to enhancing the functionality of existing and
future SDN control mechanisms by transforming the management of networking data
into a query- based processes that will remove the need to reimplement these
mechanisms for new applications. Instead they will leverage the framework rooted
in database techniques that can be reused and extended over-time, same way
relational databases have evolved. SERPENT integrates research and education of
graduate students that will help evolve the area that lies at the intersection
of several disciplines: network management, Semantic Web and graph database data
management. It will impact SDN research community by producing prototype
implementations, it will impact GENI (Global Environment for Network
Innovations) community by transitioning the results into operations of GENI
testbeds. It will impact other domains that rely on network analysis and require
the inclusion of semantic constraints in pathfinding like social and biological
networks.