* 1526431
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Adaptive Integration of Textual and Geospatial Information for Mining Massive Map Collections
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Erik Learned-Miller, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 297,859.00

Libraries and archives are digitizing historical maps for widespread online
access. Without technology for searching them, large map collections relevant to
a given problem or question may remain obscure even in online archives. If all
of the text in a map can be read automatically by computer, a wealth of
information becomes quickly available -- location names, geographic features,
and often statistics. This project will increase capacity for search and
analysis of historical maps by automatically recognizing place names and other
text in these digitized artifacts while simultaneously aligning them with modern
geography. The improvements this project will make to current text recognition
methods will facilitate more powerful uses of humanity's trove of old maps --
for example, by allowing scientists and policymakers to establish changes in
land usage, waterways, or borders over time. By creating free, open-source tools
for studying historical maps, this project will increase public engagement with
science and technology and empower any Internet user to explore the intersection
of technology and history. This research will train a diverse group of graduate
and undergraduate students in constructing, learning, and making predictions
with adaptive models featuring heterogeneous yet highly interdependent entities.

Although many institutions are digitizing hundreds of thousands of historical
maps, most digitized map images are poorly annotated, limiting their usefulness.
Manual annotation and metadata association is highly laborious. This project's
primary objectives are (1) to fully automate text and shape-based georeferencing
(aligning map images to the known global geography) while (2) indexing words and
place names (for search) by enhancing text detection and recognition methods in
these complex artifacts. These innovations will address the shortcomings of
manual georeferencing and current automated text recognition algorithms. The
researchers will employ an iterative interpretation process for solving problems
including text/graphics separation, text recognition, and georeferencing. For
example, the fact that all members of a given class of text entities on a map
(e.g., county names) are typically rendered in the same text style can be used
to inform predictions about difficult members of the category with information
derived from more easily-recognized members. The researchers will use a dataset
of annotated maps containing over 12,000 words in 9,000 place names as benchmark
data for testing the algorithms developed in the project. Software, data, and
benchmarks will be broadly distributed on the project website
(http://www.cs.grinnell.edu/~weinman/research/maps.shtml). Findings will be
shared with the research community through journals and conferences in the
computer vision, artificial intelligence, and GIS communities.