* 1526236
* Oceanographic Instrumentation - 2015
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* David Fisichella, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2016
* USD 23,508.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation on R/V
Atlantis, a 274? general purpose Global vessel operated by Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution as part of the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System research fleet. The vessel is owned by the U.S. Navy, has
state-of-the-art instrumentation and supports all disciplines of oceanographic
research. The Global vessel and can accommodate a scientific party of up to 32
persons for as many as 60 days. The vessel works in all the world?s oceans
supporting science funded primarily by U.S government agencies. R/V Atlantis is
specifically outfitted for launching and servicing Alvin, the human occupied
submersible as well as other vehicles of the National Deep Submergence Facility
(NDSF). R/V Knorr was retired in 2014 after over 30 years of excellent service
in the Academic Fleet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2014, R/V Knorr completed 251
days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 51% of the total sailing schedule
(128 days). R/V Atlantis completed 316 days at sea in 2014. NSF funded projects
accounted for 92% of the total sailing schedule (291 days). In 2015, Atlantis is
scheduled for 285 days with NSF accounting for 245 of those or
86%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lowered Digital Autonomous Video
Plankton Recorder $114,009&lt;br/&gt;MC-800 Shipping and Sampling Equipment
$23,508&lt;br/&gt; $137,517&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.