* 1526642
* RI: Small: Theory of Robust Learning Based on the Structure and Function of the Cortical Column
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Armen Stepanyants, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 182,629.00

How the brain learns, and in the process modifies its synaptic connectivity,
remains one of the greatest mysteries of modern science. The objective of this
project is to uncover the effects of robust associative learning and long-term
memory storage on synaptic connectivity, thus creating the basis for
quantitative analyses of these fundamental brain functions. The investigator
proposes to develop a biologically realistic model of robust associative
learning by cortical circuits. The model will be derived from a single
hypothesis, according to which synaptic connectivity in a given circuit of adult
cortex is functioning in a steady-state. In such a state the associative memory
storage capacity of the circuit is maximal, and learning new associations is
accompanied with forgetting some of the old ones.

The model will integrate current knowledge of excitatory and inhibitory neuron
classes, with structural connectivity constraints imposed by the morphologies of
axonal and dendritic arbors of cortical neurons, with homeostatic constraints on
numbers and strengths of synaptic connections. It is proposed to simulate
steady-state learning based on one of the best studied networks in the mammalian
neocortex - the barrel-centered column of rodent somatosensory cortex. The
simulations will be imbedded in the structural connectivity of the column, built
from the morphologies of neurons reconstructed in three-dimensions from various
cortical depths. Salient features of steady-state circuits will be validated
against a large dataset of experimental studies reporting probabilities of
connections between neurons, probabilities of specific higher-order connectivity
motifs, distributions of unitary postsynaptic potentials, as well as relative
strengths of laminar and inter-laminar projections in rodent barrel cortex. The
dataset will be created as part of the project and will encompass connectivity
of major excitatory and inhibitory cell classes present in all cortical layers.
The proposed research is rooted in the basic principles of statistical learning
and will advance the state of the art in theoretical and computational modeling
of cognitive functions with basic neuroscience and computational intelligence
applications.