* 1526237
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: EDS: Systems and Algorithmic Support for Managing Complexity in Sensorized Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Yuvraj Agarwal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Commercial buildings, the energy grid and transportation systems are examples of
emerging distributed systems that are beginning to be instrumented with a large
number of sensors and actuators for sensing ambient environmental conditions,
user occupancy, state of energy use etc. The goal of such instrumentation is to
improve safety, utility and reduce costs. This is a hard problem due to
interaction of humans, devices and networks in an operating environment with
uncertainties regarding veracity, timeliness, meaning and value of sensor data.
A large number of sensors must be provisioned, monitored and maintained by
system operators. This is currently a manual and error prone task. Deploying,
managing and adapting a sensorized system at scale become nearly impossible. In
the micro-grid testbed of networked buildings used by this project, there are
over a hundred thousand alarms raised per day by the first fifty buildings under
observation. In reality, despite thousands of reported sensors there are only a
few hundred distinct types of sensors. The key is to reduce the complexity of
sensorized distributed systems using automated or semi-automated methods to
characterize sensors, determine their type based on the sensor data streams and
make inferences about the quality of sensor data with minimal operator effort.
This project will apply advances in unsupervised machine learning methods to
compose, aggregate and interpret sensory data spatially and over time in order
to enable robust derivation of semantically useful sensory information for
applications and users resulting in better-utilized and robust systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in building an
information flow model, with a systematic capture and use of sensor meta-data
that enables algorithmic approaches to data composition and building inferences.
Using the proposed learning based automation approach along with programming and
runtime support, the project will devise a data-to-decision flow for distributed
systems operating across timing and reliability constraints. The project
outlines smart buildings as an application driver for the envisioned sensorized
distributed system with a working real-life testbed. This research will directly
contribute to methods for discovery of tele-connections, such as dependence and
causal relationships, between various sensory data streams which are crucial for
devising effective control of devices connected to these distributed
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include
advances in the design, deployment, management and programming methodologies for
a new class of distributed computing systems that can deal with changing
characteristics and topologies of the underlying sensor network. The particular
testbed will demonstrate, how such methods can create energy-efficient,
sustainable, and comfortable buildings for occupants. A number of educational
and outreach activities have been planned to train the next generation talent
for the emerging area of a data-driven internet of things. For the broader
research community, the project will make available, SensorDepot, an open-source
extensible architecture for implementing applications for sensorized distributed
systems.