* 1526929
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research:Text Retrieval in Software Engineering 2.0
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Sonia Haiduc, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,998.00

Software systems contain large amounts of textual information captured in
various software artifacts, such as, requirements documents, source code, user
manuals, etc. The productivity of software developers and the quality of the
software they produce directly depends on their ability to retrieve and
understand the textual information present in software. Since humans cannot
process and comprehend so much text, researchers proposed the use of text
retrieval techniques to help software developers with many of their daily tasks.
In order to be useful, these techniques need to be properly configured, which
requires calibrating many parameters. As most software developers are not
experts in text retrieval, they need help in determining the best text retrieval
configuration in a given software engineering context. The configuration problem
is one of the main obstacles in the adoption of such techniques in the software
industry, because many approaches proposed by researchers do not generalize
well. The outcomes of this project will transform the way software developers
address many of their daily tasks, allowing them to easily adopt the use of text
retrieval during software development. The results of this research will also be
used in software engineering courses to support students in their projects. The
new practices that the students will acquire will help them become better
software engineers. The proposed research also brings together work from
different computing research communities: software engineering and information
retrieval and it will bring new knowledge in both fields. Existing approaches
using text retrieval in software engineering will become more practical, rather
than just promising, facilitating migration from the lab into industry and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will be: (1) a novel
approach (called TRinSE2.0), which will achieve automatic, runtime query-based
text retrieval configuration; and (2) improvements to important software
engineering tasks, in practical settings, focusing on feature and bug location,
impact analysis, traceability link recovery, and bug triage. TRinSE2.0 will be
evaluated on open source data, in the classroom, and in industrial settings. The
proposed work will transform the way text retrieval configuration is done in
software engineering applications. New, software-specific measures, as well as
proven linguistic-based measures will be used to capture query properties in the
context of software engineering tasks and data sets. Machine learning algorithms
will find the best configuration for a given query. When writing a query to
retrieve information from a software project, developers will get the best
results, saving them time and effort, improving their productivity and the
quality of their work. The text retrieval configuration problem will no longer
be heuristic-based, but it will become data-driven.