* 1526052
* NeTS: Small: Mashup Content Harvesting for an Open Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Aleksandar Kuzmanovic, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 466,913.00

The Internet has transformed from a small network into a gigantic infrastructure
of enormous scale. The amount of publicly-accessible data on the Web, hosted at
millions of servers and billions of Web pages around the world, is approaching
the Exabyte limit. Given the enormous size of this data, which continues to grow
at a rapid pace, this project asks if it is possible to mirror content, i.e.,
represent it as a function of the massive data already available online.
Consequently, a related question is if the entire Internet can be treated as a
single Content Distribution Network. That is, can one harvest the desired
content, which may not exist at any one particular location on the Internet, by
downloading pieces of mirrored content from the publicly available Web
services?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes mashup content harvesting as a
comprehensive approach that aims to accomplish the above goals. In this
approach, users have the ability and means, which the PI will develop, to create
or replicate content by representing it in terms of the significant amount of
data publicly available on the Web. By enabling users to effectively mirror new
data as a function of existing data, it becomes feasible to achieve mass-scale
content distribution, yet without hosting any new server- or peer-to-peer
infrastructure. Contrary to steganography methods, which explicitly embed
information by writing it to a carrier medium, the prosed system effectively
mirrors data onto existing publicly-available content without any explicit
writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will
address fundamental questions that are key to developing and deploying mashup
content harvesting. The major challenges are (i) how to embed both data and
hopping information via information available on publicly accessible sites, (ii)
how to select a set of core data segments to maximize mirroring efficiency,
(iii) how to devise and deploy methods for scalable and accurate
characterization of mashup content harvesting data carriers, (iv) which
fundamental Web carrier properties enable effective mashup content mirroring and
harvesting, (v) what are the lower-bounds in terms of the Web page diversity and
connectivity that affect system performance, (vi) how mashup content harvesting
performs in closed national-level Web environments, and (vii) how mashup content
harvesting performs when content carriers are limited to Web pages associated
with specific world languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project
has the capacity to make a significant impact by facilitating the development of
a free and open Internet. Indeed, free, i.e., non-commercial, Web services have
created enormous value to numerous individuals and organizations on the
Internet. Common for such services is to leverage community contributions from
individuals around the world. Unfortunately, despite enthusiastic collaborative
contributions, existing free Web services aren't really free. For example,
Wikipedia must raise large amounts of money to support its hosting costs. Mashup
content harvesting provides a feasible approach for online communities to
sustain, no matter how small they may be. This is possible to achieve neither by
threatening nor competing with commercial mainstream Web services, nor affecting
their performance. The PI plans to design and disseminate mashup content
harvesting as easy-to-use browser plug-ins.