* 1526275
* CHS: Small: Narrative-Based Training Simulations Using Theory of Mind
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Stacy Marsella, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2019
* USD 493,048.00

This project will create a framework for simulation-based training that supports
a learner's exploration and replay, and will exercise theory of mind skills, in
order to deliver the full promise of social skills training. The term Theory of
Mind (ToM) refers to the human capacity to use beliefs about the mental
processes and states of others. In order to train social skills, there has been
a rapid growth in narrative-based simulations that allow learners to role-play
social interactions. However, the design of these systems often constrains the
learner's ability to explore different behaviors and their consequences.
Attempts to support more generative experiences face a combinatorial explosion
of alternative paths through the interaction, presenting an overwhelming
challenge for developers to create content for all the alternatives. Rather,
training systems are often designed around exercising specific behaviors in
specific situations, hampering the learning of more general skills in using ToM.
This research seeks to solve this problem through three contributions: (1) a new
model for conceptualizing narrative and role-play experiences that addresses
generativity, (2) new methods that facilitate content creation for those
generative experiences, and (3) an approach that embeds theory of mind training
in the experience to allow for better learning outcomes. This research is
applicable to complex social skill training across a range of situations: in
schools, communities, the military, police, homeland security, and ethnic
conflict.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research begins with a paradigm shift that
re-conceptualizes social skills simulation as the learner rehearsing a role
instead of performing a role. This shift will exploit Stanislavsky's Active
Analysis (AA), a performance rehearsal technique that explicitly exercises
Theory of Mind skills. Further, AA's decomposition into short rehearsal scenes
can break the combinatorial explosion over long narrative arcs that exacerbates
content creation for social training systems. The research will then explore
using behavior fitting and machine learning techniques on crowd sourced data as
way to semi-automate the development of multi-agent simulations for social
training. The research will assess quantitatively and qualitatively the ability
of this approach (a) to provide experiences that support exploration and foster
ToM use and (b) to support acquiring crowd sourced data that can be used to
craft those experiences using automatic methods. This project is unique in
combining cutting edge work in modeling theory of mind, interactive
environments, performance rehearsal and crowd sourcing. This multidisciplinary
collaboration will enable development of a methodology for creating interactive
experiences that pushes the boundaries of the current state of the art in social
skill training. Reliance on crowd sourcing provides an additional benefit of
being able to elicit culturally specific behavior patterns by selecting the
relevant crowd, allowing for both culture-specific and cross-cultural training
content.