* 1526102
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Sensorprint: Hardware-Enforced Information Authentication for Mobile Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Radu Sion, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Today's societies are intricately fused through a vast set of technology-driven
networks, mostly mobile-based. Individuals equipped with feature-rich mobile
devices are becoming the real-time eyes of world events, providing invaluable
insights into remote, hard to access sites and events. However, in critical
politically and socially charged settings an acceptable level of trust is
difficult, especially since current technologies allow easy forging,
manipulation and fabrication of data. The goal of this project is to design and
build a mobile data technology with increased authenticity and integrity
assurances. Of primary importance is the proof that data have been captured live
on the actual mobile device and not fabricated. The new framework will more
accurately verify that mobile data and the device sensor streams simultaneously
captured are factually related and act as the required witness to the
authenticity of reported data - a fundamental role in establishing the
credibility of mobile and social media. Applications with important social
impact include citizen journalism, smart city management and prototype
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate, develop and
evaluate a framework for secure and efficient sensor-based mobile data
verification mechanisms. In a first thrust, the team will leverage TrustZone to
build a trusted mobile device platform to bootstrap trust into sensor readings
captured on the device and provide secure storage and a secure execution
environment for sensitive functions. In a second thrust, the team will devise
solutions to securely and efficiently capture, authenticate, communicate,
archive, search, and access mobile device sensor snapshots ("sensorprints").
Finally, the team will develop mechanisms to verify the consistency between
mobile data and simultaneously captured sensor streams. In addition, the
developed solutions will be evaluated on newly introduced sensor-centric data
plagiarism attacks and mobility based data categories.