* 1526162
* SHF: Small: Designing Expandable and Cost-Effective Server-Centric Interconnects for Data Centers
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2021
* USD 460,000.00

In modern data centers, the performance of data center networks (DCNs) plays a
critical role. Currently, DCNs are mainly divided into two categories: switch-
centric networks and server-centric networks. In a switch-centric network,
switches are responsible for a variety of tasks such as routing and addressing,
while servers are only used to send and receive packets in the network. In a
server-centric network, the computational intensive tasks like routing are put
on the servers, which act not only as end hosts, but also as relay nodes for
each other. A significant advantage of server-centric networks is that network
hardware cost can be drastically reduced, as inexpensive commodity switches are
sufficient given that most complex network tasks have been shifted to servers
where computation resources are abundant. Moreover, since servers are much more
programmable than switches, server-centric networks can accelerate the process
of network innovation. Motivated by the importance and opportunities of
deploying server-centric networks in DCNs, this research systematically
investigates the fundamental and challenging issues towards building cost-
efficient server-centric DCNs with guaranteed
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to design novel, extendable and cost-effective server-centric interconnects and
associated routing algorithms for data centers. This research explores the
unique novel features and techniques in data centers to build cost-efficient
interconnects with dual-port servers or any fixed number of NIC ports. More
specifically, the research focuses on following closely coupled issues: (1)
construct cost-efficient DCN interconnects using commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
switches and dual-port servers that are available in current markets; (2)
efficient routing algorithms for unicast, broadcast and multicast that can
sufficiently take advantage of the novel interconnects; (3) employ network
virtualization technology to offer a more flexible solution to both industry and
academic research; (4) construct cost-efficient DCN interconnects using servers
with any fixed number of NIC ports that meet the trend of future servers; (5)
conduct a comprehensive performance evaluation through extensive simulations and
implementation of proposed schemes in a realistic network prototype. The
proposed research combines theoretical analysis, algorithm design, network
optimization, simulation and prototyping techniques to provide a comprehensive
working solution that enables high performance next generation DCNs. This
research hopes to impact fundamental design principles of server-centric DCNs.
The outcome of this research has the potential to boost the performance of DCNs
while keeping the cost low, and facilitate numerous cloud computing applications
currently hosted in data centers. A project goal is to train graduate students
and promote the participation of female engineering students. The important
findings of this project are to be disseminated to the research community by way
of conferences, journals and web site access.