* 1526499
* III: Small: Fusion of Heterogeneous Networks for Synergistic Knowledge Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Philip Yu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,999.00

Online social networks, such as Facebook, Twitter and Foursquare, have become
increasingly popular in recent years. These online social networks contain
abundant information about the users and their activities. Nowadays, to enjoy
more social network services, people are getting involved in multiple social
networks simultaneously. However, the accounts of the same user in different
social networks are mostly isolated without any connection or correspondence to
each other. This project has the potential to make fundamental, disruptive
advances in fusion of heterogeneous networks for synergistic knowledge
discovery. The success of this project will dramatically extend and change the
current social network studies in data mining. In addition to social network
analysis, this work can also be beneficial to scientific research such as life
sciences on biological networks. The analytic tools developed and data collected
will be made available to the public for free download.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will investigate the principles, methodologies
and algorithms for the synergistic knowledge discovery across multiple partially
aligned social networks, and evaluate the corresponding benefits. They plan to
address the challenge on effective transfer of relevant knowledge across
partially aligned networks, which will depend upon not only the relatedness of
the different networks, but also the target application, e.g., link prediction
vs clustering vs information diffusion. A general methodology will be developed,
which will be shown to work for a diverse set of applications, while the
specific parameter settings can be learned for each application using some
training data. The problems studied include (1) Partial Network Alignment, (2)
Integrated Anchor and Social Link Prediction, (3) Mutual Clustering, and (4)
Cross-Networks Influence Maximization. This proposal will address these four
major research problems systematically based on a unified concept: integrated
anchor and social meta paths (including both intra- network and inter-network
meta paths) for relationship exploration.