* 1526268
* NeTS: Small: Web Traffic Monitoring Using Anonymized TCP/IP Traces
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Jasleen Kaur Sahni, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 508,000.00

Monitoring web traffic is critical to several players in the Internet eco-system
--including Internet Service Providers, regulators, network administrators, as
well as researchers. Because of the increasing use of traffic encryption, as
well as growing privacy concerns, however, such monitoring may soon need to be
conducted using only limited information (anonymized TCP/IP headers). This
project considers a learning-based classification approach for web traffic
monitoring, that can work with such limited information and yet identify the
type of web page being downloaded. The project argues through a proof of concept
that the potential impact of this approach is quite significant in several
application domains, including profiling of user content preference, profiling
of user navigation behavior, as well as identifying the usage of video streaming
and mobile devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, however, also identifies
several fundamental issues that challenge the promise to deliver this impact in
practice. The proposed research will evaluate and address these risks
by:&lt;br/&gt; (i) designing robust statistical techniques for web page boundary
detection;&lt;br/&gt; (ii) conducting an extensive study of web traffic and page
diversity across client platforms, client locations, and time;&lt;br/&gt; (iii)
identifying stable and robust traffic features and using these to study the
performance of classification for several contemporary labeling schemes;
and&lt;br/&gt; (iv) incorporating and evaluating the proposed approach within
several real-world application domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project is expected to have a transformative impact on several domains. The
first impact is on the current debate on privacy-violating monitoring
techniques. While most arguments are either for or against allowing deep packet
monitoring, this project shifts the focus to a different paradigm -- that of
simultaneously achieving a balance between monitoring and privacy goals. The
proposed classification approach provides a great alternative to network
managers, regulators, ISPs, as well as researchers, who can understand client
preferences and application prevalence, without relying on slow and privacy-
threatening techniques. Second, the project will be an excellent source of
undergraduate and graduate students trained in experimentation, measurements,
and scientific analysis of big data---skills that are invaluable for many
federal, commercial and academic institutions that are involved in mining for
information in large data-sets. Third, through involvement of minorities, the
project will help broaden the diversity of the Computer-Science work force.
Finally, through outreach using demos to middle- and high-schoolers, especially
on a topic related to web browsing that is near and dear to most, the project
will help increase community engagement with science and technology.