* 1526475
* CHS: Small: Investigation of Dynamic Thermal Perception over Large Skin Areas
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Kristen Salomon, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 528,683.00

Temperature perception has been studied infrequently in haptics because it is a
much slower sense than tactile perception and also because temperature
sensations are confounded by tactile perceptions. Yet, this tight coupling to
other senses is precisely why it is important to study. Skin temperature alters
the perception of tactile cues, is related to one's emotions, influences core
body temperature, and affects physical performance. This project will expand our
fundamental knowledge about how the human sensorimotor system perceives
temperatures and how these temperatures couple with emotions. Project outcomes
will separate thermal perception from the reality of temperature change. This in
turn will transform our understanding of thermal regulation systems in the body
and connections between temperature and psychological state, thereby enabling
improvements in virtual reality enhanced interventions for anxiety disorders
(such as post-traumatic stress disorder), for increased human performance under
stress (e.g., first responders and athletes), and for numerous other
applications which could benefit from more realistic virtual environments (e.g.,
therapy, training, entertainment). While such virtual reality has been feasible
in the visual, auditory, and tactile modalities for decades, this work
represents a transformative opportunity in the thermal regime. In conjunction
with this research, the PI will develop a haptic demonstration and exhibit for
installation at the Museum of Science and Industry (MOSI) in Tampa, Florida,
which will teach visitors about haptics in general, including thermal
perception, and the related areas of neuroscience, psychology, and system
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand
temperature inputs applied over both localized and large areas of the skin and
how they affect emotional responses, particularly when each input is changing
over time. Temperature perception is known to be highly nonlinear; faster
changes are perceived at lower thresholds than slower rates of change. The PI
will evaluate how this nonlinear characteristic affects the perception of
multiple temperature inputs in small and large regions of the skin. For example,
this nonlinear perception could enable the sensation of a constantly changing
temperature, but without affecting an overall skin temperature change. The PI
will employ multiple thermal actuators, with a few getting hotter quickly and
most cooling slowly. The slowly-decreasing actuators will be below the
perceptual threshold and will not be perceived, but the quickly-increasing
actuators will be perceived; thus, there will be a feeling of increasing
temperature, but with no net change. The PI's preliminary studies show that this
effect can be partially felt at the small scale, but he believes the effect will
be more pronounced when larger skin areas are covered. When covering larger
areas of skin with thermal actuators, he will also test how multiple thermal
actuators are integrated into a single perception and how temperature affects
emotional changes (e.g., "hot under the collar" and "a chill down the spine").