* 1526405
* TWC: Small: Belling the CAD: Towards Security-Centric Electronic System Level Design
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Ramesh Karri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2021
* USD 498,016.00

An Integrated Circuit (ICs) is at the core of many critical applications from
financial and healthcare to avionics and military applications. Trustworthy ICs
are therefore fundamental in ensuring the safety and security of our society.
Unfortunately, cost considerations and globalization have pushed the IC design
to a decentralized and distributed paradigm, where the design of a system-on-an-
IC (SOC) spans various companies and countries with the fabrication of these
SoCs taking place in third party (offshore) foundries. Threats, such as hardware
Trojans, intellectual property piracy, and reverse engineering have emerged.
This makes IC designers question their trust in the SOCs that they design. As
SoCs are the roots of trust, applications that run on a compromised SOC platform
is vulnerable regardless of how secure the underlying operating system and
software is.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Complexity of ICs has been growing
exponentially. To keep pace with this complexity, electronic system level (ESL)
computer aided design (CAD) tools are being used to design ICs, resulting in
simpler and automated design processes and shorter design cycles. This project
develops a security-aware ESL design tool flow, and demonstrates the security
vulnerabilities in industry standard ESL design flows by showing how one can
reverse engineer an ESL generated design. This research develops approaches to
build security into the ESL design flow, yielding reverse-engineering-resilient
SoCs and systems.