* 1526928
* STARSS: TTP Option: Small: A Quantum Approach to Hardware Security: from Theory to Optical Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Carl Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 388,333.00

The problem of ensuring that computer hardware is not surreptitiously malicious
is a growing concern. The case of random number generators (RNGs) is
particularly important because random numbers are foundational to information
security. All current solutions in practice require trusting the hardware, and
are therefore vulnerable to hardware attacks. This project explores a quantum-
based solution to hardware security by designing and implementing a new class of
RNGs that can prove their own integrity to the user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate randomness generation in several settings: using a
perfect seed, using a weak seed, and distributed key distribution. The goals are
to achieve a high level of security with a minimal set of assumptions. The
approach is based on Bell inequality violations and builds upon the
investigators previous theoretical results. This project develops new methods
for both the mathematical analysis and experimental techniques in order to close
the gaps between theory and practice. The contributions include new insights and
techniques for proving quantum security and for overcoming practical challenges
for realizing Bell violations. This new approach could pioneer a new application
domain and train an early generation of diversified practitioners for the
rapidly growing quantum information technology industry.