* 1526448
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Improving Wayfinding and Navigation in Immersive Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2020
* Timothy McNamara, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 10/31/2020
* USD 266,000.00

The objective of this research is to enable more effective design and use of
virtual worlds. Virtual worlds are important in many domains, including
architecture, education, medicine, simulation, and training. However, when
compared to the real world, virtual worlds are hard to move through effectively,
and pose challenges to effective navigation. If virtual worlds are going to be
widely deployed - particularly for applications in education, training, and
simulation - then these problems must be solved. This work will generate
essential discoveries improving the process of wayfinding (orienting and
navigating from place to place) and locomoting through immersive virtual worlds.
It thus provides a critical and synergistic complement to the recent advent of
low-cost commodity-level virtual reality equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is multi-disciplinary and employs methods from computer science,
cognitive science, and geographical information science in accomplishing these
objectives. A transformation of wayfinding and navigation for large immersive
virtual worlds can be accomplished by studying locomotion modes in conjunction
with the spatial characteristics of virtual worlds and individual differences
and abilities of the users of the virtual environments. In this work, virtual
worlds are described and analyzed in terms of their connectivity, visual access,
and integration using formal measures summarized as space syntax. Likewise,
individuals traveling through virtual worlds may navigate and reason about space
quite differently, and these differences can be quantified and measured. The
goal is to develop locomotion modes that take into account both characteristics
described by space syntax and individual attributes of users. Truly effective
design and use of virtual worlds depend on an understanding of how an
individual's abilities relate to the characteristics of the virtual world and
the mechanisms for moving about in them. This interdisciplinary approach
examines wayfinding and navigation in a multi-factor way, combining a focus on
locomotion modes, a focus on spatial syntax (characteristics) of the virtual
world, and a focus on the abilities and differences of individual users. In
addition to improving the design and use of virtual worlds, this work will
impact multiple disciplines: it not only advances computer graphics and virtual
reality, but also informs the fields of cognitive science and geographical
information science.