* 1526562
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Reconfiguration for Adaptive Computing in Heterogeneous SoCs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Umit Ogras, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 247,710.00

The complexity of embedded computing systems is increasing at a rapid rate due
to both advances in technology and the increasing demand for complex
applications. A wide variety of these systems employ multi-core architectures to
keep up with the demand for performance under stringent power and thermal
constraints. Adaptation to the dynamic changes in the application is critical to
improve overall performance, energy efficiency as well as
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although dynamic adaptation (reconfiguration)
techniques have received considerable attention from various domains, they are
not employed in real-time System-on-Chip (SoC) designs. This is due to the fact
that real-time systems may consist of critical tasks with soft or hard
deadlines, and the dynamic reconfiguration overhead may adversely affect the
critical tasks. Missing deadlines may lead to performance degradation or even
catastrophic failures in these systems. The proposed research will develop
automated tools and techniques to address three fundamental challenges in
exploiting dynamic reconfigurations in real-time multitasking systems: i) lack
of a comprehensive framework that can synergistically exploit the advantages of
dynamic reconfiguration of computation, communication as well as storage, ii)
lack of efficient real-time scheduling techniques in the presence of dynamic
reconfigurations techniques, iii) lack of dynamic reconfiguration that considers
a wide variety of design and optimization constraints. Rather than focusing on
one optimization objective or specific domain, this research takes a
comprehensive approach by considering synergistic effects of computation,
communication as well as storage to optimize overall performance, energy and
reliability without violating real-time constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will make significant broader impact in several fronts. The proposed
approaches can enable a wide range of energy-efficient and low-cost embedded
systems. Reduction in energy consumption directly relates to significant
improvements in operating lifetime for battery powered mobile devices.
Similarly, reduction in temperature improves system reliability. Embedded
systems with dynamic reconfiguration capabilities will have two major impacts.
One being low-cost and high-quality everyday appliances for the public, and the
other is improved efficiency of safety-critical devices such as biomedical and
military equipment.