* 1526324
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Designing a Programming Language for Patient-Oriented Prescriptions
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Matthew Flatt, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 119,998.00

Title: SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Designing a Programming Language for
Patient-Oriented Prescriptions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medical errors in hospitals
cause 2 to 4 million patient injuries and 440,000 deaths in US hospitals
annually; this amounts to one-sixth of annual US deaths. Despite the expenditure
of billions of dollars, computerization has failed to solve this problem. This
failure can be attributed to a pervasive misunderstanding of the nature of
healthcare prescriptions. This project conceptualizes prescriptions as programs
and uses this essential insight to make significant progress in reducing medical
error. The intellectual merits of this project include new insights regarding
the building and maintenance of domain-specific languages and new general
methods for developing high-reliability software that facilitates collaboration
between machines and humans. The project's broader significance and importance
is the development of powerful tools for improving the efficacy and safety of
healthcare in the US. The main upshots are to give clinicians a public-domain,
open-source framework for designing, creating, debugging, and tackling a broad
array of prescriptions for managing medical problems; give researchers tools for
acquiring data about the effect of healthcare interventions; and eventually to
provide a simple, inexpensive means for conducting cohort studies, statistical
process control trials, and randomized controlled
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designing and building the Patient-
Oriented Prescription Programming Language (POP-PL) with the goal of using
software engineering techniques to implement and maintain highly reliable
electronic prescriptions. The research leads to new approaches to event-based
programming, new type systems and analyses to find medical error, new debugging
and iterative refinement techniques to improve reliability of prescriptions and
programs generally, and new ways to conceptualize staged programming based on
the staging that already occurs in medical care.