* 1526952
* AF: Small: Fundamental Connections in Randomness and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* David Zuckerman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Major advances in computer science have come from finding connections between
different areas and then exploiting them in nontrivial ways. In this project,
the PI seeks new connections and plans to capitalize on these and known
connections among several areas of randomness and computational complexity.
Computational complexity explores which problems are computationally intractable
and why, as well as tradeoffs between computational resources such as time,
space, and randomness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Randomness is extremely useful in
computer science and widely used in practice. When simulating complex phenomena,
such as the weather or the economy, it is standard to include random components.
Computer security is impossible without randomness. Yet while randomness is
provably necessary for computer security, it is not known whether it is provably
necessary for algorithms. A major question in computing is to understand the
power of randomness and whether it is really necessary for algorithms. Research
addressing this question often focuses on two fundamental objects: pseudorandom
generators and randomness extractors. A pseudorandom generator is a
deterministic algorithm that expands a small number of random bits into a large
number of pseudorandom bits, where algorithms using these pseudorandom bits
behave similarly to algorithms using perfectly random bits. A randomness
extractor is a deterministic algorithm that converts a large amount of low-
quality randomness into a smaller, but still large, amount of high-quality
randomness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has several themes. How do
pseudorandom generators and randomness extractors relate to lower bounds for
computational problems? How do pseudorandom generators and randomness extractors
relate to cryptography, the mathematical foundations of computer security? How
do randomness extractors relate to error-correcting codes, which enable reliable
transmission over noisy media? How do codes relate to machine learning? How do
pseudorandom generators relate to computational biology? By finding and
exploiting these connections, we can greatly advance knowledge in the underlying
areas and increase the chances of breakthroughs. Several application areas are
important to society. Understanding molecular structure could impact biology,
medicine, and drug design. Improvements in cryptography could lead to improved
computer security. Machine learning addresses the omnipresent big data.