* 1526319
* TWC: Small: Confidentiality Measurement of Complex Computations using Quantitative Information Flow
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Stephen McCamant, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 495,695.00

Concern about information privacy is a major obstacle to user adoption of new
information technology applications, from smart phone applications to the
deployment of automated workflows in the largest health-care and government
enterprises. This project addresses privacy concerns caused by software through
errors and malicious attacks. A major security concern about software revolves
around whether computers reveal information that they should not. Much of the
information we entrust to computers might be described as secret, private, or
confidential, because we want to limit who has access to it. However many things
can go wrong in computer systems to allow information to be revealed when it
should not. In this project the focus is on the information that is present in
the results of a computation. A computation might take information from several
sources and combine it in a complex way to produce output. These outputs are
usually not in a format that can easily be read directly by people, thus the
output from a computation may be undesirably "leaking" information without our
knowledge. The project tackles this problem using techniques called quantitative
information flow analysis, which allow one computer program to automatically
determine how much information another computer program is revealing. For
instance, such an analysis system might report that one program always reveals 4
bits of secret information, while another program revealed 1000 bits of secret
information in its most recent execution. By comparing these measurements to the
expected behavior of a program, one can detect situations that might be causing
a program to reveal information that it should not. Previous quantitative
information flow analysis systems have demonstrated that the basic approach is
sound, but they have been limited in the kinds and sizes of programs where they
are effective, and they require guidance from software developers to obtain good
results. This project will develop new techniques that eliminate these
restrictions to make quantitative information flow analysis more widely
applicable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative information-flow techniques,
which measure the number of bits of information about secret computation inputs
that are revealed by computation outputs, give a measurement that can be
evaluated separately without reference to the intended meaning of the
computation results and without additional annotation or specification of the
subject program. By combining a quantitative analysis with techniques from taint
analysis and symbolic execution, the tools can track in a precise way where
secret information flows, and the connection between input values and output
values. Quantitative information-flow measurement has not yet seen practical
adoption because existing approaches have too high overhead, do not naturally
support multiple kinds of secret data, are limited in the software to which they
apply, and/or require occasional developer annotations. The project seeks to
overcome the limitations of previous approaches by generalizing the underlying
techniques and improving their precision, while at the same time improving their
performance and applicability via staged optimizations and complete automation.
The research will demonstrate the approach by application to a number of
realistic challenge problems in computer security and privacy.