* 1526815
* NSFSaTC-BSF: TWC: Small: Enabling Secure and Private Cloud Computing using Coresets
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Daniela Rus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 09/30/2020
* USD 486,117.00

By collecting sensor data from individuals in a user community, e.g., using
their smartphones, it is possible to learn the behavior of communities, for
example locations, activities, and events. Similarly, using data from personal
health monitoring sensors, it is possible to learn about the health risks and
responses to treatments for population groups. But is it possible to use the
valuable information for the greater good without disclosing information about
the individuals contributing the data? What about protecting this information
from improper access? This project uses cloud computing augmented with a
combination of data reduction techniques and methods from differential privacy
and homomorphic encryption to address such questions. The key ideas are (1) to
use coresets as a way of mitigating the computational challenges around the
state of the art in differential privacy and homomorphic encryption and to
ensure private secure computation on the server side and the client side, and
(2) to give the data owners control over setting access to their data as a
trade-off between data access control guarantees and computation accuracy.
Combining coresets, differential privacy, and homomorphic encryption has the
potential for practical private and secure computation in the cloud.

This proposal builds on previous results in coresets, private coresets, and
their implementations for the cloud. Coresets are a data reduction technique for
computing a function f on a large data set D efficiently by compressing the
initial data into a small data set C (possibly on the cloud), and then solving
the problem f on the reduced set C (now, possible also at the client). The
reduced data set C is chosen so that it is fast to compute f(C) and f(C) ~ f(D).
A particular type is coreset is the private coreset, which preserves privacy but
must be constructed and sanitized on the client side. On the other hand, fully
homomorphic encryption allows encrypted computation on the server side but it is
usually impractical. This project develops (i) New private coresets for broad
classes of practical problems, with focus on generic frameworks as for non-
private coresets; (ii) Novel algorithms and techniques for efficient homomorphic
encryption on the cloud using coresets; (iii) Private Encrypted Coresets which
are new type of coresets that simultaneously preserve privacy and can be
computed securely on the cloud; (iv) Life-logging systems that implement and
combine the above techniques for simultaneous secure and private computation in
the cloud, with appropriate benchmarks and real-world testing.