* 1526424
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Versatile Locomotion: From Walking to Dexterous Climbing With a Human-Scale Robot
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Katie Byl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2019
* USD 454,868.00

The project aims to give legged robots the skills to navigate a wide variety of
terrain. This capability is needed to employ robots in applications such as
search-and-rescue, construction, and exploration of remote environments on Earth
and other planets. The multidisciplinary team, composed of researchers at Duke,
Stanford, UC Santa Barbara, JPL, and Motiv Robotics, will develop a robot to
climb a variety of surfaces ranging from flat ground to overhanging cliffs.
Using an array of sensors, unique hands, and sophisticated algorithms, the robot
will dynamically adopt walking, crawling, climbing, and swinging strategies to
traverse wildly varied terrain. During the course of this research, the team
hopes to achieve the milestone of the first demonstration of a human-scale rock
climbing robot. The research is also expected to lead to insights into cognitive
and biomechanical processes in human and animal
locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although rock climbing serves as an ideal
proving ground for the work, this project conducts basic research to address
more a general-purpose goal; namely, to provide the physical and cognitive
skills for robots to adaptively navigate varied terrain. It takes a dexterous
climbing approach, which uses non-gaited, coordinated sequences of contact to
move the body, much as dexterous manipulation uses contact with the fingers and
palm to move an object. It will apply principles from optimization, machine
learning, bioinspiration, and control theory to make intellectual contributions
in several domains, such as robot hand design, planning algorithms, balance
strategies, and locomotion performance measurement. Novel grippers, sensor-based
planning strategies, reactive maneuvers, and locomotion metrics will be
developed during the course of this research.