* 1526771
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research:A Reductionist View of Network Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Langberg, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 249,956.00

Advances in modern society are increasingly intertwined with those of our
communication systems. Everything from entertainment to business to
transportation to healthcare itself relies on our ability to communicate
efficiently and reliably. With progress in all of these domains come increasing
communication demands. The key to meeting those demands is an ever increasing
and growing understanding of how to build better communication networks and how
to operate the ones that we have more effectively. While much is known about
small parts of our communication networks, surprisingly little is known about
how to operate the network as a whole more efficiently. This project sets out to
tackle that monumental and critical goal, by seeking to uncover the implications
of network design choices, understand the commonalities and differences among
these implications, and expand the theory and techniques needed both to operate
these systems efficiently and to understand the limits of their performance.

The network information theory literature considers code design and performance
limits for communication systems under a wide variety of system models and
constraints. While a careful reading of the literature reveals many common tools
and strategies, each new problem engenders its own new theory. This work takes a
systematic approach towards uncovering the hidden underlying commonalities that
connect the solutions of information theoretic problems. Central to this
approach are reduction arguments that derive relationships between the solutions
to different information theoretic problems. In such, our framework shifts
attention from the traditional focus on solving example networks to a focus on
building connections between problem solutions. The work is organized in three
thrusts. The first examines network modeling assumptions with the goal of
determining how much each assumption impacts the information theoretic
solvability of networks, distilling out aspects that have little or no impact on
solvability, and simplifying broad classes of communication problems down to
their essential representative core. The second thrust moves from individual
network characteristics to comparisons between characteristics in order to
understand the common, unsolved challenges that lie at the heart of a wide range
of network information theoretic questions and use these commonalities to
develop a taxonomy of problems and solutions. Finally, as the first two thrusts
steer attention towards representative examples and common challenges, existing
tools for code design and capacity calculation are enhanced and amplified by
applying them to new communication scenarios for which reductive arguments
demonstrate a connection.