* 1526406
* AF:  Small:  Approximation Algorithms for Geometric Network Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Esther Arkin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,983.00

Networks are the backbone of our modern world, from the internet to cellular
communication networks, to transportation networks of roads and rails, to the
power grid, to social networks, neural networks, computer circuitry, and more.
Optimization problems (such as finding the most efficient way to place sensors
or transmitters/relays to achieve coverage and connectivity, or computing a
shortest route to visit a set of locations, or determining a set of routes for a
fleet of robots to search a domain) arise naturally in logistics applications,
including vehicle routing, robotics, advanced transportation systems, and
communication. Many networks are geometric, involving infrastructure deployed in
physical spaces or involving geographic coordinates and connectivity based on
proximity. Even abstract networks often have special structure that essentially
make them "geometric" when viewed appropriately, and this can have an impact on
the efficiency of methods used to study them. This project investigates how to
exploit special geometric structure of networks in order to obtain efficient
algorithms for solving various optimization problems --- studying them through
the lens of computational geometry and approximation algorithms. A particular
challenge addressed by this project is the fact that data is often plagued with
errors and sources of uncertainty that must be addressed within the model and
the solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of "polynomial-time
approximation schemes" for a wide variety of problems related to the classic
"traveling salesperson problem" has shown that provable approximation algorithms
with substantially better theoretical guarantees are often possible in geometric
settings. The project will advance the state of the art in approximation
algorithms for several variants of the vehicle routing problem in geometric
domains. Examples include visibility coverage optimization for static sensors as
well as mobile agents (robotic "watchmen"). Of special interest are problems
involving uncertain geometric data, which may arise from a stochastic process
(e.g., weather events) or from imprecise knowledge of deterministic data. While
many of the solution techniques are considered to be purely theoretical, there
is some hope that simplifications of earlier techniques will give rise to
practical methods and that a deeper understanding of what makes some geometric
problems easier to solve than their most general abstract counterparts. The
problems will be attacked on two fronts, through the use of formal algorithmic
analysis, with proofs of the tightest possible provable bounds (upper and lower)
on worst-case or average-case performance metrics (time, space, and
approximation ratio), and through the development of solution techniques
designed to be simple, fast, and practical, with new methods and heuristics
compared experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has broader impact in
transportation engineering, energy optimization, air traffic management, sensor
networks, robotics, manufacturing processes and logistics, virtual environments,
automated inspection, homeland security, and geographic information systems.
Tools of optimization, network analysis, approximation algorithms, and
computational geometry will be developed and applied to attack these problems.
The project will advance the research frontier, while training students at all
levels, and from varied disciplines, in the pursuit of research and problem
solving. The project incorporates a tightly-integrated educational mission,
through courses, seminars, and training of both graduate and undergraduate
students.