* 1526524
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Spoof-Resistant Smartphone Authentication using Cooperating Wearables
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Nitesh Saxena, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2021
* USD 207,965.00

This research is developing methods that leverage a multitude of sensors
embedded in hand-held and wearable devices (e.g., smart watches, smart glasses
and brain-computer interfaces) for strong user authentication to smart phones.
The current point-of-entry solutions, largely based on weak static credentials,
such as passwords or PINs for authentication to smart phones are not sufficient
because once such credentials are compromised (which is very likely given the
many vulnerabilities of passwords), the attacker may gain unfettered access to
the smart phone. In this light, it becomes necessary to constantly protect the
smart phone even after the attacker has already bypassed the point-of-entry
authentication functionality. This research aims to address this problem by
developing methods through which cues extracted from one or more wearable
devices will be used in conjunction with cues extracted from the phone itself to
continuously and unobtrusively verify the authenticity of the user. In addition
to advancing knowledge on how wearable devices can help improve smart phone
security, the research will have a number of other broader impacts including,
mentoring of undergraduate students, outreach to high school and K-12 students
and minority populations, and technology transfer by collaborating with
manufacturers and industrial consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
argument underlying this research is that, given the rise of sensor-equipped and
wearable computing, a wide array of identifying cues might be available in many
circumstances and can therefore be leveraged to build user-friendly and spoof-
resistant smart phone authentication systems. The overarching approach is to not
only capture explicit user interactions (based on touch screen sensors) when
applicable, but also capture implicit user interactions based on a
conglomeration of a multitude of smart phone on-board sensors as well as
wearable device sensors. The on-board sensors are inertial (motion and
orientation) sensors residing on the smart phone itself and measure users'
implicit interactions with the phone, specifically, phone movements, tilts and
orientations. The wearable sensors, in contrast, are inertial and neuro-
physiological sensors residing on "collaborating" wearable devices, "paired"
with the smart phone, and measure user's interactions with those devices,
specifically, movement dynamics associated with different body parts, and neuro-
physiological patterns. The project is studying how the use of such multi-
faceted cues can yield a smart phone authentication system that is robust
against accidental errors as well as deliberate spoofing attacks.