* 1526327
* NRI: Instructional Materials for Soft Co-Robot Design to Improve Motivation and Learning in STEM Classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Conor Walsh, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 398,503.00

This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) project conducted at the School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences, Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired
Engineering, Harvard University will develop a set of instructional materials
and related design competitions focused on the design of soft, co-robotic
devices, and to evaluate their impact upon students' attitudes towards and
understanding of engineering and science subjects through online instruments for
large-scale data collection. Introductory robotics teaching and outreach
typically focuses on task-based applications in which robots are isolated from
humans, rather than closely cooperating with them. Combining soft robotic
technology with applications involving human interaction and the use of social
and people-centric applications is expected to attract a more diverse population
to the study of STEM (science, technology, mathematics, and engineering)
subjects. The proposed research incorporates a substantial mechanical design
component with the aim of engaging students interested in this topic, who are
not served by education and outreach programs that typically emphasize the
software and electronic aspects of robotics design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will expose learners to subjects typically neglected in introductory
robotic design experiences, such as material selection and manufacturing, and
encourage participation by students with a broader range of interests and
aptitudes. To evaluate the impact of the proposed instructional materials and
design competitions, this research will include an emphasis on instruments for
data collection and evaluation by drawing on best practice in evaluation and
combining tools that have been developed, tested, and validated in the
literature into a single online platform that will be shared publicly with
educators and researchers. The proposed research will contribute to an improved
understanding of the factors influencing high school and undergraduate students'
motivation to pursue STEM careers, and in particular the influence of
application areas on students' perception of science and technology. The
compilation of a set of data collection and evaluation instruments will result
in a platform for quantifying the impact of this research as well as other
approaches to robotics education and outreach.