* 1526128
* CSR: SMALL: Robust Algorithms for an Open Source Software Reliability Tool
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Lance Fiondella, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 149,638.00

The key to the success of all software is its reliability. This project will
develop an open source software reliability tool that will allow software
engineers to automatically apply software reliability models to help
organizations ensure that software applications they develop can operate free of
failures. Traditional algorithms are numerically unstable, meaning that they can
fail if initial estimates are inaccurate. Failure of an algorithm renders it
impossible to apply a software reliability model to make useful predictions such
as the amount of additional time a software application should be tested in
order to achieve a desired level of reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this research is to develop numerically stable algorithms that will succeed
even if the initial estimates are inaccurate. Expectation maximization (EM) and
expectation conditional maximization (ECM) algorithms will be developed for
failure rate and nonhomogeneous Poisson process (NHPP) software reliability
models. Traditional EM algorithms impose restrictive assumptions that limit
their application to only the simplest models, while the potential of the ECM
algorithm has not been fully explored. Therefore, this research challenge will
remove the restrictions of existing EM algorithms and design efficient ECM
algorithms for software reliability models. Implementations of these numerically
stable EM and ECM algorithms will be incorporated into the open source tool to
ensure that software reliability models can be applied successfully. The
enhanced stability of the algorithms and the open source nature of the tool may
promote widespread use of quantitative software reliability models, enabling
companies and organizations to improve time to market or field a software
product.