* 1526383
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Automating Attack Strategy Recognition to Enhance Cyber Threat Prediction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Michael Kuhl, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 666,960.00

Network attacks are increasingly complex and fast-evolving. A single attack may
use multiple reconnaissance, exploit, and obfuscation techniques. This project
investigates how to extract critical attack attributes, synthesize novel attack
sequences, and reveal potential threats to critical assets in a timely manner.
The project uses machine learning techniques to simultaneously identify new
attack types and observed events that could identify those attacks. The
Transition-to-Practice component in the project includes a three-phase plan to
provide a positively reinforced and measurable cycle to develop, evaluate, and
refine a prototype system in real-world environments. This significantly
broadens the engagement of security practitioners and student teams, who will be
planning and executing attacks to test the prototype system. The outcome of this
research will provide timely comprehension and anticipation of critical attack
strategies, offering the practitioners a solution to level the playing field
against sophisticated attackers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this work
develops an online semi-supervised learning framework to capture both spatial
and temporal features of attack strategies. An attack behavior model is a
collection of feature probability distributions. The attack features are used to
synthesize attack sequences via Monte-Carlo simulation. The attack sequences
along with an ensemble prediction are then used to reveal potential threats to
critical assets in the network. The project will be evaluated on real-world
attack data as well as synthetic network attacks. An extensive outreach plan
includes course module development, a mid-project workshop to engage security
researchers and practitioners, and a summary panel in an international
conference.