* 1526844
* NeTS: Small: Enabling Cellular Networks to Exploit Millimeter-wave Opportunities (NEMOs)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Allen MacKenzie, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,293.00

The demand for wireless services continues to increase rapidly, and society has
come to rely on the availability of wireless services everywhere and at all
times. Conventional wireless services rely on communications at radio
frequencies below 5 GHz. These frequency bands are heavily used, and future
systems will not be able to meet all demands if operated only with these
existing technologies. Recent work has created electronic devices able to
generate communications signals at higher frequencies, from 30-300 GHz, which is
known as the 'millimeter wave' band. Communications links in these bands have
the promise of delivering enormous wireless capacity, but these links behave
somewhat more like beams of light than conventional radio communications they
can be directional and are easily blocked by objects and by people's bodies.
This project investigates the development of wireless networks that can
effectively use these links. This exploration is through a collaboration between
Virginia Tech (VT), Trinity College Dublin (TCD), and Queen's University Belfast
(QUB). The project explores many aspects of these millimeter wave communication
systems, with a focus on improving services in population-dense environments
like stadiums, theaters, and transportation hubs. The work will influence the
development of future cellular communications systems; these systems are
critical infrastructure for society and enablers for economic growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical work of the project will be accomplished
through six research thrusts. A network architecture for exploiting millimeter
wave communication links while maintaining control of the network via a
conventional cellular network will be developed and assessed. Making new
measurements of millimeter wave channels will enable the creation of more
accurate mathematical models of millimeter wave communication links. The
allocation of resources to these communication links in ways that preserve the
perceived performance of user applications in the presence of uncertainty
regarding link conditions will be explored. The capacity of these densely
deployed networks will be analyzed through the application of hybrid analytical-
simulative techniques. New models of infrastructure sharing to enable this
millimeter wave infrastructure to be shared among cellular operators will be
developed and studied. Finally, the developed architecture will be assessed in a
holistic way by developing end-to-end simulations and proof-of-concept
demonstrations using commercial hardware.