* 1526106
* SHF: Small: Online Detection and Recovery from Electrostatic Discharge Induced Transient Errors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Elyse Rosenbaum, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

If energy from an electrostatic discharge (ESD) reaches the integrated circuit
components inside a mobile device, failure may result. Multiple design cycles
are generally needed before a product can go through ESD qualification testing
with only sporadic, relatively benign, soft failures occurring. Manifestations
of soft failures include a hanging application, an operating system crash, poor
signal fidelity, data transmission errors, and momentary display flickering.
These are referred to as soft failures because they are recoverable from,
although operator intervention may be needed, e.g., one may have to turn the
power off and on again. This project will develop techniques for demonstrating
an operating system based approach for mitigating ESD-induced soft failures. It
is expected to reduce the need for hardware to be redesigned to meet ESD
specifications, thereby resulting in a shorter time-to-market for mobile devices
and other electronic products. Such techniques can potentially subsequently be
applied to mitigate a broad range of reliability and security hazards as well.
The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students, include members of
underrepresented groups, and will thus help enlarge the workforce in information
and communication technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The signature of ESD-
induced noise can be detected in an integrated circuit (IC) and when such noise
is detected, logic errors are likely to occur throughout the IC. It will be
demonstrated that ESD detectors may be placed inside an IC; when activated, an
interrupt signal will be sent to the operating system. In the interest of power
and area efficiency, there will be no attempt to identify the affected registers
inside the IC, nor to handle the different types of errors differently. Instead,
the operating system will be designed to respond to the notice of impending
errors and will subsequently rollback the system to a previous "known good"
checkpoint. The proposed solution will be validated in hardware and this will
allow ESD-induced errors to be characterized at the application level. To enable
further research in ESD-induced failure analysis, diagnosis and recovery, fault
modeling of ESD-induced errors will also be undertaken.