* 1526262
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Rapid Socioeconomic Change on Mental Health and Associated Healing Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Magnus Fiskesjo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 25,152.00

Increasing rates of socioeconomic change are associated with widespread
increases in social distress and related mental illnesses, yet health systems
often struggle to develop the capacity and knowledge for responding to mental
disorders. Focusing on the biological dimensions of mental illness, scientists
predominantly search for biomedical solutions. Recent studies, however, have
called into question the effectiveness of biomedical treatment models, noting
unexpectedly good mental-illness prognoses among populations with scant historic
access to biomedical interventions. These positive prognoses have been
attributed to cultural and familial practices. This project, which trains a
graduate student in how to conduct rigorous empirically-grounded scientific
fieldwork, seeks to understand the impact of rapid socioeconomic change on the
mental health and treatment of marginal populations.

Cornell University graduate student Ting Hui Lau under the supervision of Dr.
Magnus Fiskesjo, will examine indigenous mental illness categories and
traditional healing practices in rural Southwest China where ethnic and
religious minority populations are undergoing rapid socioeconomic change. Her
study includes the following two major components: First, she will document and
analyze indigenous illness categories, religious cosmologies, and associated
healing practices. Second, she will ethnographically evaluate the transformation
of these practices in the context of rapid development. Her project advances
social scientific understanding of mental illness by (1) evaluating the impact
of rapid social and economic change on marginalized minority communities and
their mental health; (2) deepening scholar's and policymaker's understandings of
how marginalized communities derive resilience from indigenous spiritual
practices in the face of social distress; and (3) contributing to scientific
knowledge of the nature and origins of mental illness by giving more
consideration to the social and cultural dimensions of mental illness. Methods
include participant observation, open-ended interviews, and the collection of
life histories, all of which are widely accepted and standard ethnographic
approaches for this type of study.