* 1526306
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Collaborative: Enhancing Anonymity Network Resilience against Pervasive Internet Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Roger Dingledine, The Tor Project
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2019
* USD 216,952.00

Large-scale Internet censorship prevents citizens of many parts of the world
from accessing vast amounts of otherwise publicly available information. The
recognition and publication of these censorship events have aided in motivating
the development of new privacy-enhancing technologies to circumvent the censor.
We argue that as circumvention technologies improve and the cost of detecting
their use increases, adversaries that are intent on restricting access to
information will seek out alternative techniques for disruption. As such,
understanding these alternative disruption techniques and how they affect
network anonymity, privacy, and performance is paramount not only to the
successful design of future technologies, but also to the security of existing
networks and systems. Accordingly, this project explores, designs, and
transitions to practice techniques that will improve the resilience of privacy-
enhancing technologies against these realistic but understudied threats to
network anonymity, privacy, and availability. We consider adversaries that look
beyond weaknesses in software implementations or protocols and instead seek to
destabilize anonymity services by affecting the shared resources upon which
these services depend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how Internet
infrastructure attacks apply to anonymity networks. The research designs
defenses that improve the resilience against such threats, and transitions such
defenses to the deployed Tor network. Our research activities (i) examine
performance-based resource attacks and design privacy-preserving detection
techniques to understand not only how denial-of-service attacks can drain
network resources, but more importantly, how to automatically detect and prevent
such attacks; (ii) study how control-plane routing attacks can be used to harm
anonymity, and develop attack mitigation techniques to understand how to improve
the resilience of anonymity networks against threats from the underlying
untrusted Internet infrastructure; and (iii) analyze the impact of human
mobility on anonymity to understand how to provide robust and secure anonymity
services to the now ubiquitous mobile operating environment. The activities help
expand understudied research areas and not only help improve the design of
future technologies, but also enhance the security of existing networks and
systems.