* 1526742
* III: Small: Algorithms for Genome Assembly of Ultra-Deep Sequencing Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Stefano Lonardi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,000.00

This project will investigate the computational challenges that will brought
upon by the analysis of ultra-deep sequencing data (i.e., coverage 1000x or
higher), specifically in the context of de novo genome assembly. As sequencing
cost continues to decrease, ultra-deep sequencing data will become more common,
but the problem of de novo genome assembly remains computationally challenging,
in particular for large, repetitive genomes. Since the sequencing of H.
influenzae in 1995, the assembly problem has been characterized by limited depth
of sequencing coverage mostly due to the high cost of generating the data. This
project will investigate for the first time the opposite problem, that is, the
challenge of dealing with excessive depth of sequencing. Deliverables will
include novel software tools for genome assembly which will benefit researchers
and the public worldwide, and potentially lead to new international and
industrial collaborations. This project will directly support two graduate
students in a highly interdisciplinary environment, building on UCR's strengths
in Computer Science and Agricultural Sciences. Undergraduates will have
opportunities to participate in research through a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at UCR, a collaboration with a nearby community
college, and a new US Department of Education Title V Hispanic Serving
Institution grant (UCR is an accredited HSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
plan is aimed at de novo assembly problem under the assumption that the input
sequencing data is ultra-deep. The study will demonstrate that when the depth of
sequencing increases over a certain threshold, sequencing errors make the genome
assembly problem harder and harder, and as a consequence the quality of the
solution degrades with more and more data. The project will show that modern de
novo assemblers like SPAdes, IDBA-ud, and Velvet are unable take advantage of
ultra-deep sequencing data. The research plan will deal with ultra-deep
sequencing data using a divide-and-conquer approach. In this proposed meta-
assembler, the input data will be partitioned into optimal-sized "slices" and a
standard assembly tool (e.g., Velvet, SPAdes, IDBA, Ray) will be used to
assemble each slice individually. For the de novo assembler, a set of de Bruijn
graphs will be created, each one built form the sequencing data of a slice. In
both cases, a majority voting strategy among the individual assemblies/graphs
will be used to generate a high-quality consensus
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Updates and additional information about this
project will be made available at http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~stelo/iis15.htm