* 1526848
* CIF:  Small: Geometric, Variational Algorithms for Radiometric-Based Shape Reconstruction
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Anthony Yezzi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The investigator will develop a new class of variational geometric inverse
algorithms for reconstructing dense 3D shape of objects from measurements of a
scene representing an arbitrary combination of vantage points and/or resolution
by employing a common mathematical framework based on generative radiometric
models. Reconstruction of shape from raw sensor data is a necessary step for
graphical 3D rendering and analysis in scenarios where CAD models are
unavailable or impossible. Two examples to be initially explored include
unfocussed camera images from different viewpoints and/or focal lengths using
thin-lens modelling, and radar signals reflected from nearby objects with
different antenna locations and/or wavelengths.

The framework will be general enough to apply to several related sensor
modalities beyond those initially investigated, ranging from infrared,
acoustics, and SAR. Furthermore, having a unified model affords the freedom to
generate flexible data capture and fusion schemes where not one, but multiple
sets of measurements are captured under different viewpoint and sensor setting
characteristics, and use the entire set of collected data to infer an estimate
of reflectance and geometry that is of superior quality relative to what may be
obtained in scenarios where "isolating a single cue" is not possible. For
instance, with cameras, it may be impossible to fix the viewpoint while
capturing images of different focus (isolating focus), or to capture perfectly
sharp images because of the finite aperture of the lens (isolating viewpoint).
Removing this constraint can enable applications to endoscopy, inspection of
pipes and crevices, dental impressions, as well as environmental monitoring.