* 1526723
* RI: Small: Bayesian Modeling of Situated Communicative Goals
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Matthew Stone, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,945.00

This multidisciplinary project undertakes a program of research in natural
language generation (NLG), the subfield of artificial intelligence that aims to
construct intuitive, accessible utterances to communicate the data, knowledge
and reasoning of computational systems. NLG capabilities have an important role
in facilitating new, more natural interaction with computers, both in current
applications such as mobile information access and in emerging ones such as
personal assistants and human-robot interaction. NLG systems remain inflexible
and difficult to build, however. This research aims to addresses this problem by
developing techniques to train NLG systems to match human language use. The
project is a close collaboration that links psychological experiments, designed
to uncover the strategies human speakers use, to computational experiments,
which apply these strategies in NLG systems using machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical framework at the center of this
project is Bayesian cognitive modeling, a probabilistic approach that explains
human information processing in terms of decision making under uncertainty.
Applied to language use, Bayesian cognitive modeling involves estimating the
communicative goals speakers adopt, the knowledge and meanings available to
speakers, and the choices speakers make to express needed information in
suitable linguistic terms. Such knowledge and strategies can then be used to
drive NLG systems. The specific research of the project investigates three key
domains for applying NLG to construct messages to describe real-world
situations: making lexical choices, constructing complex linguistic structures
compositionally, and fulfilling multiple overlapping communicative goals. The
project explores each domain through interrelated activities carried out by an
interdisciplinary team of computer scientists and psychologists: to formalize
speaker choices using a range of Bayesian cognitive models; to fit the models to
visually-grounded language corpora using machine learning; to evaluate the
empirical scope of goal-directed reasoning by comparing the learned models both
to attested human choices and to baseline learned models; and to assess how well
the models match human comprehension of linguistic meaning. The intellectual
merits of the project lie in bridging the gap between traditional goal-directed
rational models of human behavior and state-of-the-art computational methods
that instantiate templates or reproduce likely patterns. In addition to the
societal impacts of the technology, the broader impacts of the project include
the construction of data resources, models and modeling tools that will be
distributed to facilitate further research, and contributions to ongoing
initiatives for education in cognitive science at Rutgers.