* 1526652
* SHF: Small:Testing in the Presence of Continuous Change
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Gregg Rothermel, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 425,000.00

Many organizations that develop software are utilizing continuous
integration&lt;br/&gt;processes, in which engineers merge code frequently with
the mainline codebase,&lt;br/&gt;and continuously regression test it. The pace
at which evolution occurs in&lt;br/&gt;such environments, and the numbers of
tests that must be run, can be staggering.&lt;br/&gt;To ensure the quality of
software in these situations, testing processes need&lt;br/&gt;to adapt quickly
to changes in available resources, testing request frequency,&lt;br/&gt;and
product release cycles. Tests must be chosen and scheduled
appropriately,&lt;br/&gt;tests must be analyzed for robustness, and testing
processes must be&lt;br/&gt;appropriately monitored. The proposed work addresses
these needs, and by&lt;br/&gt;focusing on software dependability, the work
promises to benefit both&lt;br/&gt;producers (i.e., software developers) and
consumers (i.e., the public at large)&lt;br/&gt;of
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will create new techniques for
scheduling test cases during&lt;br/&gt;continuous testing based on their
historical effectiveness, the relationships&lt;br/&gt;between tests and changes,
and their potential for execution; these techniques&lt;br/&gt;will also be able
to adapt to release practices and environmental changes, and&lt;br/&gt;will be
supported by analysis techniques that are efficient enough for use
in&lt;br/&gt;CI testing situations. The work will involve studying the effect of
problems&lt;br/&gt;related to test design, and developing lightweight static and
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;techniques for analyzing test cases and test suites to
determine whether they&lt;br/&gt;may be problematic. The work will lead to the
creation of new approaches for&lt;br/&gt;test monitoring, and the definition of
new metrics that capture test and test&lt;br/&gt;suite attributes and states for
the assessment of testing results in continuous&lt;br/&gt;testing processes.
Finally, the work will result in the creation of&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure to
support rigorous empirical assessments of the techniques&lt;br/&gt;developed.