* 1526982
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Joseph Tanski, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 289,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program (CRIF), Vassar
College will acquire a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The instrument will allow
research in different areas including the synthesis of materials of potential
commercial interest such as of carbon nanotubes, fullerenes and small molecules
which are potential precursors to pharmaceuticals. Areas of biochemical interest
such as the biosynthesis of lipids will be investigated. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument will be an
integral part of teaching as well as research performed by students at Vassar
College, Marist College, SUNY New Platz and other undergraduate institutions in
the area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research
especially in areas such as (a) characterizing glycerophospholipid structures;
(b) investigating titanium-mediated asymmetric imine alkylation; (c)
charactering pyrrolidine substituted fullerenes; (d) developing biodegradable
polyanhydride materials; and (e) studying C-Shaped diastereomers containing
cofacial thiophene-substituted quinoxaline rings.