* 1526014
* TWC: Small: Analysis and Tools for Auditing Insider Accesses
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Bradley Malin, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 12/31/2018
* USD 497,315.00

Compliance officers specify organizations' policies and procedures for
mitigating risk to sensitive data. However, demands for employees' quick access
to organizational data often limit which security technologies can be deployed.
As a result, many organizations configure an open access environment in which
authenticated employees can access any piece of data (e.g., a common practice
across health care facilities). One specific risk of an open access environment
is that employees may access data they do not need for their role or
responsibilities, potentially resulting in data breaches or privacy violations.
This insider threat is extremely challenging for compliance officers to detect
because of the dynamic nature of access patterns and the large volume of
accesses. This project is developing an auditing framework that allows for the
simple, interpretable and efficient monitoring of accesses to detect insiders'
inappropriate use. The development of this framework will allow compliance
officers to drill-down into the access history, filter away accesses that occur
for valid operational reasons and focus on suspicious behavior, therefore
improving the overall security of sensitive data.

The main hypothesis of this research is that most appropriate accesses in
specialized organizations, such as health care facilities, occur for valid
operational reasons and those reasons are documented in the organization's
database. Therefore, if a reason for access can be gleaned from operational and
workflow data and meta-data, a log record of the access can be automatically
filtered without requiring manual compliance officer review. This work contrasts
with alternative methods that utilize the access log in isolation, and produce
results that are difficult to interpret. This project is studying how
explanations for accesses (1) are modeled and capture these operational reasons,
(2) can be mined directly from the database, (3) can be enhanced by filling-in
frequently missing types of data, and (4) can drastically reduce the auditing
burden compared to current manual auditing approaches. The explanation
methodology is being evaluated on data from a large health care system, which
produces approximately one billion logged accesses per year. The empirical
evaluation also compares how such an approach compares to current common methods
for identifying high-risk insider accesses. Hospital compliance officers are
consulting with the research team to verify the approach.