* 1526986
* NRI: Simulation Guided Design To Optimize the Performance of Robotic Lower Limb Prostheses
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brian Umberger, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 630,331.00

The goal of this project is to use sophisticated computer models of the human
body to help design the next generation of robotic prosthetic technologies that
maximize mobility for lower-limb amputees. The major outcome of this project
will be an improved approach for designing prosthetic devices that reduce
loading on the body and make walking easier. The success of this project will
improve the quality of life for lower limb amputees by increasing their mobility
and their ability to participate in the activities of daily life. The proposed
research is especially relevant for older amputees whose residual limbs cannot
tolerate significant loading. This award will also support the training of the
next generation of engineers and scientists and the development of an innovative
STEM robotics program targeted toward middle and high school teachers and their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on creating a new design
process for assistive robotic devices that aid people with mobility impairments.
Using modeling and simulation, optimal robot forms and controls will be
identified. The case study for this project is the development of prostheses for
below-knee amputees. The guiding principle of the project is to consider the
complete and altered anatomy of the person and develop solutions that are not
limited to anthropomorphic mimicry. Detailed musculoskeletal models and optimal
control simulations will be used to guide the robotic prosthesis development
process towards optimized loading conditions while minimizing metabolic energy
consumption. In this process, the optimal prosthesis form and specifications are
initially unknown and are generated through predictive simulations. The results
will then be reverse-engineered to develop robotic ankle prostheses that enable
these optimal gait patterns for below-knee amputees. This approach will later be
extended to maximize the performance of other co-robot systems such as
exoskeletons and other rehabilitation robots.