* 1526215
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Communications with Energy Harvesting Nodes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Xiaodong Wang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,496.00

Wireless networks composed of nodes that can harvest energy from the environment
represent the green future of communications. Utilizing the harvested ambient
energy improves the environmental impact of wireless devices in the global
scale, while extending the network lifetime indefinitely and making the devices
truly mobile. Energy harvesting (EH) brings new dimensions to system design in
the form of randomness and intermittency of available energy, as well as
additional system issues such as energy storage capacity and processing
complexity. Additionally, the deployment of EH wireless networks calls for novel
techniques for resource and interference management, cooperation among EH nodes,
as well as cross-layer optimization of the network. The research focuses on a
new set of challenges brought about by wireless networks composed of EH nodes.
The research directions are divided into four major thrusts. (1) The first
challenge is to understand the fundamental limit of EH communications in the
information theoretic setting, accounting for random and intermittent supply of
available energy, finite battery capacity with storage and withdrawal
efficiencies. The special cases for low-power and high-power regimes are of
particular interest. (2) In order to make efficient use of the available
resources, joint energy scheduling and spectral and/or spatial resource
allocation in EH networks exploiting the inherent structure of the resource
allocation problems becomes an important problem. (3) Different EH nodes in the
network can share their harvested energy either through the presence of power
line between them, or through wireless charging. The research studies previous
thrusts with energy and data cooperation. (4) The research investigates
efficient distributed cross-layer solutions to maximize the total system utility
subject to data and energy queuing stability constraints.