* 1526745
* RI: Small: Modeling Lexical Borrowing to Bridge the "Linguistic Divide" in Natural Language Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Chris Dyer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

The rich ecosystem of intelligent, language-aware technologies (e.g., personal
assistants, content recommendation, spam detection, etc.) that users of English
and other high-resource languages have access to depends on the existence of
language-specific data resources. Developing the resources that enable these
technologies has usually required a substantial investment -- both monetarily
and in terms of trained native speakers -- meaning that without new strategies,
most of the 7,000+ languages in the world would likely remain resource-poor and
their speakers underserved. This project addresses the problem of bootstrapping
linguistic resources required for language technologies in low-resource
languages more economically by identifying cross-linguistic correspondences
between high- and low-resource languages and projecting resources (e.g.,
translations, lexical ontologies, and syntactic annotations) accordingly. To
identify these correspondences, this work develops computational models of
linguistic borrowing, which is the process by which words from a donor language
are adapted by speakers of a recipient language as a result of language contact
and bilingualism. In addition to enabling the transfer of resources from high-
to low-resource languages, being able to identify borrowing enables corpus-based
studies of the social factors (power differences between countries, public
opinion, and personal attributes such as geographic location, gender, and
race/ethnicity) that have been identified as correlates with which words are
borrowed. Thus, by observing language change, this work enables changes in
social relations to be quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Words are not left
unchanged by the process of borrowing, and modeling this process is the central
challenge to identifying instances of borrowing. Fortunately, the adaptation
processes are generally regular and amenable to computational modeling, and this
work uses weighted finite-state transducers parameterized with features derived
from Optimality Theory (OT). OT-derived features not only provide increased
statistical efficiency relative to conventional linguistically naive statistical
models but they also provide a new kind of corpus-based verification of some of
the central claims of phonological theory. The borrowing model identifies
lexical correspondences across dozens of typologically representative language
pairs (primary text data is obtained from open resources such as Wikipedia,
Twitter, blogs, and online news), enabling projection of resources and
development of core natural language processing technologies. Finally, the
borrowing model enables instances of borrowed words to be identified in text as
it is generated over time, enabling corpus-based sociolinguistic studies.