* 1526843
* NeTS: Small: Fundamental Techniques for Incentive-aware, Efficient, and Reliable Cloudlet Management and Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Xin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 441,229.00

The goal of this work is to develop some fundamental techniques that can
facilitate efficient management of cloudlet resources for high cloud service
performance while minimizing the system cost. These techniques are to enable
efficient, reliable and low cost mobile cloud services, which will in turn
support high-performance wireless applications in an energy- and resource
efficient manner. With this research, a cloud service provider can exploit
sparse signal processing technique to remotely monitor one or multiple cloudlet
clusters running in different location sites with high accuracy but low cost. To
reduce the service initialization delay and operational cost, the system can
cache application components, and a user can exploit the proposed rate dependent
Bloom filter (RDBF) to quickly determine of some cloudlets have its required
application components cached. Rather than being constrained by a limited number
of options for virtual machine (VM) configurations, the system will be equipped
with multi-dimensional pricing and resource negotiation capabilities for a user
to flexibly negotiate multiple types of resources to maximize the benefits of
both users and cloudlets while taking into account user application preference,
performance requirements, and the system resource conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementary to the research agenda, the project will
carry out a broad range of education and outreach activities and facilitate
technology transfer through the industrial partners and industry affiliate
programs. The proposed research is part of a global effort in exploiting
(mobile) cloud computing for advancing some critical fields for national economy
and security, including health-care, transportation, smart-grid, homeland
security, and education.