* 1526423
* RI: Small: Tasking on Natural Image Statistics: 2D and 3D Object and Category Detection in the Wild
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Alan Bovik, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 441,933.00

This project develops "distortion-aware" computer vision models and algorithms
suitable for today's mobile camera devices, such as are found in cell phones.
Today's mobile camera devices contain remarkably powerful computing capability,
sufficient, in fact to contemplate performing sophisticated computer vision
problems such as three-dimensional depth estimation, object detection and object
recognition. However, mobile camera capabilities are much more limited due to
distortions on capture, such as low-light noise, blur, saturation, over/under
exposure, and processing artifacts such as compression. These distortions cause
most computer vision algorithms to "break," making them unable to accurately
recreate the 3D world or to find and recognize objects in it. This project
creates computer vision algorithms with similar capability, using new and
emerging models of visual neuroscience (how people see) and detailed and
accurate statistical models of the three dimensional visual world (called
natural scene statistic models). The project can impact many other camera
devices, including low-cost surveillance and security cameras, mobile medical
cameras, military cameras operating under battlefield conditions, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops principled approaches to using
natural scene statistics models to solve difficult single-image visual tasking
problems under poor imaging conditions. Specifically, the research team studies
robust 'distortion-aware' statistical image models and algorithms for single-
image 2D and 3D object and object category detection and synergistic 3D depth
estimation. The research work includes (1) developing algorithms for fast,
generic object detection and categorization "in-the-wild" that operate on single
photographic images suffering authentic artifacts from digital cameras; (2)
designing object and object class detection mechanisms augmented by 3D depth
estimation processes, driven by powerful 2D and 3D prior natural image
constraints; and (3) constructing a new annotated Color+3D database of HD
precision-calibrated RGBD data using a Reigl VZ-400 Terrestrial Lidar Scanner on
object categories of interest, yielding data of higher resolution and richness
than existing datasets, complete with image labels as well as hand annotations
of bounding-box object locations. This database is free to the community at
large once it is available.