* 1526205
* SHF: Small:  Green Parallel Language Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2019
* Yu David Liu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2019
* USD 484,547.00

Title: SHF:Small:Green Parallel Language Systems

The broad spectrum of modern parallel computing platforms are faced with the
growing concern about energy consumption. This project explores the frontier at
the converging point of parallel computing and energy-efficient computing. The
intellectual merits of the proposal are to study energy efficiency of parallel
computing through novel programming language and compiler technologies, and
produce a set of energy-optimizing compilers, language runtimes, and programming
models for parallel systems. With parallel platforms pervasively deployed in the
modern computing world, the project's broader significance and importance are as
diverse as reducing the operational cost of data centers, improving system
reliability of mission-critical systems, extending the battery life of handheld
devices, and promoting the environmental sustainability of our society.

The unifying theme of the project is to exploit program structures and run-time
semantic information for optimizing energy consumption of multi-threaded
programs on parallel architectures. Concretely, the project consists of three
interconnected directions. (i) energy-efficient thread management, that is,
optimizing energy consumption through coordinating threads based on their static
and dynamic dependencies. (ii) energy-efficient data management, that is,
promoting energy proportionality through analyzing data-intensive programs in a
setting where data rates, data processing schedules, and CPU frequencies may
interplay in complex fashions. (iii) energy-efficient synchronization
management, that is, harvesting different thread synchronization patterns to
achieve pattern-specific energy optimization. Together, the three directions
constitute a unique and important dimension of energy optimization for parallel
computing platforms.