* 1526301
* RI: Small: Knowledge Representation and Reasoning under Uncertainty with Probabilistic Answer Set Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Joohyung Lee, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2019
* USD 342,795.00

Combining logic and probability is an important subject in Artificial
Intelligence, and is recently being extensively studied in the area of
statistical relational learning, where the main goal of representation is to
express probabilistic models in a compact way that reflects the relational
structure of the domain and ideally supports efficient learning and inference.
However, in comparison with main knowledge representation languages, such
languages do not allow natural, elaboration tolerant representation of
commonsense knowledge. Currently, there is a big gap between the state of the
art languages that are used in knowledge representation and the state of the art
languages in which machine learning is done. The success of this project will
identify fundamental issues in bridging the gap between the two areas, will
produce a uniform framework for both expressive representation and learning, and
will contribute to the integration of knowledge representation and machine
learning. The outcome of the research will be useful for many applications that
require integration of knowledge representation and other areas, such as vision,
robotics, and event recognition, where commonsense reasoning has to be applied
on uncertain knowledge and data. The software systems developed under this
project will be freely available as open source software. The research will
involve both graduate and undergraduate students, contributing to a strengthened
relationship between education and research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to design and implement a knowledge representation language that
allows elaboration tolerant representation of expressive commonsense knowledge
involving logic and probability, which can be efficiently computed by the
techniques developed in related areas. The proposed research aims at shifting
the current logic-based foundation of answer set programming to a novel
foundation that combines logic and probability, and achieving its computation by
intelligently adapting and combining the methods from probabilistic reasoning
and machine learning. It will build upon the existing works on answer set
programming, statistical relational learning, and probabilisitic logic
programming. The project will (i) enhance the mathematical foundation of answer
set programming to the novel foundation that combines logic and probability.
(ii) relate it to other existing approaches in statistical relational learning,
Pearl's causal models, and P-Log; (iii) design inference and learning
algorithms; (iv) design a high level action language that allows elaboration
tolerant representation of probabilistic transition systems; (v) apply
probabilistic answer set programming to event recognition; (vi) implement and
evaluate involved software systems.