* 1526932
* CSR: Small: Timely Power-Aware Data Management in Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Kyoung-Don Kang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

In emerging embedded and cyber physical applications like smart cars, micro
grids, and homeland security, data amounts are increasing fast. Database support
is essential in data-intensive embedded applications, because developing them
without database support is hard and error-prone. Ideally, a database system
needs to process real-time data service requests, such as driving route
recommendations and electricity demand/supply analysis, in a timely manner using
fresh data representing the current real-world status, e.g., the present traffic
or electric grid status. It is also important the database should consume
minimal power considering stringent power constraints in embedded systems.
Achieving this vision is challenging for several reasons, including dynamic
workloads varying in time depending on the current real world status, severe
data/resource contention, and computational costs for updating temporal data.
Moreover, the timeliness, data freshness, and power efficiency may compete with
each other. If higher priority is given to user queries, their timeliness can be
improved at the cost of the decreased data freshness or vice-versa. Simply
consuming more power to support the desired timeliness and data freshness is not
desirable. Unfortunately, state-of-the-art database systems may fall short of
power-aware real-time data services. Non-real-time databases unaware of timing
and data freshness requirements may perform poorly in these applications. Most
existing real-time and embedded databases can provide no guarantee on the
desired timeliness and data freshness. Neither are they power-aware. This can be
a serious problem, since the unbounded tardiness or data staleness may result in
a traffic jam, power outage, or homeland security problem. Although research on
energy-efficient databases mainly in data center contexts has recently begun,
real-time deadlines and data freshness requirements are not considered. Despite
the importance, related work on power management in real-time databases, chiefly
targeting embedded applications, is surprisingly scarce. Due to the power
ignorance, deploying real-time databases may become increasingly difficult and
costly. To bridge the gap, in-depth research will be performed in this work to
investigate effective fundamental approaches for power-aware real-time data
services in emerging embedded and cyber physical systems with significant
broader impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate novel
methods to support the desired timeliness and data freshness even in the
presence of dynamic workloads, while substantially decreasing the power
consumption in real-time embedded databases (RTEDBs). This will involve
exploring 1) application of adaptive control theoretic techniques to gracefully
adapt the RTEDB system behavior, if necessary, to support the desired timeliness
and data freshness for less power in the closed-loop system; 2) feedforward
methods to avoid data/resource contention incurring performance and power
penalties by considering RTEDB semantics; 3) a multicore RTEDB system
architecture, in which the cores support the desired timeliness and data
freshness, decreasing the power usage both autonomously and collaboratively; and
4) extensive simulations and experiments in a testbed will be performed using
real-world data traces to measure the timeliness, data freshness, and power and
energy consumption.