* 1526791
* NeTS: Small: A Programmable Network Data Plane for Resource Management in Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Hari Balakrishnan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Datacenters have revolutionized computing, allowing small companies and research
groups to harness the power of tens of thousands of computers, and large
companies to provide a wide range of services to billions of users. Research on
datacenter network architectures is important to meet the stringent performance
requirements of many applications at acceptable cost. A key aspect of modern
datacenter networks is their use of sophisticated resource management algorithms
within the network, without which it would be prohibitively expensive or even
impossible to accomplish many data-intensive computing tasks. Researchers,
engineers, and network operators have been developing new methods for resource
management at a healthy pace over the past two decades. Much of this work
requires changes to network routers, whose data planes are typically implemented
in hardware. Hardware is inflexible, so researchers cannot convincingly
demonstrate their new ideas, and operators cannot evaluate them in practice. The
two approaches available today for programmable networks---software routers and
hardware routers with programmable elements---both have drawbacks. To date,
software routers have failed to deliver on performance, being at least an order
of magnitude slower than hardware, whereas programmable elements in hardware
routers have not been able to provide a convenient platform to express most
queue management, scheduling, and control algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address this problem, this proposal introduces Flexplane, a new way to architect
a programmable network data plane capable of supporting a variety of resource
management schemes. The goal is to support schemes specified in a high-level
language like C++ as in a software simulator or a software router, but run them
at hardware rates on real networks. The key idea is to use a centralized arbiter
to emulate the behavior of an entire network with abstract packets, and reflect
that behavior on to real packets sent by the endpoints over the actual network.
With Flexplane, packets arrive at their destinations with the timings and
headers that mimic on-path routers running the programmed schemes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Flexplane is of demonstrated interest to
network infrastructure teams in companies like Facebook. The results of this
research will directly benefit datacenters operated by companies like Facebook,
Google, Microsoft, Amazon.com, and many other enterprises. The education plan
includes the introduction of this research's findings into the undergraduate
curriculum and offers undergraduates an opportunity to implement network
protocols in a friendly programming environment, but have them run at high
rates, a capability that was hitherto unavailable. The graduate-level education
goals are to explore the limits of centralized arbitration and data-plane
programmability. The course material will be made widely available through MIT
OpenCourseWare and on the MITx MOOC.