* 1526677
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Spatio-Temporal Situational Awareness in Large-Scale Disasters Using Low-Cost Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Manish Kumar, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2019
* USD 389,303.00

Providing real-time situational awareness is a critical but immensely
challenging component in the management of large-scale disasters such as
wildfires, where incident managers need to make timely decisions and allocate
resources. Yet gathering accurate real-time information is difficult due to the
multi-scale spatio-temporal nature of the event, the overwhelming amount of data
that has to be processed in near real-time, the heterogeneous nature of the
technological resources involved, and the complex interdependencies and
interactions between human and technological entities. Recent advances in
various areas of cyber-physical and information systems, including sensing,
mapping, communication, computing technologies, and unmanned systems, have
provided an unprecedented opportunity to revolutionize the acquisition of
situational awareness in a large-scale disaster. The objective of this multi-
institutional project is to conduct fundamental research aimed at creating user-
centered control and algorithmic tools that integrate real-time sensory data
from multi-rotor unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) into effective fire-predictor
software, which will allow a team of UAVs equipped with electro-optical sensors
to generate situational awareness in a large-scale wildfire. The PIs will
develop a reliable and affordable UAV system that is portable, safe, and easy to
operate by first responders (especially firefighters and forestry officials),
and which will enable them to make informed decisions which can optimize
resource allocation and thereby save both property and lives. With the imminent
inclusion of UAVs in the national airspace, the technologies developed in this
research will have potential broad applicability to a number of other civilian
applications such as law enforcement and border patrol.

Project objectives will be met by pursuing specific aims including the design of
user-centered analytical and algorithmic tools for robust and safe motion
control of UAVs for gathering information, the development of spatio-temporal
situational awareness using real-time data and a fire propagation model, and the
development of a command, control and communication (C3) framework for emergency
management personnel integration. The PIs will create new algorithms for UAV
trajectory generation that resourcefully carry out monitoring in a dynamic
environment, along with new cooperative control algorithms for a team of UAVs
tasked with dynamic perimeter tracking that are robust to addition and/or
deletion of UAVs. They will devise distributed filtering methods coupled with
reduced order modeling techniques based on real-time spatio-temporal
decomposition, to seamlessly generate situational awareness in a computationally
efficient manner. Finally, the PIs will develop simulation and field capacity,
while studying human-robot interaction issues pertaining to the wildfire
application. The PIs' user-centered design approach is novel, in that it will
address not only usability issues related to the developed system, but also
issues such as deployment, training, and changes in operational paradigms. To
ensure project outcomes meet the needs of the target user community, the PI team
will be working in collaboration with the City of Cincinnati's Fire Department
and the State of West Virginia's Division of Forestry.