* 1526444
* Characterization of the Effects of a Severe Drought on Dust Lifting
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 671,958.00

Dust particles in the atmosphere are known to affect weather and climate through
the absorption and scattering of radiation and through their ability to affect
cloud processes. In order to better understand the variability of dust loading
in the atmosphere it is important to study how dust aerosols are transported
from the surface to the atmosphere, a process known as saltation. This award
will provide funding for observations and analysis of data from the Owens Lake
playa in California, a dry lake bed that is known as a significant source of
dust pollution. The research will seek to determine the roles of soil particle
size distribution, crusted soil, water content, and dust electrification in
saltation. The long-term societal benefits of the project are through better
representation of dust in the weather and climate system, thereby improving
forecasts. In the shorter-term the researchers will work with the Owens Valley
air quality officer, offering a direct link to health effects, and the project
will also contribute to the education and training of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate the
effects of soil composition, particle size distribution, and soil water content
on the depth of the saltation layer, the intensity of saltation, the electric
fields generated by saltation, and the PM2.5 aerosol concentration as a function
of wind shear stress in a variety of weather phenomena and climate conditions.
The campaign is primarily observational, with instrumentation residing in the
Owens Lake salty playa in California. The three main objectives of the work are
in the following areas: 1) Saltation and dust lifting - Continued and improved
measurements will be used to test competing hypotheses about the correlation
between vertical dust flux and near surface humidity, 2) Effects of electric
fields on dust lifting - Electric field data would be used to test the
hypothesis that electric forces attract saltating particles toward the surface,
inhibiting increases in the depth of the saltation layer with increases in wind
shear stress at the surface, and 3) Dusty weather phenomena - The researcher
will study the intensity and depth of the saltation layer and dust lifting in
weather phenomena ranging from small-scale dusty plumes and vortices to larger-
scale dust storms to accurately quantify the contributions from each to the dust
cycle. The hypothesis that dust lifted by convective events is much richer in
fine particles will also be tested.