* 1526434
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Optimal Provision of Backhaul and Radio Access Networks: A Cross-Network Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Zhi-Quan Luo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 310,000.00

The explosive growth in the number of smart consumer devices leads to
projections that within 10 years' time, wireless cellular networks need to offer
1000x throughput increase over the current 4G technology. By that time the
network should be able to deliver fiber-like user experience boasting 10 Gb/s
individual transmission rate for data intensive cloud-based applications. To
move such a huge amount of data from the network to the users' handheld devices
in real time, revolutionary network infrastructure and advanced network
provision are required. Two key enablers of the envisioned future mobile
networks are the ultra-dense deployment of base stations and centralized cloud-
based processing. This project addresses the challenging problem of managing
such densely deployed, cloud-based radio access
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research includes the introduction
of a unified cross-network framework to manage a cloud-based radio access
network. Important aspects of resource management in different sub-networks,
including the backhaul and the cloud networks, will be considered. The project
focuses on providing theoretical insights as well as designing practical
algorithms for the optimal provisioning of a cloud-based radio access network.
Fundamental computational issues of key cross-network resource management tasks
will be investigated, revealing their intrinsic complexity. Moreover, practical
schemes capable of optimally utilizing resources across networks will be
developed, using cross-network optimization formulations. These algorithms will
be optimized to fully exploit the computational resources offered by the cloud
centers, addressing key issues such as parallel/distributed implementation,
asynchronous computation, and load balancing. The goal is to determine how
computational resources should be deployed through the proposed cross-network
framework to dramatically improve the performance of a cloud-based radio access
network.