* 1526165
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Rechargeable Networks with Energy Cooperation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Aylin Yener, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 230,000.00

Wireless energy transfer for energy harvesting communications will introduce a
new breed of wireless networks with extended lifetime, deployable in challenging
conditions or locations including in-infrastructure and in-body applications.
Such nodes will not only harvest energy from nature to continually recharge
their batteries but will be able to share energy with similar devices in the
network via wireless energy transfer for uninterrupted and perpetual operation.
Energy cooperation through wireless energy transfer adds a significant new
dimension on top of energy harvesting from natural resources, by giving nodes
the ability to transfer some of their energies to neighboring nodes as needed.
This technology enables the energy-receiving nodes to harvest energy from a man-
made source via a targeted and optimized energy transfer process. As such, this
technology is useful as an additional source of energy, as a mechanism to
regulate the pace of incoming energy when ambient resources fluctuate and could
be the only dependable energy source when ambient resources are not sufficient.

This project investigates communication theory, optimization and networking
aspects of energy harvesting wireless networks with wireless energy transfer in
order to determine the optimum transmission, scheduling, reception and
networking methods for such systems. The researchers aim to determine the
optimum wireless energy transfer times and amounts, on top of the energy
harvesting profile of the user from natural energy sources, so as to optimize
the overall energy arrival profile at the energy receiving node, to maximize the
given objective of the user. In addition, the researchers aim to investigate
energy cooperation schemes at the battery level that together with signal
cooperation schemes at the physical layer improve the end-to-end throughput of
the system in small to medium size networks. Finally, the researchers will study
joint energy and information routing in multi-hop cooperative wireless networks,
where energy and information flow together in the system due to wireless energy
transfer. The researchers aim to develop practical, distributed, local
measurement-based, back-pressure type algorithms for the control of both data
and energy queues in the network.