* 1526342
* CSR: SHF: Small: Programming Language, Runtime System, and Architecture Support for Reliability in Intermittent, Energy-Harvesting Computing Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Brandon Lucia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,999.00

Emerging energy-harvesting computing devices (EHDs) run on energy extracted from
their environment and are poised to be the key enabler of next-generation
wearables, implantable medical devices, and the Internet of Things (IoT)
applications. However, software on an EHD can only execute intermittently, as
energy is available. When power fails (10 to 100 times per second) the EHD turns
off and reboots, requiring software on EHDs to span multiple periods of
execution interrupted by power failures. Unfortunately, today's software
development tools and practices do not address intermittence, and frequent
interruptions cause unexpected and incorrect system behavior. Intermittence is a
barrier to the widespread adoption of EHDs for many high-value applications and
limits EHDs to use by experts only.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses
the fundamental challenges of intermittence by introducing the Persistent-
Channel-Based (PCB) programming and execution model. PCB provides a new, simpler
way to write software that is robust to intermittence. PCB also describes a new
way to execute that software with high reliability, despite intermittence. By
simplifying the process of writing software for EHDs and making intermittent
execution reliable, PCB makes EHDs accessible to all potential system builders
and developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as the maturation of programming and
execution models for embedded computer systems spawned industries around new
embedded applications (e.g., the quantified-self project and in-home sensing),
the development of the ideas in this project propels the same transformation for
EHDs. PCB will enable researchers, individuals, and commercial players to create
novel EHD-based applications that in the past could only be tediously purpose-
built by expert researchers. The impact of this work is expected to transcend
the technical outcomes of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
technical outcomes in PCB are novel approaches to writing and executing
software. Programs are composed of tasks using a novel task-graph control-flow
model that eliminates control-flow discontinuities due to intermittence. PCB's
novel channel-based memory model together with channel access control, ensures
that memory remains consistent. PCB simplifies a program?s reasoning progress
because it persistently tracks the execution through the task graph and channel
access control prevents a task from modifying its inputs, ensuring correctness
as the task repeatedly executes to completion. PCB cuts across layers of the
system stack, with language, compiler, runtime, and architecture support using a
language that enables programmers to use simple expressions. The compiler maps
programs to operations in PCB's runtime system which in turn implements tasks
and channels, providing the guarantees relied on by the PCB language. Hardware
and architecture support for channels and tasks, provides similar guarantees
with novel hardware support, eliminating the overhead of the software runtime
system. Encouraging preliminary findings support the idea that PCB's tasks and
channels makes reasoning about intermittent computation simpler and that PCB
eliminates correctness issues in several actual EHD applications.