* 1526269
* NeTS: Small: Channel Recognition for Optimized Links And Networks (CROLA)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2019
* Dinesh Rajan, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 476,000.00

Wirelessly-connected users encounter a vast array of environmental settings from
factors including diverse terrain, buildings, vegetation, weather conditions,
and velocities. Today, when traversing across these diverse conditions, each
environmental change triggers a new wireless channel characterization so that
links can have optimal performance for transmission rate and frequency band
decisions, both of which depend on spatial and environmental characteristics.
This characterization process can induce a high overhead on the network, greatly
reducing the overall performance of the wireless links which were seeking to be
optimized. In this project, diverse wireless scenarios will be classified into a
finite set to recognize wireless channel types and optimize per-link and
network-wide decisions. The project will significantly reduce the amount of
characterization that needs to be performed per environment, especially when
revisiting a location or when a new location shares many similarities as those
previously visited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use two different
approaches to classify wireless channels and create a notion of channel type
which will be fed into an online training framework to optimize transmission
rate and frequency band selection. In the first approach, previously encountered
channel types will be recognized for immediate link-level and network-wide
decisions and the resulting performance from these decisions will be observed to
improve future decisions. In the second approach, previously-unencountered
channel types for which insufficient levels of training exist will be inferred
via crowdsourcing as an initial starting point for on-the-fly training. There
are four main intellectual thrusts to the proposal: (i) The geometric
relationship that forms between the link-level performance and the n-dimensional
space of environmental factors contributing to such performance will be
characterized in order to classify and recognize channel types across
geographically diverse regions. (ii) A crowdsourcing approach with a large data
set of cellular and WiFi-based mobile phone users will be leveraged to
experimentally isolate the roles of geolocation, land use, and situational
context to geo-spatially infer channel types. (iii) An on-the-fly training
framework will be developed to leverage these two notions of channel type for
previously-encountered and well-trained scenarios for optimal link adaptation,
network-wide decisions, and ongoing training, and previously-unencountered or
poorly-trained scenarios to use inferred channel types with decisions and
resulting performance used for constructing a sufficient training. (iv) This
knowledge of channel type will be exploited along with the current spectral
activity and demand to optimize the band assignment in multiband, multihop
networks.