* 1526455
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Differential Introspective Side Channels --- Discovery, Analysis, and Defense
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2021
* Zhuoqing Mao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2021
* USD 605,282.00

Side channels in the security domain are known to be challenging to discover and
eliminate systematically. Nevertheless, they can lead to a variety of stealthy
attacks seriously compromising cybersecurity. This work focuses on an important
class of side channels that are fundamental to the operations of networked
systems. Rather than constantly reacting to newly discovered side channels
because of security breaches with ad-hoc patches, this work enables the
automated discovery of an important class of side channels that exist due to the
inherent goal of exposing information to enable debugging and management of
computing systems. This project is expected to bring a paradigm shift to the
security area of side channel investigation that can bring significant economic
benefits of preventing a diverse set of cyberattacks. This project also has
important educational and workforce training benefits for both undergraduate and
graduate students, in addition to the broader dissemination of the findings
through applicable standards processes to ensure operational
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates an entirely new class
of side channel attacks against networked systems such as network stacks that
can lead to significant damage to user privacy, network security, and
application integrity. An example feature about this class of attacks is the
requirement of actively injecting carefully crafted and potentially incorrect
events to trigger error conditions in a program so as to reveal their internal
sensitive states, which can indirectly expose critical information.
Interestingly, the attacks are inherent byproducts of network and operating
system design and implementation, which are fundamentally hard to modify. In
contrast to other well-known side channels that can be directly observed through
passive monitoring, e.g., power and timing, this class of side channels is much
more subtle to discover and also more challenging to defend against. The
proposed security work helps introduce a more rigorous approach to discovering a
new class of side channels, that have direct impact on the security assurance of
both small systems such as mobile devices as well as large network systems such
as enterprise networks. This research develops methods to systematically and
rigorously detect and eliminate such side channels by leveraging both program
analysis and network measurement science. The investigation to understand the
tradeoffs between security guarantee and manageability of network systems leads
to more practical and usable security solutions that can be deployed in
practice.