* 1526379
* RI: Small: Robust Optimization of Loss Functions with Application to Active Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Brian Ziebart, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop machine learning techniques that produce
better predictions in a broad range of application domains where the usefulness
of predictions is measured by application-specific performance measures.
Existing machine learning methods are frequently forced to approximate these
performance measures so that the search for a good predictor using the
approximated measure will be efficient. This can produce inappropriate
predictions for data in which the approximation to the performance measure is
loose, even for the most fundamental performance measure: accuracy. The approach
of this project instead approximates the training data and optimizes the exact
performance measure to obtain a good predictor. Approximation takes the form of
an "adversary" in a zero-sum game that chooses how the predicted variables are
distributed for evaluation in a way that minimizes performance, but also matches
properties of the dataset that are measured from training data. Many performance
measures that are intractable to directly optimize become tractable when
adversarially optimized. Resulting predictors are designed for the worst case
and must perform at least as well when the adversary is replaced by real data
with high probability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal impact of better
aligning machine learning methods to a significantly wider range of performance
measures is substantial. All classification and regression tasks that are
currently solved using methods that approximate the desired performance measure,
such as support vector machines or AdaBoost, could potentially be improved by
the proposed approach. The project specifically investigates cost-sensitive
classification, in which different mistakes incur penalties that are based on
the implications of the prediction on real-world applications, F-measure
maximization, which is a preferred performance measure balancing precision and
recall in information retrieval tasks, and active learning, where the approach
produces predictions that are robust to sample selection bias. Additional
broader impacts of this project include developing new curriculum that will
enable a wide range of data-driven practitioners to apply these improved methods
to important application areas, including public policy, medical decision
support, and epidemiology. Further, the PIs are committed to advising students
from underrepresented groups at the University of Illinois at Chicago, which is
an urban school with a diverse student population.