* 1526666
* AF: Small: Algorithmic Foundations of Hybrid Stochastic Modeling and Simulation Methods with Applications to Cell Cycle Models
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Yang Cao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 399,999.00

Complex systems emerging from many biochemical applications often exhibit
multiscale features: the systems incorporate a variety of physical processes or
subsystems across a broad range of scales. A typical multiscale system may
require scales with macroscopic, mesoscopic, and microscopic kinetics,
deterministic and stochastic dynamics, continuous and discrete state space,
fast-scale and slow-scale reactions, and species of large and small populations.
These complex features present great challenges for the modeling and simulation
of biochemical systems. The goal of this project is to face these challenges by
developing rigorous mathematical theories and innovative numerical algorithms
for hybrid modeling methods. Mathematical foundations for error analysis of
hybrid methods and algorithms for partitioning a biochemical system into
subsystems will be developed and applied to chemical systems in different
scales. The proposed work will advance the frontier of computational methods for
the simulation of complex biochemical systems and enable automatic regime
switching among multiple scales in complex biochemical systems. The numerical
analysis will also contribute to general understanding of errors in discrete
stochastic simulation methods. The project will support education and training
of graduate and undergraduate students. The simulation methods developed in this
project will be incorporated in the modeling and simulation packages JigCell and
CoPaSi, all are open for public access. The curriculum material and source code
modules will also be available on the university
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by realistic modeling
and simulation of a complex biological control system: the cycle of growth and
division in yeast cells. The project focuses on three specific aims. The primary
aim is to develop mathematical foundations for error analysis of hybrid methods.
Errors will be analyzed in two ways: one approach is based on approximation of
chemical master equations for linear systems, and the other is based on a
Poisson-process formulation of stochastic simulation trajectories. Errors caused
by different partitioning strategies and hybrid solvers will be studied
corresponding to different scale regions and interactions among them. Error
analysis will also help to determine parameters in partitioning strategies. The
second aim is to develop algorithms for hybrid stochastic simulation of
biochemical systems, mechanisms to automatically partition reactions and state
variables into different scale regions, and software to efficiently simulate
multiscale systems. Reactions in a biochemical system are partitioned into four
regions according to reactant population and reaction propensity scales. The
partitioning strategy is based on analysis of these four regions and actual
scale differences. Implementation details of hybrid methods will be carefully
studied to achieve high efficiency. The third aim of this project is to develop
a realistic stochastic model of the budding yeast cell cycle, which will include
protein interactions as well as gene and mRNA dynamics and which will be judged
with respect to the phenotypes of wild-type budding yeast cells and ~120 mutant
strains. Simulation results of the developed model will be compared with wet-lab
experimental data. The ambitious goal is to have a detailed cell cycle model
that reflects dynamics at gene and mRNA levels, accounts accurately for known
probabilistic features of cell proliferation in yeast cells, and accurately
predicts the aberrant behaviors of mutant strains. Algorithms, theories, and
software of hybrid methods developed in this project will be applied and tested
in the modeling and simulation of this complex cell cycle model.