* 1526635
* NeTS: Small: Measurement and Analysis of Second-Generation Crypto-Currency Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Samrat Bhattacharjee, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 496,145.00

Cryptographically formatted digital data that can securely emulate functions
provided by traditional forms of currency are known as cryptocurrencies. Like
traditional currencies, cryptocurrencies can be generated, used to conduct
transactions, and destroyed. Cryptocurrencies are poised to change commerce over
the Internet and beyond. Following the unprecedented success of well-known
cryptocurrencies, there are several hundred variations and some entirely new
cryptocurrencies that are, taken together, valued at several billion dollars in
2015. As the 'second generation' currencies gain traction, the landscape of
cryptocurrencies their uses for online payments and their public acceptance is
changing quicker than ever before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal covers
three broad areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurement: For deployed and emerging
crypto-currencies, this proposal will develop techniques to discover network
structure and understand how network structure affects other properties of the
currency system. The techniques will also measure how mining power interfaces
with the network, how mining algorithms affect the topology, and whether miners
are omitting certain classes of transactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis: The
measurements will generate a longitudinal view of multiple cryptocurrencies,
enabling comparison between topological structure across time and across
currencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design: Deployed cryptocurrency networks and
computation power structure is susceptible to previously theorized attacks,
where attackers gain advantage by being able to propagate information faster
than others. This work will lead to new protocols that mitigate or even
eliminate these types of attacks, regardless of how many nodes attackers
control, how these nodes are situated in the network, and how the computation
power in the network is distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cryptocurrencies seem
inevitable, with some having passed a "tipping point" in social mindshare and
being used for everyday commerce. New currencies are being continually
introduced, and being traded for U.S. Dollars and other "hard" currencies; these
networks are increasingly poised to have a financial impact and our designs are
meant to eliminate structural protocol faults that have been identified. The
data resulting from this work will generate "birds-eye" views of different
currency networks across time and will be made publicly available for the
research community. Broader analysis of these datasets will result in deeper and
foundational understanding of cryptocurrency networks.