* 1526707
* NSFSaTC-BSF: TWC:  Small:  Practical Plausibly Deniable Encryption through Low-Level Storage Device  Behavior
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Donald Porter, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,999.00

Plausibly deniable encryption is the ability to hide that given data is on a
device, whether the ability exists to decrypt it, or even that the data exists.
Plausible deniability is a powerful property to protect data on devices the user
has lost physical control over, such as protecting consumers from accidental
mass disclosures of private data through misplaced devices. This issue is of
particular concern for anyone who travels internationally with sensitive data,
including human rights workers, diplomats, military personnel, or even business
travelers. This project leverages low-level characteristics of flash and other
emergent persistent memories to hide data with plausible deniability, improving
performance and capacity over the state of the art. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates a unique opportunity to implement plausibly deniable
encryption using the underlying electrical properties of flash memory. The
promising property of flash is that the same hardware cell can encode data in
multiple ways, and adjust the encoding dynamically. This project integrates this
encoding mechanism with data hiding: as long as the encoding follows an expected
voltage distribution, an adversary cannot discern the precise encoding technique
or how much data is encoded. This project also investigates firmware-level
techniques to manage hidden data; extends these techniques to emerging
persistent memories, such as phase change memory; and augments widely-used flash
simulators. This project develops novel teaching materials for low-level flash
programming.