* 1526092
* AF: Small: Approximate optimization: Algorithms, Hardness, and Integrality Gaps
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Venkatesan Guruswami, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 266,000.00

Optimization problems, where the goal is to find a solution subject to some
constraints that maximizes or minimizes a certain objective value, are
ubiquitous in computing. As an overwhelming majority of optimization problems
are NP-hard to solve optimally, one widely studied approach is to settle for
approximately optimal solutions with provable guarantees on quality. The
overarching goal in the theory of approximate optimization is to identify, for
broad classes of optimization problems, the best approximation factor achievable
efficiently. This study has two sides that go hand-in-hand, the design of
efficient approximation algorithms, and complementary hardness results
establishing limits to the best approximation possible. One of the most widely
employed approaches to design approximation algorithms is via convex programming
relaxations such as linear or semidefinite programs. So a third intertwined
aspect is to understand the power and limitations of such tools for important
optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research on this topic has made
huge strides, and for a broad class of problems called constraint satisfaction
problems, a common meeting ground of all these aspects has been uncovered, in
the form of a canonical semidefinite program achieving the best possible
approximation ratio in a unified manner. This theory, however, relies on the
unproven Unique Games Conjecture (UGC), and also doesn't extend to various other
important settings. This project focuses on a carefully conceived collection of
fundamental research directions that are germane given our current understanding
of the approximability landscape. Topics studied will include approaches to
bypass the reliance on the UGC where possible, the complexity of approximately
solving problems where a perfectly satisfying assignment exists (a setting that
is not at all captured by the UGC), and a promising new direction where the
notion of approximation is not in the number of constraints satisfied but rather
in how strongly the constraints are satisfied. The project will aim to advance
the frontiers of the subject by harnessing the confluence of the three aspects:
algorithms, hardness, and mathematical programming, that together bear upon this
rich subject. In particular, the project will investigate the power of
semidefinite programs in certifying properties of random graphs and matrices, as
well as their limitations in the form of integrality gaps as prognosis of the
intractability of problems whose status is otherwise open or only known under
the UGC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will shed light on the
approximability of basic optimization problems that abstract some of the core
computational tasks arising in practice. The research and outreach activities
will aim to foster a cross-fertilization of ideas between the approximation and
constraint satisfaction communities. On the education front, the project will
train and mentor graduate students and provide a stimulating research
environment for them. The research will balance the long term and general agenda
of advancing the frontiers of the subject with the investigation of precisely
stated open questions that are yet to receive the thorough investigation they
deserve. The research findings, as appropriate, will be integrated into a novel
course highlighting the emerging confluence of algorithms, hardness results, and
integrality gaps.