* 1526466
* SHF: Small: Secure Power Management and Delivery Exploiting Intelligent Power Networks On-Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Eby Friedman, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 460,000.00

The continued advance of society and emerging market segments require
functionally diverse semiconductors. In these modern heterogeneous systems,
functionally diverse circuits are integrated on-chip, requiring a wide range of
high quality power supply voltages. In addition, as the need for portable,
secure, and high-performance Integrated Circuits (ICs) increases, intelligent
management of the energy budget becomes a primary concern. To satisfy evolving
power delivery requirements, the classical approach for power generation and
distribution has changed over the last decade. Power generation circuits are
physically closer to the loads to provide enhanced control over the quality of
delivered power. Heterogeneous power delivery systems with different types of
off-chip, in-package, and distributed on-chip power converters must be
effectively integrated into complex integrated circuit design methodologies.
Software and firmware solutions are necessary to address the high design
complexity of these hierarchical nonlinear power delivery systems with thousands
of power delivery components and billions of loads. An effective power delivery
solution must be developed which will provide a systematic and intelligent
methodology, scalable distributed architectures, algorithms for distributed
power management, and specialized circuits to support the development of next
generation power efficient integrated systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
research results of this project are to provide a systematic, scalable,
intelligent, and secure solution for efficient on-chip power delivery and
management. A fine grain power management framework comprising a variety of
circuits, algorithms, and architectures will be developed to control power
routing and switching, while optimally allocating power among a variety of
different power domains at run time. To achieve efficient real-time multi-
voltage power delivery, the following components will be developed: (a) a
distributed, intelligent, and secure architecture for heterogeneous scalable on-
chip power delivery, (b) a systematic methodology that exploits the distributed
nature of the proposed architecture to provide real-time adaptive and efficient
control over the quality of power, and (c) specialized circuits such as power
routers, microcontrollers, and ultra-small voltage converters. These novel
capabilities will fundamentally change the manner in which power is delivered
and managed in complex, high performance heterogeneous systems. The development
of these innovative power delivery methodologies for heterogeneous ICs will also
provide new directions for educational initiatives targeting both university
teaching and research activities within the broader academic community. The PI
will promote the advancement and diversity of the science and engineering
workforce to enhance underrepresented minority enrollment in science,
technology, and engineering (STEM) programs.