* 1526456
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Configuration Management for Mobility Support in Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Chunyi Peng, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 10/31/2017
* USD 230,212.00

Mobility support is deemed a fundamental service for the next-generation
Internet. The current cellular network is the only large-scale infrastructure
that successfully provides wide-area, ubiquitous mobility support in reality.
With the explosive growth of smartphone devices and the surge of mobile data
traffic, cellular networks have been evolving into an increasingly heterogeneous
networked system. As a result, managing mobility becomes challenging yet
rewarding. This project seeks to study the configuration issues on mobility
management of 2G/3G/4G networks, in order to ensure desirable mobility support.
The research focuses on assessing two structural properties: stability and
reachability. Stability implies no persistent oscillation loops during constant
network conditions, while reachability denotes no access black hole (e.g.,
certain cells or even a given mobile technology (e.g., 4G) cannot be reached by
the device). The success of the project will not only identify and characterize
misconfigurations in today's cellular networks, but also protect multi-trillion
dollar investment in the fast expanding mobile information infrastructure. The
obtained results may influence the design of upcoming 5G wireless networks.

The proposed research has three key areas of technical contributions. First, it
takes a novel approach to configuration study. It models and analyzes
problematic cases and comes up with a taxonomy of instability and unreachability
for the mobility configuration problems, and derives triggering conditions for
each problematic instance. The fundamental problem lies in its distributed, yet
not well-coordinated configuration decision-making. Second, the project covers
activities from theory to practice. Given the misconfiguration instances
discovered in theory, it further empirically assesses them in operational mobile
networks. It seeks to measure their likelihood in reality and quantify their
negative impacts on both the user device and the network infrastructure. The
diversified root causes are to be analyzed, spanning policy conflicts within a
single parameter, inconsistency between different types of parameters, and
uncoordinated decisions between the device and the network. Last, the research
proposes new solutions to configuration management in mobile networks. This
research simplifies the current approach, while retaining its full
configurability for parameters. To this end, two design guidelines of minimal
replication of decision rules and no multi-hop mobility decision are explored in
order to ensure both stability and reachability of mobility support.