* 1526695
* STARSS: Small: Detection of Hardware Trojans Hidden in Unspecified Design Functionality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Cetin Koc, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Concern about the security and reliability of our electronic systems and
infrastructure is at an all-time high. Economic factors dictate that the design,
manufacturing, testing, and deployment of silicon chips are spread across many
companies and countries with different and often conflicting goals and
interests. In modern complex digital designs, behaviors at a good fraction of
observable output signals for many operational cycles are unspecified and
vulnerable to malicious modifications, known as Hardware Trojans. Since
verification and testing is a major bottleneck, currently the verification
effort is focused on increasing confidence in the correctness of specified
functionality, meaning Trojans modifying unspecified behavior will go
undetected. This research focuses on preventing and detecting the insertion of
Hardware Trojans in unspecified design space. Addressing this emerging yet
powerful threat, this project advances the field of hardware verification and
increases the stability of our society.

This project traverses the unspecified design space efficiently by focusing
analysis only on portions of the design related to attacker controllable or
observable signals. After identifying potentially dangerous functionality, a
mixture of formal and simulation-based methods confirm if the functionality is
dangerous, and provide the verification team with a concrete trace illustrating
a possible attack scenario. This methodology has been successfully applied to
several register-transfer level (RTL) designs. Additionally, the project will
provide metrics allowing design owners to trade-off security with the costs of
Trojan prevention/detection, which include area/power/timing overhead, manual
effort, and analysis time.