* 1526940
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of New Urban Planning on Indigenous Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Miyako Inoue, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2016
* USD 17,474.00

As more and more indigenous people move to metropolitan areas at rapid rates,
municipalities are confronted with urban planning challenges that must balance a
range of stakeholder concerns: the infrastructural needs of the city, the stress
that is placed on resources, and the importance of preserving the heritage that
draws so many people to cities to make them creative centers. This project
explores the relocation of a group of indigenous migrants, and how planners
develop architectures designed to permit these groups to flourish as urban
indigenous subjects with distinct cultural traditions. This project, which
trains a graduate student in conducting rigorous, empirically grounded
scientific fieldwork, asks how such urban planning initiatives targeted at urban
indigenous populations contribute to cultural and socioeconomic transformation.
The results will be useful to engineers, architects, policymakers, and urban
officials tasked with the responsibility of building and managing these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University doctoral candidate, Tomonori
Sugimoto, under the guidance of Dr. Miyako Inoue, explores the construction of
new built environments for urban indigenous people. The researcher will conduct
research on one such urban planning project targeted at the urban indigenous
population in the Taipei region, Taiwan. In Taiwan, close to 50% of the
Austronesian indigenous population has settled in metropolitan areas. In 2014,
Taipei's suburban municipality of New Taipei City initiated experimental
projects to relocate several indigenous squatter communities located on state-
owned riverbanks to newly-built "indigenous cultural park areas." The researcher
will investigate the ideals and intentions of city officials and architects in
relocating indigenous squatters to these new communities. In addition, the
researcher will examine what kinds of impacts relocation to new communities
might have on community residents' cultures, livelihoods, and community. The
researcher will employ methods such as in-depth interviews with city officials,
architects, and community residents, participant observation of community
meetings and city council meetings, analysis of expert architectural knowledge,
and archival research. This research will further our understanding of how
urbanization is affecting indigenous communities, a topic that is poorly
understood despite the fact that in many countries the majority of indigenous
people today reside in urban areas. Furthermore, the research will contribute to
scientific understandings of how urban planning and new built environments can
have impacts on processes such as cultural change and economic marginalization.
This research will be of interest to scholars, architects, urban planners, and
policymakers.