* 1526877
* SHF:  Small:  Layout Assessment and Optimization for Disruptive Patterning and Device Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Puneet Gupta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 370,000.00

Continued scaling of semiconductor technology is essential to preserve the
promise of reduced cost, more functional integration and improved performance -
all within the same or smaller energy footprint for electronic systems. With
integrated circuit fabrication already working at the edge of its physical
limits, the semiconductor industry is likely to see several radical changes in
the manufacturing and device technologies in the next few years and decades. The
broader impact of this proposal lies partly in the artifacts (software,
exploration outcome data, etc.) which would enable the academia and industry
communities to assess and optimize advanced semiconductor technologies. In
addition to enhancing graduate curriculum and engaging undergraduate students in
research, the PI will co-organize the Los Angeles Computing Circle: a summer
program to expose high school students to non-traditional aspects of computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the manufacturing front, the two radical changes that
may be seen are (1) use of Extreme Ultraviolet (EUV) light in lithography which
has over 10X smaller wavelength than what is used currently with associated
improvement in resolution (i.e., potential to shrink transistor and wire
dimensions even further); and (2) adoption of Directed Self Assembly (DSA): a
scheme where desired patterns self-assemble onto the wafer with some guidance.
The other disruption in electronics technology is likely to come from
development of vertically oriented transistors (i.e., the current through them
flow in z direction instead of x or y) which hold the promise of reduced sleep
power, improved performance, smaller area and amenability to integrate
heterogeneous materials. The focus of the project is to enable these disruptive
technologies that will require substantial changes in design infrastructure and
manufacturing-side software tools to be viable. Algorithms and software
frameworks for technology development, design layout generation and
manufacturability assessment will be developed.