* 1526638
* NeTS: Small: Designing Sustainable Battery-Free Multi-Hop Sensing Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Cynthia Hood, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2020
* USD 475,000.00

The promise of pervasive, long-term, and large scale sensing has spurred many
new applications. In spite of more than a decade of research, the promise of
many such applications is still hindered by the limitation of power supply to
devices. To provide a competitive sustainable solution for building these
applications, this project takes a radical shift in the sensing and networking
paradigm. It proposes to build battery-free sensing network (BFSN) by exploiting
the ambient energy to support its operation. By removing the need for battery,
it will support a sustainable operation, especially in hazard conditions. The
underlying novelty is the establishment of a hybrid architecture (composed of
three layers: battery-free devices, battery-powered devices, and base-stations)
to enable the battery-free multi-hop networking with the low-power supply,
extremely limited computation and storage in battery-free devices. The proposed
research has the potential to revolutionize the communication architecture for
sensor and cyber-physical systems, lowering their cost and easing their
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many key challenges in realizing the benefits
of BFSN will focus on the small-sized battery-free devices, such as charging
these devices, placement of devices and charging stations, networking these
devices and the wider network, and locating them. First, the researchers study
Smart Energy Harvesting and Charging. They propose to carefully deploy and
schedule the wireless charging stations to compensate the unstable and
unreliable environmental energy, and provide sustainable network services.
Secondly, the researchers study Battery-free Networking and Communication. To
enable networking of multiple devices, they present a complete network stack,
composed of the physical layer protocols, the link layer protocols, and network
layer protocols. Data collection protocols are proposed for trade-offs among
latency, energy-efficiency, and network reliability. Thirdly, the researchers
study Battery-free Locating and Tracking. They aim to divide battery-free
devices into different categories and propose different algorithms to locate
them with good accuracy while successfully addressing the limited computation
and energy supply of batter-free devices.