* 1526459
* SHF: Small:  Control-Flow and Data-Flow Analysis of Android Software: Foundations and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Atanas Rountev, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 470,208.00

In recent years the growth in the number of computing devices has been driven
primarily by smartphones and tablets. For such devices, Android is the dominant
platform. The correctness, security, and performance of Android devices is of
paramount importance for many millions of users. However, the scientific
foundations for software analysis, verification, and transformation in this area
are still very inadequate. The proposed work will significantly advance the
state of the art in software analysis for Android. The results will be made
available to other researchers, which will help design new analyses to improve
software quality. Integration of research and education will develop the
expertise of new developers of mobile software. Recruitment of underrepresented
students will contribute to increased diversity in computing. Through commercial
and academic software tools, new software analyses could enter real-world use in
the development toolkits of Android programmers, resulting in better software
quality and faster time to market.

Android applications are framework-based and event-driven. The complex semantics
of the framework event/callback model presents a major challenge to static
analysis. The project will develop a precise semantic description that captures
essential abstraction of the run-time execution model, including modeling of
components, their interactions through calls and callbacks, and their handling
of external events. Based on this semantics, the project will design a general
program representation of application control flow and data flow, and will
develop algorithms for constructing and traversing it. The resulting
representation and algorithms can serve as basis for a wide variety of static
analyses. Three exemplar client analyses will be designed and evaluated: (1)
detection of resource leaks, (2) detection of energy-related defects, and (3)
taint analysis. These analyses target important quality problems and can help
improve the performance and security of Android software. A suite of public
algorithm implementations and experimental subjects will be made publicly
available, to enable development and evaluation of existing and new static
analyses for Android.