* 1526860
* RI: Small: Theory and Application of Mechanism Design for Team Formation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Myrna Wooders, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 454,051.00

In a world where complexity of tasks abounds, teamwork is the norm rather than
the exception. Formation of effective teams is therefore vital in nearly any
organization, and across a broad array of domains, such as large-scale software
projects, course projects, military operations, construction projects, and
search-and-rescue tasks. Successful team formation, however, hinges on having
knowledge about how individuals working on a team complement each other in
service of a task, their ability to work together, as well as potentially
misaligned preferences about goals that the different tasks may achieve. The
goal of this project is to develop a general-purpose team formation exchange
service, leveraging new theoretical foundations for designing team formation
mechanisms when the abilities and preferences of prospective teammates are
uncertain. Such an exchange would significantly improve the ability of
organizations to dynamically form agile and efficient project teams, reducing
conflict and better aligning individual and organizational incentives. This
project considers an exceptionally challenging conceptual and technical problem
of mechanism design in the context of team formation in service of a set of
goals. The core conceptual challenge lies in modeling the problem in sufficient
detail to capture considerations such as achievement of sub-goals by tasks,
agent capabilities, task requirements, and agent preferences about goals and
teammates, but avoiding unnecessary detail to maintain tractability. The
proposed research offers a novel modeling framework aimed at balancing these two
considerations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical contributions involve both
novel theoretical treatment of the problem, such as characterizations of novel
extensions of mechanisms from related domains, including combinatorial
assignment, entirely new mechanisms tailored to the problem at hand, and
algorithmic contributions to optimal scalable automated mechanism design
leveraging specific problem structure. Additionally, the proposed research will
blend experimental economics research with contributions in theoretical and
computational economics by using human subject experiments as one of the means
to evaluate the developed mechanisms.