* 1526639
* III: Small: BigSolver: Data-Intensive Solver Support for Big Data Exploration and Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ugur Cetintemel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,999.00

Exploratory data analysis plays a key role in data-driven discovery in a wide
range of domains including science, engineering and business. This project will
enable data scientists from many domains to search and explore their large data
sets far easier and faster than they do today. Rather than spending a lot time
to set up exploration pipelines by combining multiple software tools, users will
work with a single, general purpose and more usable system. Overall, this
project will enable fundamentally richer means for data exploration and lead to
significant productivity improvements; it will accelerate discovery and
breakthroughs in many domains such as e-commerce, finance and science. This
research will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate coursework. The
outreach activities include special research and education-focused programs that
are geared towards undergraduates and high-school girls.

This research proposes to design and build a new prototype database system,
called BigSolver, that will uniquely integrate constraint solving and data
management techniques. The result will enable rich, highly-efficient means for
generic ad hoc search, exploration and mining over large multidimensional data
collections. BigSolver will allow Constraint Programming (CP) machinery to run
efficiently inside a DBMS without the need to extract, transform and move the
data. This marriage will offer the rich expressiveness and efficiency of
constraint-based search and optimization provided by modern CP solvers with the
ability of Database Management Systems (DBMSs) to store and query data at scale.
This work will be an early yet transformative step in enriching the
functionality of database systems towards new data- and search-intensive
applications. The proposed effort will develop novel approaches for synopsis-
based in-memory processing, speculative solving, search query optimization,
parallel processing and load balancing, as well as architectural innovations,
which will collectively yield performance and usability levels that far improve
those of the state of the art.

For further information, see the project website at:
http://database.cs.brown.edu/projects/SearchLight/