* 1526605
* AF: Small: Geometry-aware Integral Equation Solvers for High-fidelity Electromagnetic Modeling and Simulation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Zhen Peng, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2018
* USD 242,267.00

For the design of antennas to aircraft, it is important to simulate the
electromagnetic behavior of objects with many parts or complex geometry. This
project investigates geometry-aware, high-performance integral equation (IE)
solvers: decomposing the geometry and creating algorithms that fit new
mathematics to the geometry. This research enables integrated design and
simulation in engineering applications via reconfigurable modeling and reusable
simulation: by generating analysis-suitable models per-component and
independently analyzing individual components, one can hope to automatically
assemble components to simulate a virtual prototype of an entire product. This
will overcome key challenges in simulation-based engineering and science (SBES),
resulting in high-fidelity simulation software that can advance computer-aided
design and engineering (CAD/CAE).

This proposal aims to investigate high-resolution and high-performance IE
solvers for time-harmonic Maxwell Equations, whose simulation capability and
modeling fidelity scale with the exponential growth in computing power. This
objective will be attained through three major research efforts: 1.) investigate
a geometry-adaptive multi-resolution discontinuous Galerkin (DG) boundary
element method, which permits the use of non-conformal surface discretizations,
allows mixing different types of elements, and facilitates the mesh generation
task for high-definition objects. 2.) investigate a well-conditioned multi-trace
IE formulation for complex composite objects to resolve the intricacies of
materials in composite structures. 3.) develop a geometry-aware domain
decomposition (DD) method to conquer the geometric complexity of physical
domains.

The work will impact design of advanced antennas, optical integrated circuits,
nanomaterials and other engineering applications. The capability of the
developed algorithms will be illustrated in applications ranging from high-
definition jet aircraft to radar stealth objects to nanoparticles and plasmonic
nanoantennas. A modular software library will implement the algorithms
developed, with detailed documentation to allow wide reuse. On the educational
side, this project will train students (from undergraduates to graduates) in
computational mathematics, electromagnetics, microwave engineering and computer-
aided engineering, and will broaden participation via UNM undergraduate research
and education programs (PROFOUND, PREP) and minority outreach programs (New
Mexico AMP and HESO). This will foster greater awareness and interest in
computational science and engineering, and reinforce student preparation to face
future challenges.