* 1526015
* CSR: Rethinking System Software for Overprovisioned, High-Performance Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* David Lowenthal, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 505,882.00

Currently, the high-performance computing (HPC) community is focused on
achieving exaflop performance, which is about a 30-fold improvement from the
performance of the best supercomputer in the world today. Because of practical,
financial, and environmental concerns, the Department of Energy is setting a
power limit for achieving an exaflop at 20 megawatts. As today's top machines
generally consume between five and 20 megawatts---and yet are an order of
magnitude or more away from the exaflop performance target, significant hardware
and software advances in HPC systems are necessary. One way to improve hardware
is to use overprovisioned systems, which contain more machines than can be fully
powered simultaneously. While overprovisioned systems have the potential to
significantly improve power and performance, software will need to be redesigned
to support such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is to
design and implement software infrastructure that will support overprovisioned
systems. The key advance in the infrastructure is support of system-wide
optimizations, i.e., optimizations that span multiple applications. This is in
stark contrast to the current focus in HPC systems of optimizing on a per-
application basis. The developed software will consist of a job profiler, a
scheduler that performs analysis on multiple jobs at a time, and a cluster-wide
run-time system that jointly optimizes multiple applications based on the output
of the scheduler analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving exascale computing is
an important national priority and will impact many critical application
domains, such as climate/weather, renewable energy, nuclear energy, materials
science, and national security. The work described here will improve whole-
system performance on power-constrained HPC systems, which is one important step
towards the exascale goal. The project plans to transfer technology resulting
from this research in the form of the proposed software stack via longstanding
collaborations with several national laboratories.