* 1526725
* AF: Small: Complexity of Distributed Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Welch, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 416,000.00

Distributed computing systems are all around us, ranging from multiple cores in
a cell phone to the Internet itself. Distributed storage, or shared data, is a
vital mechanism for communication among computing entities ("processors") in
distributed systems and facilitates the development of correct and efficient
applications. Although shared data is a desirable abstraction, it is not
generally provided in large-scale distributed systems due to physical
limitations. Instead, processors keep individual copies of the data, and
communicate by sending messages to keep the copies consistent. It is known that
providing shared data with strong guarantees on how consistent the data is can
be expensive -- in particular, the operations on the data can take a long time
to complete. This fact has fueled interest in more "relaxed" versions of the
data, in the hope that operations can be implemented faster. As an example of
relaxed data, imagine data that supports read and write operations where a read
operation can return a value that is not the one most recently
written.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing software for distributed storage
systems (and indeed for most distributed systems) that is correct and efficient
is challenging due to complications caused by concurrency, component failures,
and variable communication delays. Yet being able to do so will benefit society
because of the ubiquity of such software. This project takes a principled
approach, based on rigorous mathematical reasoning, to find distributed
algorithms for some fundamental problems that underlie distributed storage
systems, with especial focus on relaxed data, and to characterize applications
that can exploit the relaxations and their improved
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will also include creating
undergraduate curricular materials on distributed computing to fill existing
gaps and providing research experiences for undergraduates, especially women who
are woefully under-represented, to encourage more to obtain graduate degrees in
computing-related field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical problems to be
solved include these: Find optimal implementations of various data structures
that satisfy the "linearizability" consistency condition, where the performance
metrics considered include worst-case as well as amortized time; amortized
bounds are often of more use than isolated worst-case results, yet they have not
been the focus of much analysis. Discover the relationship between relaxing the
specification of an object and relaxing the consistency condition. Characterize
general classes of applications that can exploit relaxed data structures or
relaxed consistency conditions. Determine the level of fault-tolerance of data
types in a generic way. Characterize patterns of churn (processors entering and
leaving the system) that allow linearizable objects to be implemented in an
asynchronous system subject to crash failures. The PIs plan to apply, as a
general tool, classifications of data type operations by their algebraic
properties.