* 1526473
* CHS: Small: Human-Directed Optical Music Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Erik Stolterman, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 504,197.00

Vast quantities of character-encoded text form the foundation for the
information retrieval revolution of recent decades. In contrast, very little
symbolically-represented music exists, preventing music from fully participating
in the 21st century. The International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP) is a
large and rapidly growing open library of public domain machine-printed
classical music scores, actively used by many musicians, scholars, and
researchers around the world. Optical music recognition (OMR) forms the natural
bridge between the IMSLP and the missing symbolic music data. While there has
been active OMR research since the 1960s, the state of the art still is not
sufficiently well-developed to create symbolic data from realistic documents, as
represented on the IMSLP. This is because music notation contains a thicket of
special cases, exceptions to general rules, image pathologies, and
interpretation challenges, whose recognition requires a deep level of content
understanding. With this in mind, the PI has developed prototype software named
Ceres for supporting a hybrid human-computer team, in which both machine and
person partner in a collaborative recognition effort. The human guides the
computer through the recognition task, identifying and providing crucial missing
pieces of information, while allowing the computer to fill in the details,
consistent with the human guidance. The ultimate goal is to build a Wikipedia-
like community centered around Ceres and the IMSLP with the mission of creating
a definitive, open access, symbolic music library that distributes music scores
electronically and globally, allowing for adaptive display and automatic
transformation and registration of scores with audio and video. The prevalence
of symbolic music data would open up a world of possibilities to music-science
researchers, including systems for music information retrieval, expressive
performance, musical accompaniment, transcription and arranging, performance
assistance, and many others. Last but not least, the symbolic music library
would enable innovative commercial applications; tablet computers will likely be
the sheet music "delivery system" of the future, allowing automatic page
turning, performance feedback, and various kinds of content-based annotation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of integrating both human and algorithmic
intelligence to create a tractable and efficient OMR solution constitutes the
heart of this project. The PI's approach is to adopt the interface paradigm of
constrained optimization; the human uses domain understanding to supply crucial
missing pieces of information when needed, and the computer uses this guidance
to re-recognize and reinterpret subject to these user-supplied constraints. A
preliminary experiment conducted by the PI using a medium-difficulty test set
showed a 17% error rate on the part of his prototype system, accounting for both
false positives and false negatives at the primitive level. The human-computer
interface is where the recognition results become tangible and subject to
manipulation, so its design is critical; this is an area where the PI expects to
make contributions to HCI in general. The PI argues that to be useful for OMR
the interface should be almost completely open, providing a set of tools and
options, and imposing only the minimal required structure (e.g., staff
recognition must be verified before we identify page structure, while the latter
must be verified before it is worth continuing to the symbol recognition phase).
The interface development strategy will be one of iterative refinement, the
evaluation of each version to involve time- and effort-oriented metrics as well
as open-ended user comments. For example, the Ceres user interface (the null
hypothesis for the current project) superimposes the recognized results on the
original image, making discrepancies readily apparent (in contrast to other
systems that present side-by-side original and recognized notation which is
cognitively more difficult to compare), but maybe even better solutions are
possible? Other aspects of the work will include exploration of the roles of
visualization (including directing the user's attention) and music playback
(hearing the score). OMR is just one of many computer vision problems that fall
into the constrained optimization category, and the approach also applies to
natural language processing, machine listening, and others; the essential
process to be explored here would extend to these domains as well, providing a
general template with far-reaching significance. For OMR the constraints are
individual pixel labels, but for other problem domains they could equally well
refer to labelling of individual samples, words, or whatever fundamental units
compose the data. In this way, the approach uses a generic and flexible view for
human input that doesn't require the human to understand the inner workings of
the recognition processes.