* 1526200
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Targeted Observation of Severe Local Storms Using Aerial Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Dezhen Song, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,242.00

This project addresses the development of self-deploying aerial robotic systems
that will enable new in-situ atmospheric science applications. Fixed-wing aerial
robotic technology has advanced to the point where platforms fly persistent
sampling missions far from remote operators. Likewise, complex atmospheric
phenomena can be simulated in near real-time with increasing levels of fidelity.
Furthermore, cloud computing technology enables distributed computation on
large, dynamic data sets. Combining autonomous airborne sensors with
environmental models dispersed over multiple communication and computation
channels enables the collection of information essential for examining the
fundamental behavior of atmospheric phenomena. The aerial robotic system
proposed here will close significant capability gaps in conventional platform?s
abilities to collect the data necessary to answer a wide range of scientific
questions. The motivating application for this work is improvement in the
accuracy and lead-time of tornado warnings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project draws on techniques in the areas of robotics, unmanned systems,
networked control, wireless communication, active sensing, and atmospheric
science to realize the vision of bringing cloud robotics to the clouds. The
autonomous self-deploying aerial robotic systems is comprised of multiple
robotic sensors and distributed computing nodes including: multiple fixed-wing
unmanned aircraft, deployable Lagrangian drifters, mobile Doppler radar, mobile
command and control stations, distributed computation nodes in the field and in
the lab, a net-centric middleware connecting the dispersed elements, and an
autonomous decision-making architecture that closes the loop between sensing in
the field and new online numerical weather prediction tools.