* 1526085
* CHS: Small: Remote Supportive Touch for Health and Wellness
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Svetlana Yarosh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 361,261.00

Supportive touch plays an important role in how people communicate empathy,
compassion, and group affiliation in peer-support health and wellness
communities (e.g., holding hands at the start of an Alcoholics Anonymous
meeting). While communication technologies such as Apple's FaceTime have allowed
such peer-support meetings to extend their reach through online communities,
supportive touch is not currently possible in these online settings. While
researchers have explored the possibility of remotely transmitting supportive
touch, few ideas have progressed beyond the conceptual design stage, fewer still
have been tested through rigorous empirical investigations, and almost none have
been deployed in real-world settings. The PI's goal in this project is to move
the field forward by developing and evaluating projection-based and haptic
remote supportive touch technologies in health and wellness domains. Since the
field research will take place at St. Paul facilities for recovery from
substance use disorders, the work has the potential for broad impact by helping
to address the significant gap between people who need support and those who are
able to get it. Additional broader impact will derive from the fact that one of
the prototype systems to be developed as part of this project involves extending
and transferring research findings to a commercially available system, where
they will be made freely available to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two broad research questions drive the
investigation: What variables affect user perceptions of remote supportive touch
and how do these variables interact? And how does remote supportive touch affect
relationship formation and maintenance in the wild in the health and wellness
domain? These questions will be addressed through three synergistic activities:
development and validation of a questionnaire (for measuring user perceptions of
remote supportive touch, which will provide a baseline for rigorous empirical
investigations in this domain); a laboratory investigation (that addresses open
questions about the impact of three variables on user perceptions of remote
supportive touch: relationship with partner, emotional salience of task, and
presence of haptic activation) contributing to a model of user perception of
remote supportive touch; and a field deployment of two prototypes in the context
of peer-support in the health and wellness context (holding hands with a remote
partner to promote recovery from substance use disorders) to validate the model
in the wild (one of these prototypes serves to transfer research findings on
camera-projector collaboration systems to the HP Sprout commercially available
technology, while the other leverages novel shape-shifting display technology to
represent a remote hand, thereby also contributing to the emerging domain of
shape-shifting interfaces).