* 1526908
* CIF: SMALL: Spatiotemporally Varying Channel Map Estimation and Tracking in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Athina Petropulu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2020
* USD 516,000.00

The availability of wireless channel maps can greatly improve the performance
and reliability of wireless networks. In addition to traditional applications
which depend on channel information, channel maps can be valuable in emerging
applications such as communication-aware motion and path planning, network
routing, connectivity maintenance and dynamic coverage, which will support
improved wireless performance. In a realistic setting, the statistics of the
wireless medium change dynamically in time and space. This research develops
theory and algorithms for building wireless channel maps over a geographical
area based on channel measurements obtained by the network
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The descriptive statistics of the channel, referred
to here as the channel state, are modeled as discrete time stochastic processes,
evolving in time or space according to a fully or partially known statistical
model. The channel state encompasses the path-loss exponent, the shadowing power
and the correlation distance, and is hidden from the network nodes; the nodes
can only observe their respective channel realizations. This project develops a
novel framework for dynamic spatiotemporal estimation / tracking / prediction of
both the channel state and the channel magnitude, in complex, nonlinearly
evolving, time varying and possibly nonstationary environments. The estimation
problem is approached through the rich theory of nonlinear filtering and
stochastic control. Several issues are studied, including (1) Decentralized
channel tracking &amp; spatiotemporal channel prediction, (2) Event triggered
sampling for efficient channel sampling, (3) Structured stochastic models for
nonstationary channels. The project has an experimental component, which informs
the analytical models and is also used to test/evaluate the developed methods.
The project engages graduate and undergraduate students in a range of
theoretical subjects and also measurements performed on WINLAB?s communications
testbed.