* 1526674
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Reducing Classifier Bias in Social Media Studies of Public Health
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,01/31/2019
* Aron Culotta, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 01/31/2019
* USD 304,725.00

Social media creates a new opportunity for public health research, giving
greater reach at lower cost than traditional survey methods. Online content
offers several potential advantages over traditional survey data; one can in
real-time measure how behaviors and attitudes change in response to rare events
such as legal changes, new products, and marketing campaigns. Machine learning
techniques for classification can be used to tailor interventions that improve
health outcomes while minimizing costs. However, online content is not a random
sample, potentially biasing the outcomes. This proposal develops techniques to
overcome this problem, enabling effective use of publicly available social media
data for public health research. The approaches are evaluated against a
traditional survey-based approach to evaluate end-to-end effectiveness in a
real-world public health scenario, determining effectiveness of smoking
cessation campaigns.

The project builds on well-grounded statistical approaches to eliminate
classifier bias. Key innovations are extending this to the high-dimensional,
noisy domain of textual social media data (specifically Twitter), robustness to
confounding variables, and scalable methods to identify comparison groups. Noisy
data will be addressed through advancing multiple imputation techniques. The
project will develop a model-based approach to identifying comparison groups
that addresses confounding variable issues. The methods will be evaluated in the
context of an actual public health study of smoking cessation, based on
historical Twitter data and traditional surveys conducted before and after a CDC
campaign as well as a survey of smokers on perceived risk factors of
e-cigarettes.