* 1526693
* CHS: Small: Transforming the Architectural Design Review Process through Collaborative Embodiment in HMD-Based Immersive Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Lee Anderson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,410.00

Immersive virtual reality (IVR) technology has the potential to fundamentally
transform the architectural design and building industries, by enabling
individuals and groups to achieve an accurate and intuitive experiential
understanding of a designed environment before it is built. To help realize this
promise, the PI and her team will in this project pursue a multi-faceted
research agenda that seeks to develop and deploy low-cost, multi-user, head-
mounted-display (HMD) based IVR technology to more effectively support the
decision-making process in architecture / engineering / construction design
reviews. The research will address two critical challenges: to enable individual
stakeholders to achieve a more accurate understanding of the 3D spatial
structure and affordances for action in a designed interior space and to
reliably assess its aesthetic and functional suitability under realistic use
conditions; and to facilitate effective collaborative design review by enabling
groups of stakeholders to be jointly immersed in the virtual model during the
review process. Project outcomes promise to offer immediate benefits to
architects, builders, and their clients, who will be able to more readily
evaluate the suitability of designed spaces to meet their needs. The work also
has the potential to enhance the effectiveness with which IVR technology can be
used for a wider variety of collaborative and experiential purposes, in areas
from education and training to psychotherapy and rehabilitation. In addition,
the research has the potential to support significant advances in design
education, by enabling the broader effective use of IVR technology in teaching
fundamental concepts of visual imagination, and to foster closer
interdisciplinary collaboration between faculty and students in computer
science, architecture and design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ambitious research
plan consists of three key components. The PI and her team will develop robust
methods for providing individual users with the ability to see a visually
faithful, dynamically rendered 3D representation of their own body while they
are physically moving about within an HMD-based IVR, along with a quantitative
assessment of the impact of alternative embodiment methodologies on the accuracy
of peoples' spatial perception judgments in the virtual environment. The team
will also develop robust methods for providing multiple users with the ability
to see each other while being co-located in a wide-area, HMD-based IVR, along
with a qualitative assessment of best-practice representational approaches for
supporting effective interpersonal communication and simultaneous accurate
spatial understanding when multiple users are immersed as a group in a shared
virtual environment. Finally, the team will create a system for populating a
designed environment with realistically behaving and interactively responsive
autonomous virtual agents, along with qualitative and quantitative testing of
the impact on spatial perception and functional suitability judgments from
experiencing dynamically populated, as opposed to static or unpopulated,
immersive virtual environments, plus related efforts that will assess the
subjective and objective realism of the agents' dynamic behavior.