* 1526353
* TWC: Small: Online tracking: Threat Detection, Measurement and Response
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Arvind Narayanan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

The project develops new technologies for continual, web-scale measurement and
rapid defenses against emerging threats to web privacy and security arising from
third-party tracking. It draws from the fields of web security, systems,
measurement, statistics, and machine learning. The outputs of this project will
enable website administrators to find and fix a large class of privacy and
security problems. They will help improve existing browser privacy tools.
Finally, they will aid regulatory enforcement and contribute to better-informed
press reporting on online privacy and security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is driven by two fundamental questions: (i) which privacy and security
threats are created or exacerbated by the presence of embedded third party
elements? and (ii) how can we automatically detect these problems and develop
defensive tools for users and site administrators? The project uses automated
web browsing and measurement to generate "third-party threat profiles" for
websites, maintain a "web privacy census," and develop a new class of browser
privacy tools using machine learning. The project brings transparency to the
third-party ecosystem and enables oversight, giving users and developers the
upper hand in blocking unwanted tracking and supporting enforcement actions when
companies violate established privacy rules.