* 1526155
* CHS: Small: Advancing the Human Work of Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Phoebe Sengers, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Data analytics, the automatic discovery of patterns in large datasets, is an
integral part of contemporary digital practice. Owing to their large scale,
broad scope, and unprecedented granularity, such data are manually intractable
and, thus, data mining algorithms do work that humans cannot. Still, data
analytics necessitates human labor to make it work, for example deciding what
data to collect, pre-processing the data to make them algorithm-ready, and
making sense of the results. This research addresses related technical and
societal challenges by identifying, tracking, and analyzing the multiple forms
of human labor involved in the practice of data analytics, and by using this
analysis to develop new methods for data analytics research and training. By
articulating work practices that previously have been taught largely through
apprenticeship, this work expands the reach of data analytics beyond those with
direct connections to existing researchers. It increases transparency and
accountability of data analysis by making clear how data analysis results are
developed and by developing techniques to better communicate results. It
supports a better fit between data analysis and domain contexts and demonstrates
good practices for integrating social and technical research. The key question
this project will answer is how people and machines can work together more
effectively to make sense of large-scale data.

Through a collaboration between sociologists of technology and data scientists,
this research will identify and address invisible labor at three stages in the
analytics process: (1) Conceptualization: How is a problem conceptualized and
translated into a machine-solvable data analytic problem? (2) Pre-processing:
How are data collected, cleaned, and made algorithm-ready? (3) Post-processing:
How are the results of data analysis contextualized, represented, and made sense
of, both individually and publically? This research answers these questions by
analyzing the uptake of data analytics in the digital humanities. This is a
useful site for surfacing questions of human labor because data analytics is a
powerful potential tool for the humanities, but does not map directly onto
traditional research methods in this field. Thus, mapping problems onto data
analytics and translating the results of data analytics into meaningful
arguments for the target domain requires more explicit articulation than is the
case in more "data-native" disciplines. This research develops implications for
the practice of data analysis in 4 areas: (1) designing new curricula for
training in data analysis; (2) developing software systems and research methods
that better address and support human labor; (3) exploring new ways to make the
process of data analysis transparent, accountable, and communicable; and (4)
creating a nuanced sociological understanding of the practice of data analysis.