* 1526249
* CHS: Small: Interactive Haptic Assembly and Docking for 3D Shapes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Horea Ilies, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 497,499.00

Haptic human-computer interaction mechanisms and systems play a critical role in
a variety of engineering and scientific activities that rely on the fundamental
task of virtual object assembly, from protein docking, drug design and tele-
surgery, to advanced manufacturing, rehabilitation, robotics, teleoperation and
consumer applications. One of the key long-standing challenges in developing
such practical interactive systems is the lack of a proper formulation of the
guidance forces that effectively assist the user in the exploration of the
virtual environment, from repulsing collisions to attracting proper contact. A
secondary difficulty is that of achieving an efficient implementation that can
maintain an acceptable haptic refresh rate. Current state-of-the art solutions
to these open problems have been developed for severely restricted classes of
shapes and motions, and rely heavily on heuristics that exploit drastic
geometric limitations. To address these issues, the PI's goal of this research
is to develop a purely geometric model for an artificial energy field that
favors spatial relations leading to proper assembly of arbitrarily complex
shapes. Project outcomes will lead to effective interaction mechanisms for
intelligent human-computer or human-robot systems and will open the doors to the
development of generic and fully automated assembly planners while
simultaneously unlocking new levels of expression and productivity in activities
that rely on interactive assembly tasks in a broad range of industrial,
scientific and consumer applications, in domains as diverse as 3D user
interfaces, engineering, and medical and assistive technologies. The PI's
industrial partnerships will facilitate aggressive and widespread technology
transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To these ends, the energy function is expressed
in terms of a convolution of shape-dependent affinity fields that rely on the
novel concept of a space-continuous, well-defined, and robust density function,
called the Skeletal Density Functions (SDF), whose sublevel sets in the limit
are related to an implicit definition of the medial axis. Importantly, the
proposed energy field leads to the first practical and automatic approach to
detect key features that contribute to proper alignment or assembly, as well as
the geometric constraints required for virtual assembly. Moreover, the proposed
approach completely avoids the heuristic recipes and manual intervention that
are common to existing methods for haptic assembly. The PI's preliminary results
show that this research can unify the two haptic interaction phases of free
motion and precision assembly, which are common in current haptic simulations,
into a single interaction mode, and suggest a generic and automatic constraint
model for the so-called virtual fixtures, with no restrictive assumption on the
types of the assembly features and shapes involved.