* 1526485
* Small: Collaborative Research: Programmed Cyclic Molecular Dancing on 2D Origami Lattices
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Natasa Jonoska, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Molecular interactions can be seen as molecular communications and exchanges of
information. In recent years the understanding of molecular information
processing has been explored through DNA-based bottom-up self-assembly. These
studies explore algorithmic, programmable molecular interactions including
molecular devices. In this work, two PIs with complementary expertise, a chemist
and a mathematician, join together to further the possibilities for programmed
molecular interactions. The goal of this highly interdisciplinary project is to
introduce environmental control within the DNA self-assembly process that will
direct molecular interactions in a preprogrammed manner. It introduces a "clock"
(an essential part of computation) that controls programmed oscillating
attachments/detachments of different molecular species on a predesigned
platform. The proposed project will enable self-assembly of a variety of
preprogrammed molecular shapes from the same set of building blocks. These
shapes could serve as scaffolds for nanoelectronic components, which if
achieved, will allow for smaller, denser and faster computer hardware.
Furthermore, programmed dynamical molecular interactions would be the first
incarnation of nucleic acid robots (nubots) acting on a platform. Several
undergraduates and at least two PhD graduate students (one in each institution)
will receive training through this award. This project will prepare these
individuals as unique interdisciplinary research scientists able to pursue
studies that require broad scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to introduce environmental control for periodic dynamical,
molecular arrangements in molecular programming, to develop a method for
molecular signal communication between different molecular species, and to use
this method to obtain molecular arrangements that cycle in time. In particular
the project will (1) develop molecular conditions for environmental control
through laser illumination that will allow oscillating platform
attachments/detachments between two different molecular floating tile species
and (2) introduce algorithmic molecular interactions with oscillating dynamics
between two molecular species by simulating a two-dimensional Game-of-Life-like
dynamics on a two dimensional DNA origami array. The system has a platform
consisting of a 2D DNA origami array whose tiles have signaling strands, and
free floating tiles able to attach to their respective "identity" counterparts
on the platform and to transmit signals to neighboring locations. The array
tiles are arranged in a checker-board fashion such that in an alternate manner,
at each cycle, one of the colors receives the floating tiles and computes the
identity of the next cycle tiles of the other color tiles. The floating tiles
are equipped with nano-particles whose exposure to appropriate laser wave length
increases the local temperature and thereby can disassociate those floating
tiles from the platform.