* 1526055
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: System Research on Persistent High-Dimensional Data Access and Its Application to Semiclassical Molecular Dynamics Simulation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Yu Zhuang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,807.00

High dimensional data arise in many scientific studies. High-frequency accesses
of large disk-resident high dimensional datasets pose both I/O and algorithmic
challenges for high access efficiency. Investigators of this proposal are faced
with high dimensional data from semiclassical molecular dynamics studies that
need to be accessed repeatedly at a very high frequency during the simulation,
and in some simulation studies the datasets can be far larger than the memory
capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the challenge of large
high-dimensional datasets by proposing a middleware system for fast access of
storage-resident high dimensional data, with easy-to-use APIs for data
organizing, indexing, search, and I/O latency hiding. In order to enable fast
searches with low memory footprint, various indexing structures are explored and
a new locality preserving tree (LPT) is proposed. Furthermore, the project
exploits specific data access patterns in dynamics studies for I/O latency
hiding through overlapping of computations with I/O's, enabled by a small set of
easy-to-use programming constructs for non-blocking read/write operations that
are under development for further reduction of data access time. The developed
non-blocking APIs are compatible with hard disk drives (HDDs) and hybrid solid
state drives (SSDs) and HDDs. In addition, an SSD-based I/O accelerator is
developed and integrated with non-blocking APIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project tackles important and challenging problems for accessing large high-
dimensional data sets, which has applications beyond semiclassical molecular
dynamics simulations. The investigators will leverage the research efforts to
motivate and educate students. To broaden the impact beyond project
participants, courses will be enhanced with knowledge, insights, and materials
obtained from the research, with careful adaptation as course materials and
course projects.