* 1526234
* RI: Small: Bounded Distortion Models for Articulated and Deformable Object Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2020
* David Jacobs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2020
* USD 435,618.00

This project develops technologies for understanding shapes and parts of a
person or animal and how these relate to their surface appearance. By building
models that capture the variations in shape and pose of humans and animals, it
becomes possible to understand the way that a person or animal's appearance
changes as its arms and legs move or its head turns. These models can then be
aligned with images, assisting in the recognition of figures and the
determination of their pose. Understanding human pose and activity is a
fundamental problem in computer vision with a host of interesting applications
in surveillance, video retrieval, and automated video annotation. Automated
systems that can identify the species of animals can form the basis for
automated field guides that can be used in education and studies of
biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new algorithms for
matching image features and registering 3D models with bounded distortion
mappings. The research team models people and animals using a skeleton capturing
their articulations, along with a deformable skin model and an appearance model
encoded by classifiers that can identify body parts of an animal. Given an
image, the system computes an optimal bounded distortion transformation to
register the model with the image. The system identifies both the pose and shape
change of the person or animal with respect to the model and provides a way to
rank possible detections of the model. The research team explores the problem of
identifying the species of animals. The research team further applies algorithms
to determine the pose of humans in images.