* 1526700
* III: Small: Increasing the Value of Existing Web Archives
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Nelson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 481,780.00

Web archiving is a thriving activity, but remains at the fringes of the larger
web community. Web archiving often runs into two opinions: (1) who cares about
the past? and (2) hasn't the Internet Archive solved this already? While the
Internet Archive is the cornerstone of web archiving, there remains much work to
be done to align archiving with the larger web community. The PIs will
investigate a collection of methods and concepts to accelerate the adoption and
utility of web archives. While there are more than a dozen publicly available
web archives (including the Internet Archive) that are simultaneously accessible
via the Memento protocol, these archives are mostly underutilized because they
lack the APIs and services to be of greater immediate use to the live web. For
example, rather than returning "HTTP 404" responses for pages that are not
archived, the archives can introspect on their collections for replacement or
similar pages. This project will research: (1) extended APIs for archives; (2)
models and methods for archival quality; and (3) user tools and techniques for
exploring and understanding temporality on the web. The broader impacts of this
research will include increasing the ability of archives to record today's
social discourse, which primarily occurs on the web, oftentimes with print or TV
as secondary. The ability to publish data on the web far outstrips the ability
to archive it for posterity. There are a number of public web archives that are
doing yeoman's work saving as much material as they can, but saving is only a
precondition for later use. Mostly these archived web pages are being
underutilized, only because the tools for extracting the value from these
archives are lacking. This project will research and build the tools,
infrastructure, and methods to better utilize, understand, and interact with the
archived materials that we already have.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aside from their
crawling, archives are mostly passive collections of content that offer little
in the way of services other than answering "yes" or "no" to a request for an
archived page. Even with the increased rate of archiving (and a greater number
of active web archives), there is little analysis on the web archives to provide
better services for incoming requests. The PIs will build on their prior API
work to explore recommendation services for web pages, where even if an archive
does not have the requested web page it can make recommendations for a
replacement page based on content and link analysis. This will prevent the web
archives from being a dead end if they do not have the requested page. The PIs
will also perform fundamental research on the issue of the quality of the
reconstructed page, a topic that has been mostly ignored. In particular the PIs
are concerned with detecting and resolving "temporal violations," combinations
of HTML pages with embedded resources that are presented to the user as an
historical page but in fact they never existed in that combination on the live
web. This occurs in at least 5% of the pages replayed through the Internet
Archive. The other aspect of quality research deals with automatically assessing
how damaged an archived page is with respect to its missing embedded resources.
Straight percentages (e.g., this page is missing 3 of 57 embedded resources) do
not tell the whole tale, but there are automated methods that can be used to
estimate how important the resource was (even though you do not have it) to the
rendered page. This will allow large-scale assessment not only of pages, but of
archive-wide performance for comparable time periods. Lastly, the PIs will focus
on tools and methods for allowing users to better understand and interact with
the archived web and temporal concepts in general. Users' understanding of
temporal concepts is not well advanced, in part because the tools are not in
place to allow them to better understand and build models for interaction. For
further information see the web site at: http://ws-dl.cs.odu.edu/.