* 1526547
* TWC: Small: Communication under Adversarial Attacks in Complex Networks - Fundamental Limits and Secure Coding Strategies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2020
* Joerg Kliewer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2020
* USD 338,193.00

Today's world is highly dependent on the integrity of communication systems as
the Internet, WiFi, or cellular networks. As networks become more pervasive,
they are increasingly being used for communication and storage of critical as
well as sensitive data and therefore impose more stringent demands on
reliability and security, which must be maintained even under extreme settings
such as partial power failures, natural disasters, or, most importantly,
adversarial attacks. This research seeks to understand fundamental limits of
protecting complex practical networks against adversarial attacks, and how these
limits can be achieved by optimal secure strategies, thus bridging the gap
between advanced theoretical research and the development of realistic
solutions. Further, the project is able to provide a significant transformative
impact on many other critical applications employing reliable networked
communications, for example in the fields of healthcare, environmental
monitoring, finance, etc. It also provides a platform for creating broader
technological, societal, research, and educational impact as advancing
information technology and its benefits to society through newly established
theory and practice, an ambitious education plan, and actively engaging students
from underrepresented demographics.

Specifically, the project focuses on aspects (e.g., distributed users,
heterogeneity, delay requirements, actions of adversaries described by
probability distributions) important in real network systems but poorly
understood in current literature, and seeks to elucidate the impact of each such
aspect on capacity and code design. This research aims both to characterize
features of the problems and solutions (e.g., hardness of computing the rate of
communication under adversarial attacks, interaction between redundancy in
different network flows, and non-uniform adversarial sets) that are new to the
literature, as well as to identify commonalities between the solutions required
in each new scenario. These commonalities are then applied to characterize the
fundamental tradeoff between security and performance in general adversarial
networks. The technique employed here is via reductions, which demonstrate the
relationship between two problems by showing that any solution for one can be
employed to build a solution for the other. In particular, reductions are
derived between noisy networks with a state chosen by the adversary and their
corresponding noiseless and stateless versions, for which capacity is much
easier to characterize. Further, these results lead to analytical performance
guarantees for the designed secure coding strategies, thus providing guidance on
specific design approaches and for those cases where capacity bounds are still
open.