* 1526593
* SHF: Small: An Aspect-Oriented Approach to Large-Scale Urban Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Cristina Lopes, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 465,040.00

Population, environmental, and technological changes are reshaping the
infrastructure of our urban environments, and will be a major focus of attention
in the near future. With the advent of alternative energy and the Internet of
Things, there is suddenly a plethora of new technologies that will require major
restructuring of cities. In order to establish sound public policies, all these
new technologies can greatly benefit from urban simulations, to measure their
impact on the city and on the people before the policies are defined. Large-
scale urban simulations tend to be too large and complex to fit a single
machine's resources and a single group's expertise. As such, distributed and
decentralized urban simulations are a desirable technology to develop.
Unfortunately, distributed simulations are still rarely used (except in military
applications). Developing distributed simulations is much harder than developing
non-distributed ones, and requires a much higher level of software engineering
expertise, which usually modeling and simulation experts do not have. The
difficulties have been well-known by researchers and engineers, and over the
years there have been a few efforts to address them. One of the most important
efforts was the development of the High Level Architecture (HLA) standard. The
adoption of HLA in practice, however, has been very slow. Surveys suggest that
domain-specific adaptors and middleware could help bridge the technical gap in
software knowledge. The use of appropriate software engineering concepts and
theories can greatly reduce the technical complexity of developing such
middleware, and make HLA accessible to a much wider audience, including
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this proposal is to
investigate whether the use of Aspect Oriented Programming (AOP) concepts will
help overcome the engineering challenges faced by distributed simulation
systems. Introduced in 1997 by Kiczales, Lopes et. al, AOP put forward a model
of system decomposition that encompasses a base functional decomposition as well
as one or more orthogonal ones that cut across the base and each other. There
are many similarities between the concept of aspect (as given by AOP) and the
general concept of aspect of a city that urban planning researchers routinely
use. All these aspects are conceptually distinct, but interact with each other
over essentially the same objects of simulation, the city and its coordinate
system. There are many unknown variables in applying the AOP paradigm to the
simulation field. For instance, if simulators are divided by aspects, there is a
high chance that urban entities such as individuals, vehicles, and buildings,
will be common to multiple simulators. The HLA standard enforces that an
attribute of an object can be owned (i.e. read and write permission) by any
simulator, but only by one simulator. Thus multiple aspects of the same object
will need to coexist, but as different objects. Consistency and performance
become issues in maintaining separate versions of what is essentially the same
entity. Determining how to maintain a semantic interoperability between aspects
would solve one of the major issues with distributed simulations. If AOP proves
to be a good fit for distributed simulations, this work can have a tremendous
influence on the accessibility of distributed simulations for a large number of
modeling and simulation experts, therefore also having a potential impact on
policy making, wherever modeling and simulation is used ? in science, logistics,
social behavioral, transportation management, health, and land to mention only
some examples.