* 1526753
* III: Small: Efficient Query Processing over Large Probabilistic Knowledge Bases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Daisy Zhe Wang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,917.00

Due to the uncertainty, incompleteness and inconsistency from automatic
extraction processes, query results from current large-scale knowledge bases
(KBs) are incomplete, erroneous and conflicting. The research objective of this
proposal is to extend the state-of-the-art KB systems to create a probabilistic
first-order KB system that can infer missing knowledge using rules, prune
conflicting knowledge using constraints, and return confidence values for
resulting tuples. The new system and algorithms developed in this proposal can
enable advanced online data analysis through an declarative query interface over
large uncertain graphs exist in many high impact applications, including
knowledge bases, social networks, and biological networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to extend the
data model, query language, query processing and optimization techniques of the
state-of-the-art KB systems to support a probabilistic first-order KB system.
The P.I. will design a probabilistic KB graph data model; extend SPARQL to
probabilistic graph query language with additional inference operators; invent
new query execution and optimization techniques for scalable inference queries;
and implement a new query processing system using a unified data-parallel and
graph-parallel system over web-scale probabilistic KB
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project website at:
http://dsr.cise.ufl.edu/Eureka