* 1526799
* AF: Small: Optimizing with Submodular Set Functions: Algorithms, Integrality Gaps and Structural Results
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Chandra Chekuri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Submodular set functions capture the notion of diminishing returns in an
abstract and general way. For this reason they arise in numerous scenarios of
interest and have been of much importance in classical combinatorial
optimization. In the recent past there has been a substantial interest in
optimization problems involving these functions due to a number of applications
ranging from machine learning, algorithmic game theory, and information
transmission in networks. The project focuses on a some canonical classes of
optimization problems where submodularity plays a role in the objective function
or constraints. The goal is to design fast and near-optimal algorithms for these
canonical problems. Advances in the project will lead to improved algorithms,
structural results, and insights into several application areas that were
mentioned. The project will support and train two PhD students in the design and
analysis of algorithms at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The PI
will complete a manuscript-length survey on submodular function maximization.
The PI will develop and teach a course on recent advances on submodular
functions at the University of Illinois. Lecture notes and related material will
be made available to the public on the university's website.

The technical focus of the project is to develop fast approximation algorithms
for a number of fundamental problems involving submodular functions. The PI
plans to build on the mathematical programming approach: relax the discrete
optimization problem into a continuous optimization problem followed by
appropriate rounding methods which would convert the fractional solution into an
integer solution. The project will have four main thrusts.

(i) Constrained Submodular Function Maximization: The goal is to obtain improved
approximation algorithms for maximizing a given non-negative submodular function
subject to a variety of independence (down-closed or packing) constraints.

(ii) Constrained Submodular Function Minimization: The goal is to obtain
improved approximation algorithms for minimizing a given non-negative submodular
function subject to a variety of covering and allocation constraints.

(iii) Faster algorithms: The goal is to obtain algorithms that are significantly
faster than existing ones. The project will examine sequential algorithms as
well as algorithms in the streaming and map-reduce models of computation.

(iv) Submodularity in Information Transmission: The goal is to understand the
capacity of networks for information transmission via flow-cut gaps in
polymatroidal networks.