* 1526925
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cross-cultural Models of Domestic Violence, Care, and the Family in Urban Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Tanya Luhrmann, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2017
* USD 22,903.00

Domestic violence is a pervasive problem across the globe, producing physical,
emotional, and psychological harm. The majority of the time this violence is
perpetrated by men upon the women who are their spouses, domestic partners, or
girlfriends, although we know from growing research that domestic violence also
occurs within same-sex couples and other non-traditional family arrangements.
When domestic violence first came to prominence in the United States, the focus
was on helping and encouraging women to leave abusive relationships. However, we
now recognize that leaving or staying are not the only two options for dealing
with abuse. Family dynamics and social networks are more complex and flexible
than this dichotomy suggests. Yet healthcare systems and other systems of social
support persist in not finding the best ways to identify abuse and to assist
women who do not wish to leave abusive relationships. In the United States, the
problem is particularly acute for minority, immigrant, and refugee women whose
ideas of family may not fit those of the mainstream. Therefore, research is
needed on how cultural and social factors, such as the role of the extended
family and expectations of spousal relationships, shape experiences of domestic
violence so that the micro-processes involved can be understood theoretically
and social support services and healthcare systems can respond effectively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University doctoral student Amrapali Maitra,
under the supervision of Dr. Tanya Luhrmann, will undertake such research in the
Indian city of Kolkata. She has chosen this as a research site because India has
both high rates of domestic violence and clear cultural and social
differentiations between those who are the receivers of assistance and those who
seek to give assistance. In 2004-2005, the National Health and Family Survey
found that about 40 percent of women across India experienced some form domestic
violence. Domestic violence has been repeatedly shown to cut across lines of
caste and class, but the stereotypical picture is that it is a problem of the
poor. So the researcher will investigate what domestic violence means to the
urban poor and to the middle class employees and social service providers who
control the resources to assist them. The project will focus on two slum
neighborhoods in Kolkata and the institutions of social support that exist in
the surrounding areas. The investigator will assess three key areas: how men and
women in Kolkata define domestic violence; how those definitions differ from how
it is defined in the West, including the United States; how the medicalization
of domestic violence in urban healthcare clinics and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) affects definitions and perceptions of violence; and how
interactions between "victims" and institutional employees shape understandings
of family, gender, and violence on both sides. She will conduct surveys in both
neighborhoods to understand typical domestic arrangements, interactions and
expectations between spouses, and the role of extended kin. She will also
collect data through participant observation in clinics and other sites where
women seek services for domestic violence, to understand where women draw the
line between routine forms of violence and instances that require institutional
help. Findings from this research will illuminate experiences of domestic
violence in a place of both intense poverty and great resilience, and more
broadly will illuminate how cultural ideas of family, kinship, and physical
intimacy shape how different people think about domestic violence and how they
aspire to resolve these moments of conflict and care for one another. These
findings will be of use to those charged with creating effective policies and
programs for dealing with domestic violence wherever it occurs, and to social
scientists seeking to understand the changing but varied nature of the
contemporary family in the world today.