* 1526966
* CSR: Small: Practical methods for removing latent configuration errors in cloud platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,12/31/2020
* Yuanyuan Zhou, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Configuration errors are a major cause for computer failures. A special type of
configuration error called latent configuration errors, often has the highest
severity and causes many serious, wide spread outages in data centers and cloud
infrastructures, which affects millions of customers. These configuration errors
are prevalent and expensive to troubleshoot, and can result in millions of
dollars in business losses. This project addresses this important latent
configuration problem that has caused many data center-wide outages in various
cloud platforms. The methods developed by this project will significantly reduce
the amount of severe data center-wide outages and improving the availability of
cloud services and applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous
research experience in studying thousands of real world configuration errors in
data centers, this project tackles this important latent configuration error
problem via three practical and innovative research thrusts: (1) Automatically
build configuration checkers to detect latent configuration errors at early
stage before rolling out to thousands of nodes in data centers; (2) Design and
build on-site configuration validation utility to allow data center
administrators easily validate their configuration settings, especially those
complex, latent ones; and (3) Improve configuration design to make them less
prone to errors. The first research thrust observes the hidden validation checks
in usages and develops automatic ways to separate the checks from the latent
usages. The second research thrust is more fundamental as it aims to
systematically simplify the configuration space to reduce configuration errors.
The third thrust enables data center administrators to have more control of
their configurations. In addition, various educational and outreach activities
for students, especially women students in computer science.