* 1526953
* Collaborative Research: A New Design for Identifying Persuasion Effects and Selection in Media Exposure Experiments via Patient Preference Trials
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2021
* Matthew Baum, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 61,700.00

General&lt;br/&gt;Does media choice cause polarization or does polarization
cause media choice? The PIs investigate the extent to which either or both of
these two causal processes contribute to polarization of political attitudes.
Adopting a procedure from the medical literature, the PIs design and implement
an experiment that uses both a forced-choice and a free-choice scenario. Using
this procedure allows for estimation of the degree of selective exposure, the
degree of polarization by like-minded media, and the degree of persuasion across
the partisan aisle by counter-attitudinal media. This method also involves
estimation of bounds, or the range of treatment effect sizes that result in
different subgroups under certain assumptions about the choice
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Does media choice cause
polarization or does polarization cause media choice? We investigate the extent
to which either or both of these two causal processes contribute to attitude
polarization. Adopting the patient preference trial procedure from the medical
literature, the PIs design and implement an experiment that uses both a forced-
choice and a free-choice scenario. Using this procedure allows for estimation of
the degree of selective exposure, the degree of polarization by like-minded
media, and the degree of persuasion across the partisan aisle by counter-
attitudinal media. Methodologically, the PIs also compute nonparametric bounds
on the subgroup-specific treatment effects and conduct sensitivity analyses to
demonstrate the reliance on certain assumptions of stable choices.