* 1526333
* TWC: Small: Automorphic Forms and Harmonic Analysis Methods in Lattice Cryptology
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2018
* Stephen Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Susanne Wetzel
* 07/31/2018
* USD 499,522.00

Cryptography is a fundamental part of cybersecurity, both in designing secure
applications as well as understanding how truly secure they really are.
Traditionally, the mathematical underpinnings of cryptosystems were based on
difficult problems involving whole numbers (most famously, the apparent
difficulty of factoring a product of two unknown primes back into those prime
factors). More recently, several completely new types of cryptography have been
proposed using the mathematical properties of lattices. For example, homomorphic
encryption offers the possibility of manipulating encrypted data without
revealing its contents. The research funded by the project seeks to apply new
mathematical techniques to understand difficult properties of lattices and hence
of these proposed systems -- properties that are seen as crucial for making them
practically fast, in particular.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The projects in the
proposal involve using tools from automorphic forms (such as Borel-Harish-
Chandra reduction theory, Eisenstein series, and change of base field) to
examine concrete questions about short vectors in certain families of lattices.
It also includes a study of cryptosystems based on nonabelian generalizations of
lattices, and the geometry of BKZ-reduced bases in Coppersmith's method
(including the Boneh-Durfee attack on small exponent RSA).