* 1527141
* TWC: Small: Understanding and Mitigating the Security Hazards of Mobile Fragmentation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* XiaoFeng Wang, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 09/30/2019
* USD 498,897.00

Mobile computing technologies are rapidly evolving and phone (and other mobile
device) manufacturers are under constant pressure to offer new product models.
Each manufacturer customizes operating system software for its devices and often
changes this software to support its new models. Given the many manufacturers in
the mobile device marketplace and the many different generations of products,
there are many customized branches of mobile operating systems in use at any
time. Unfortunately, high-impact, security-critical flaws have been introduced
through the combination of the operating system customization process and the
design of mobile applications. This project is the first to systematically study
and mitigate such security hazards. The researchers are collaborating closely
with device manufacturers to transfer the results of the project into practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the project involves an in-depth study
of the security risks and pitfalls that lead to fragmentation-related
vulnerabilities. The researchers are developing novel technologies to detect
such flaws in existing systems and avoid them when building new ones. The
project includes the development of automatic analysis techniques that scan a
large number of factory images to identify inconsistencies in the protection of
a system capability on different operating system (OS) layers (e.g., Android
framework layer, Linux layer, etc.), and across a customized version and its
official counterpart. This consistency check helps elevate the security
qualities of customized systems to that of Android official systems.
Furthermore, to mitigate the security risk introduced by the services or apps
designed for cross-version, cross-device compatibility, the research team is
studying techniques for automatically analyzing a variety of services on new OS
releases, enhancing the mechanism for capturing exploits on them, and
eliminating new security hazards like hanging capabilities.