* 1527748
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Cooperative Autonomous Vehicle Routing under Resource and Localization Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2019
* Sivakumar Rathinam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 12/31/2019
* USD 241,292.00

This project aims to develop novel algorithms required to deploy Unmanned
Vehicle (UV) networks with resource constraints in Global Positioning System
(GPS) denied environments. The methods developed in this project will be useful
in a wide variety of applications of national importance such as disaster
management, border surveillance, monitoring of civilian infrastructure including
oil pipelines, power grids, harbors, inland waterways, and intelligent
transportation systems where GPS signals can be easily jammed either
intentionally or unintentionally. The proposed research spans several areas
including control, estimation, sensing, robotics and optimization. This project
provides a rich opportunity for involving undergraduate and graduate students in
the development of vehicle platforms, sensor networks, and in the implementation
of the control and optimization algorithms. This project engages minority
students in small research projects to motivate their interest in engineering
and science. Enabling autonomous unmanned vehicles with a capability of
navigating in GPS denied environments can aid in effectively monitoring large
infrastructure systems, protect their structural integrity and functional
reliability as well as provide ecological, societal and economic benefits,
including better preservation of natural resources, reduced property damage and
reduced loss of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses the following
fundamental problem that arises while deploying unmanned vehicles in GPS-denied
environments: Given a set of vehicles and targets to visit, find a path for each
vehicle such that each target is visited at least once by some vehicle, the
error in the position estimate of each vehicle at any time instant is within a
given bound and an objective which depends on the travel and sensing costs is
minimized. The specific technical objectives of this project are to: determine
the minimal set of requirements that would render the system of vehicles
observable over a time period, develop novel approximation and exact algorithms
using cutting plane, rounding and Lagrangian dual methods for the optimization
problems, and experimentally corroborate the performance of the proposed
algorithms using large scale and hardware-in-the-loop simulations, and field
demonstrations. It is anticipated that this project will significantly advance
the state of art in the area of observability analysis for a team of
cooperatively localizing vehicles, and in the area of tractable, approximation
and exact algorithms for vehicle placement and path planning problems with
resource and localization constraints. Novel cutting plane, rounding, and
Lagrangian dual methods are expected to provide new insights into efficient ways
of decomposing the difficulties in the vehicle placement and path planning
problems, and will lead to good feasible solutions with approximation bounds.
The proposed large scale simulation and experimental results will provide a new
understanding of the influence of the different parameters (number of
landmarks/vehicles/targets, bounds on acceptable position errors, onboard sensor
type, different operational environments, and the speed of each vehicle) on the
performance of the vehicle localization/path planning system.