* 1527829
* CSR: Small: Vibration-based Secure Side Channels for Implantable and Wearable Medical Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Vijay Raghunathan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Implantable and wearable medical devices (IWMDs) promise to revolutionize
healthcare by enabling advances in the diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment of
an ever-increasing range of medical conditions. The capabilities of IWMD
hardware platforms have been greatly enhanced by advances in low-power computing
and wireless connectivity. These capabilities have in turn enabled the use of
more sophisticated algorithms for sensing and control, ubiquitous access to
medical data, and the ability for post-deployment tuning and personalization of
therapy. However, the confluence of increased complexity, programmability, and
wireless connectivity have also led to the emergence of information security as
a critical concern in the domain of medical devices. The demonstration of
security attacks on commercial medical devices by researchers and security
practitioners in recent years has led to an urgent need to address these
security concerns. Cryptography and secure communication protocols can address a
large swath of the known attacks on IWMDs, and advances in ultra low-power
microcontroller platforms have brought state-of-the-art symmetric cryptography
within their computational reach. However, the lack of viable secure connection
establishment and key exchange mechanisms is a major bottleneck that limits the
use of cryptography to protect the wireless communication channels of
IWMDs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project explores the use of vibration as a
secure side-channel between IWMDs and external devices such as smartphones or
programmers. Vibration has unique advantages as a communication channel,
including distance-bounded transmission, high user perceptibility, very low
power consumption, and ubiquitous availability of vibration generators and
sensors in smartphones and wearable devices. These attributes make it an ideal
supplement to the traditional wireless communication channel. This project will
develop the necessary foundations of vibration-based side-channels, and explore
their use for wakeup, secure connection establishment, and key exchange in
medical devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Personal healthcare security has been
underserved by the research community and industry alike. The technologies
developed in this project can facilitate increased adoption of personal
healthcare systems by addressing security concerns. The project will leverage
outreach programs at Purdue, including Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships
(SURF), the NCN (Network for Computational Nanotechnology), and the Women and
Minority in Engineering programs, to involve undergraduates and minority
students in the proposed research and provide broader exposure to the field of
medical security.