* 1527610
* SHF: Small: Coalitional Game Theory for Co-Locating Software on Shared Hardware
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2015,07/31/2020
* Andrew Hilton, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

As computing capability grows and computation becomes increasingly task
parallel, many small tasks will co-locate on a few big machines. No single
computational task can utilize a machine's resources completely, yet all of
these resources become available when a machine is powered up. This mismatch
leads to the well-known problem of energy disproportionality, when a server is
under-utilized and its fixed power costs are amortized over little work.
Managing task co-location to ensure performance, to improve power efficiency,
and to incentivize desired behavior from strategic users requires new
perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;Computing resources increasingly fall into economists?
definition of a commons. A commons is a technology used jointly by a set of
agents and the problem of the commons is to organize the joint exploitation of
this technology. By mapping shared hardware architectures into this problem
formulation, the investigators adapt systems management mechanisms to
accommodate strategic user behavior. This microeconomic perspective leads to
incentives that encourage users to adopt cloud computing for greater performance
and efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are committed to
integrating research and education. Successes include strong teaching
evaluations for classes in energy-efficient computing and classes that rapidly
prepare Masters students with weaker backgrounds in computing fundamentals.
Successes also include fostering research participation from undergraduates and
under-represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;The investigators study game-theoretic
mechanisms for co-locating tasks and mitigating contention between strategic
users who share high-performance hardware architectures. First, these mechanisms
estimate performance by inferring statistical models for contention penalties
that arise from users? behavior combinations. Then, these mechanisms attribute
penalties to tasks by using coalitional game theory to determine the extent that
each task contributes to system contention. Finally, these mechanisms optimize
software co-location for strategic users and ensure game-theoretic desiderata,
such as sharing incentives and fairness. &lt;br/&gt;The project is
interdisciplinary, linking previously disparate studies in computer
architecture, resource management, and algorithmic economics. The research draws
on rigorous, analytical frameworks to reason about users' interactions within
shared systems and their contributions to overall system outcomes. Moreover, the
research translates rigor into operational mechanisms for systems management and
task co-location.