* 1527340
* RI: Small: Object Detection, Pose Estimation, and Semantic Segmentation Using 3D Wireframe Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Rene Vidal, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 458,322.00

Humans can recognize a wide variety of object categories in an image, even in
the midst of occlusion and clutter, and in spite of significant variability in
the objects' shape, size, appearance, and pose. While automatic object
recognition systems in computer vision have seen great progress over the past
decade, state-of-the-art methods rely primarily on 2D representations of object
categories, which cannot capture large variations in the objects' shape and
pose. This project develops new 3D representations of objects that are general
enough to describe the shape of a wide variety of object categories, yet simple
enough so that they can be learned efficiently from a collection of 2D images,
and used for detecting and segmenting objects in new images. This project can
impact many research areas, including image search, autonomous navigation,
medical diagnostic tools, surveillance and robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a new class of 3D wireframe models for view-invariant object
detection, fine-grained pose estimation, and semantic segmentation. A wireframe
model is a sparse collection of 3D points, edges and surface normals defined
only at a few points on the boundaries of the 3D object. The project develops
methods for learning wireframe models from 2D images of multiple object
categories, methods for learning deformable wireframe models that capture intra-
class shape variations across object categories, methods for integrating
appearance information into wireframe models, and methods for semantic
segmentation based on wireframe models.