* 1527504
* III: Small: From Real-Time Sensor Data Streams to Continuous Data Fields Models: Formal Foundations and Computational Challenges
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Max Egenhofer, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Massive sensor data streams are created from the automatic collection of sensor
data in high frequency and in near real-time today. This project aims to advance
the analytical potential of live-streamed data, historical data streams, and
model simulations by creating an overarching representation in the form of the
field data model with a set of operators that establish the field algebra. A
field is best explained as, for example, a magnetic field; the magnetic force
can be determined for each point in a magnetic field and the field is therefore
considered to be continuous. Similarly, environmental phenomena such as air
pollution or flooding are considered continuous in space and time although they
are sampled at limited, discrete time-space locations with sensors. This project
develops the field algebra, which is an intuitive, yet mathematically defined
formalism to represent real-world phenomena as fields and to express analytical
needs as canonical operations over fields. The field model represents phenomena
as continuous entities again, and the implementation hides the fact that their
spatio-temporal continuity is calculated on-the-fly based on real-time
measurements streams. Extending sensor data streams to fields is transformative,
as rarely a domain scientist is interested in the readings of individual
sensors. Allowing scientists to work with high-level abstractions will
significantly enhance their analytical tasks such as finding insights about
changes, trends, or unexpected events happening in the real world. The project
will integrate fields and data streams mathematically so that mappings between
both are well defined. The field data model is complemented by the development
of an innovative computational framework for synthesizing and analyzing fields
based on very large numbers of high throughput, real-time sensor data streams,
and for creating continuous representations on-the-fly. This framework provides
novel algorithms to assure that the field operators can absorb the throughput of
very large numbers of sensor data streams, yet still compute complex analytical
results in near real-time. This project will benefit our society by enabling us
to react to situations such as extreme weather events, environmental disasters
or chemical accidents immediately, and organize response effort based on
accurate and timely information; this will help to protect the public interests
better. The research in this project develops a formal foundation for sensor
data streams by abstracting them as geographic fields, and a scalable
computational framework that computes field operators on massive numbers of
sensor data streams in near real-time. In this research, the field algebra, with
a recursive definition of fields and a set of field operators are formalized.
The field algebra and data streams are formally integrated on the level of their
mathematical foundations. The formal field algebra is implemented as a data type
hierarchy and integrated with stream data models. At the same time, a
computational framework is developed that extends data stream engines with
computational components to estimate spatio-temporal fields based on recursive
or transposed field definitions, and the evaluation of complex predicates over
fields, which lays the foundation for co-analyzing live and historic fields. The
results of this project will be distributed via scientific publications, open
source software, and online training tutorials and classes. The project web site
(https://silvianittel.wordpress.com/from-streams-to-fields-nsf/) will provide
access to the results of this project.