* 1527112
* III: Small: RUI: Collaborative Research: ANTE - A Four-Tier Framework to Boost Visual Literacy for High Dimensional Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kristina Striegnitz, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 64,338.00

This is a collaborative research project involving SUNY Stony Brook and Union
College, an undergraduate institution. With the massive availability of data,
the need to understand and be comfortable with data has gained increasing
importance. There is now a great demand for individuals that have the skills to
extract meaning from data. Academic programs in data science been created in
many institutions, but going back to school to formally study this topic is not
possible for a large segment of the population. In addition, not everyone really
needs to become a formal data scientist to be competitive in this increasingly
data-centric society and workplace where it can be of great benefit to become
more data literate. Visualizations, such as the bar charts, line plots, maps,
etc. that most people are familiar with, are helpful in explaining data.
However, today's data sets often combine many different kinds of information and
are, therefore, too complex to be represented with these basic visualizations.
The goal of this project is to develop a visualization system that can represent
data in such a way that a user can make sense of complex data without extensive
training. This will involve advances in visualization techniques as well as
novel approaches to presenting visualizations in an engaging way. The ANTE
(Appeal, Narrate, Transform, Engage) system developed in this project has good
potential to help increase the ability of citizens to become more knowledgeable
participants in an increasingly data-centric society. The project provides
research training for graduate students at SUNY Stony Brook and undergraduate
students at Union College. The visualization tools and games will make an
excellent environment for teaching both data and visual literacy, at all
education levels. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ANTE framework seeks to achieve its
goal by developing novel solutions that address these four complementing
elements: Appeal, Narrate, Transform, Engage. ANTE will appeal to the user's
existing visual literacy by defining new powerful techniques that can faithfully
transform complex high-dimensional data into simpler representations. One such
representation is a novel 2D contextual data map that unlike other maps of this
kind can maintain all relationships in the data matrix -- data to data, data to
attribute, and attribute to attribute. Another is an interactive 3D shaded
display that replaces the complex scatterplot matrices that are in standard use
for high-D visualization. ANTE will use natural language to narrate the
visualizations it produces. ANTE will also use animations to show how different
representations of the data set can be transformed into each other. The project
will investigate the use of such animations for teaching users to interpret more
advanced visualizations. Finally, ANTE entices user engagement into data by
offering (1) support for story authoring by ways of visual causality analysis;
(2) capabilities for designing compelling infographics by fusing data with
contextual images retrieved with web-scale image databases; (3) a narrative
interface that uses learning from analogy to teach users more complex
visualizations from familiar ones; and (4) a framework that employs techniques
gleaned from gamification to incentivize engagement in user evaluation studies
for all of our proposed techniques. Further information, research paper and
developed artifacts, such as web interfaces to the visualization systems, data,
video links, etc. are available at the project web site
(http://www3.cs.stonybrook.edu/~mueller/ANTE/).