* 1527104
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Mathematical Theory and Fast Algorithms for Rayleigh Quotient-type Optimizations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Ren-Cang Li, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 06/30/2019
* USD 138,995.00

Many modern data analysis techniques and applications in machine
&lt;br/&gt;learning try to learn what input data has the largest effects on the
&lt;br/&gt;outputs. Rayleigh Quotients (RQ), or, more generally, RQ-type
&lt;br/&gt;objective functions, are the basis of a mathematical technique that
&lt;br/&gt;captures this information. This project conducts in-depth theoretical
&lt;br/&gt;and algorithmic studies of three RQ-type optimizations: robust RQ
&lt;br/&gt;optimizations that can handle data uncertainty, constrained RQ-type
&lt;br/&gt;optimizations that can incorporate prior information from image
&lt;br/&gt;segmentation or data clustering, and trace ratio optimizations that
&lt;br/&gt;can perform multi-view spectral clustering. This project improves
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of this practically important and user-oriented
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory, creating computational methods that are embodied
&lt;br/&gt;in open-source software. It not only advances mathematical theory
&lt;br/&gt;and optimization algorithms in data science, but trains computer
&lt;br/&gt;science and computational mathematics graduate students in
&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary knowledge and tools necessary to undertake the
&lt;br/&gt;project successfully. The PIs also involve undergraduate students
&lt;br/&gt;in all aspects of this research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs expect to produce a unified view of RQ-type optimizations,
&lt;br/&gt;reformulating them into linear and nonlinear eigenvalue problems for
&lt;br/&gt;which new variational principles can characterize the optimal
&lt;br/&gt;solutions. These new principles should expose the numerical linear
&lt;br/&gt;algebra characteristics of the underlying problems, supporting the
&lt;br/&gt;development of fast algorithms that exploint the mathematical
&lt;br/&gt;properties and sparse data structure.