* 1527541
* III: Small: Real-Time Detection of Structures from a Massive Graph Stream
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Goce Trajcevski, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 515,896.00

There is an urgent need to quickly derive actionable intelligence from
increasingly large volumes of data. In many domains, including social media
analytics and cybersecurity, data contains relationships between entities that
can be modeled using a graph, and a question on detecting patterns in data can
be transformed into questions on detecting emerging structures in appropriately
derived graphs. The goal of this project is to develop algorithms and software
for finding significant structures from dynamic graphs in real-time. The project
will develop algorithms that are efficient in their use of CPU and memory, and
whose performance can be quantified in a mathematically rigorous way. The
project will also develop implementations that are expected to process data at a
high&lt;br/&gt;throughput and can identify emerging structures much faster than
current methods. The availability of these methods and implementations will
impact the domains of cybersecurity and social network analytics. Software
developed will be released as a toolkit of operators that can be used with
current stream processing systems. The project will lead to new instructional
material in existing courses as well as new courses in data analytics, involve
individuals from underrepresented groups, and forge research collaborations with
industrial research labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consider data
that contains an evolving dynamic graph, and develop methods for detecting and
enumerating change in the set of (1) dense combinatorial structures such as
maximal cliques, quasi-cliques, maximal bicliques and quasi-bicliques in a
graph, and (2) temporal structures such as temporal paths and temporal cliques
in a time-stamped graph. While there has been significant progress in methods
for detecting structures in a massive static graph, the same is not true for a
dynamic graph, and often, the state-of-the-art for a dynamic graph is to
repeatedly execute a method designed for a static graph. For enumerating the
change in the set of structures, the project will take a novel approach of
developing change-sensitive algorithms whose processing cost is proportional to
the magnitude of change in the set of structures. It will use techniques from
the area of approximation algorithms in designing (space and time) efficient
methods for enumerating temporal structures from a graph stream.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information, see the project web site at:
http://www.ece.iastate.edu/~snt/nsf-iis2015/