* 1527393
* RI: Small: A New Mechanical Coupling Metric to Enable Effective Biped Locomotion Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* John Goodwine, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2019
* USD 502,145.00

Legged locomotion has evolved to provide the primary means of locomotion for
land-based mammals, including humans. While highly-structured or artificial
environments may lend themselves to alternative means, legged locomotion still
provides the most effective way to traverse many locales. These include uneven
natural terrains, human-designed environments featuring steps and staircases,
and disaster rubble consisting of natural and/or human-made elements. Because
they mimic the human structure, biped robots are of particular interest for
operation in human-designed environments and performing human-assistive tasks
alongside their human counterparts. Several decades of research efforts have
sought to move biped robots out of laboratories and enable them to perform a
wider range of practical tasks in real-world environments. A fundamental
challenge that remains before this vision is fully realized, though, is how to
enable robots to move in the very dynamic and efficient manner of humans while
still maintaining the excellent stability that humans exhibit. Most modern biped
robots either move relatively slowly and thus expend an excessive amount of
energy or else move more rapidly and efficiently, but are too susceptible to
falls caused by only minor disturbances. This project seeks to enable the
development of biped robots that move more like humans, in terms of both
efficiency and robustness. It formulates and applies a new, more general metric
of dynamic robot control and stability that exploits the underlying mechanics of
human-like locomotion, demonstrating its utility in laboratory robot
experiments. The broader impact centers around encouraging K-12 students to
pursue higher education in the STEM disciplines by highlighting engineering
connections between robots and childrenÂ¹s own primary means of locomotion --
walking.

This project seeks to formulate and experimentally validate a novel approach to
biped locomotion control based on an analytical measure of the control authority
over the unactuated degrees of freedom. Legged locomotion systems are inherently
underactuated because there are no actuators at the points of contact between
the feet and the ground. The approach in this project exhibits the four
characteristics of a universal dynamic control authority metric that would
enable the design of controllers to produce gaits that are both robust and
efficient, characterized by 1) generality of application to a range of
movements; 2) flexibility for use with a variety of mechanical designs; 3)
consistency with the natural dynamics to yield energy efficient gaits; and 4)
analyticity to enable systematic mechanical and control design. The basic
approach is, at any state, to decompose system velocities into directions that
are aligned with the inputs, termed the controlled velocities, and directions
orthogonal (with respect to the kinetic energy metric) to the inputs, termed the
orthogonal velocities. A computable measure of coupling between the controlled
and orthogonal velocities quantifies the control authority of the system over
the unactuated DOFs and is the basis for the new dynamic control metric.
Configurations where there is complete decoupling between the controlled and
orthogonal velocity directions are referred to as dynamic singularities. Strong
coupling is advantageous for the system to have good disturbance rejection
properties, while weak coupling is desirable for the system to have good
disturbance isolation properties. Thus, the project examines how a thorough
understanding of the nature of the disturbances can be used to exploit dynamic
singularities in the control of dynamic biped gaits.