* 1527762
* Collaborative Research: School Segregation and Resegregation: Using Case Studies and Public Polls to Understand Citizen Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2021
* Stephen Smith, Winthrop University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2021
* USD 56,997.00

Why are some school districts able to sustain school desegregation while others
are not? Although social scientists have been active in studying the effects of
school racial composition on student achievement, relatively neglected is the
inclusion of variation among districts in the social factors that lead to school
district segregation itself. Using five case studies and public opinion polls,
the research team will study the relationship between citizen characteristics
and their attitudes and values supporting (or failing to support) school
desegregation. This study increases the value of five strategically chosen case
studies including those of Wake County, NC (Raleigh); Davidson County, TN
(Nashville); Jefferson County, KY (Louisville); Charlotte-Mecklenburg, NC and
Rock Hill, SC by fielding an opinion poll in each location, where the polls
contain mostly common questions across sites. These polls will reveal
similarities and differences in adult attitudes that track to differences in how
long these districts have sustained desegregated schools. Study findings have
implications for other school districts beyond the five studied here in terms of
formulating policy that will better support socioeconomic mixing of students,
which enhances diversity by promoting educational attainment and upward mobility
in society, especially for at-risk students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some school
districts sustain desegregation over many years while others do not. Existing
research is largely based on case studies. Case studies have limited external
validity and are often heterogeneous in approach because researchers frame
questions and invoke theory differently. The data obtained from in-depth
interviews, participant observation, and document analyses are rarely
triangulated with data from theoretically-driven surveys of the school
district's adult population. These attitudes and values play an important part
in explaining districts' current school assignment policies and inform future
policies as well. This study addresses gaps in existing social science
literature on desegregation by using a common theoretical perspective and
fielding a largely common questionnaire via Interactive Voice Response,
supplemented by cell phone samples, across five school districts. The research
will produce poll data on a minimum of 5000 adult respondents. Analysis will (1)
embed each poll within the existing qualitative data on each case; and (2) use
the poll data to analyze both commonalities and differences in values and
attitudes across sites.