* 1527401
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Collaborative: Enhancing Anonymity Network Resilience against Pervasive Internet Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Micah Sherr, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2019
* USD 449,781.00

Access to publicly available information can be disrupted by various techniques,
and alternative disruptive techniques continue to be developed. Understanding
these alternative disruption techniques and how they affect network anonymity,
privacy, and performance is paramount not only to the successful design of
future technologies, but also to the security of existing networks and systems.
Accordingly, this project explores, designs, and transitions to practice
techniques that will improve the resilience of privacy-enhancing technologies
against these realistic but understudied threats to network anonymity, privacy,
and availability. The project consider adversaries that look beyond weaknesses
in software implementations or protocols and instead seek to destabilize
anonymity services by affecting the shared resources upon which these services
depend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how Internet infrastructure
attacks apply to anonymity networks. The research designs defenses that improve
the resilience against such threats, and transitions such defenses to the
deployed Tor network. Our research activities (i) examine performance-based
resource attacks and design privacy-preserving detection techniques to
understand not only how denial-of-service attacks can drain network resources,
but more importantly, how to automatically detect and prevent such attacks; (ii)
study how control-plane routing attacks can be used to harm anonymity, and
develop attack mitigation techniques to understand how to improve the resilience
of anonymity networks against threats from the underlying untrusted Internet
infrastructure; and (iii) analyze the impact of human mobility on anonymity to
understand how to provide robust and secure anonymity services to the now
ubiquitous mobile operating environment. The activities help expand understudied
research areas and not only help improve the design of future technologies, but
also enhance the security of existing networks and systems.