* 1527074
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research:Towards more Secure Systems: Uniformization for Secrecy
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Matthieu Bloch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2020
* USD 230,000.00

As communication networks play an increasingly vital role in our society,
ensuring the confidentiality of information transmission and storage has become
an increasing concern. New classes of networks, such as heterogeneous wireless
networks and distributed storage networks, are emerging, in which the deployment
of off-the-shelf cryptographic solutions faces several limitations. These
include, for instance, the overhead of key management to maintain synchronized
private and public keys; the challenge of distributing keys within the stringent
delay constraints imposed by clients; and the exposure to large-scale attacks
that were once deemed infeasible. Consequently, several solutions from network
coding to physical-layer security have been developed to improve the
confidentiality of data over modern wireless networks. Many key-independent and
keyless schemes have been developed to provide additional robustness against
attacks and more flexibility in the network operation. These schemes have in
common that they exploit coded data as keys and move away from the traditional
paradigm in which data is a commodity and in which information packets must be
transmitted and protected independently. Instead, these schemes envision that
information packets could be mixed in a controlled manner so as to introduce an
intrinsic level of security against adversaries.

Most existing secrecy results hinge on the crucial assumption that data is
uniformly distributed and independent from a packet to another. Unfortunately,
recent results have shown that even optimal data compression algorithms
uniformize the statistics of coded data only in a very weak sense. Consequently,
several security guarantees established in the literature may well collapse in
the absence of any proven robustness with respect to data uniformity
assumptions. The objective of this project is to develop a better understanding
of how the statistical properties of passwords and data influence the security
of secrecy systems. The project investigates several interrelated research
tasks: (i) the analysis of the fundamental limits of data-compression techniques
with improved uniformity properties; (ii) the design of low-complexity codes for
uniformization; (iii) the application of such algorithms in cloud storage
systems. Additional activities include an outreach effort to high-school
students.