* 1527287
* CSR: III: Small:  Collaborative Research:  A Hybrid Vehicle-Cloud Solution for Robust, Cost-Efficient Road Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Stacy Patterson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 125,001.00

Many of today's vehicles are equipped with GPS, networking capabilities,
computational resources, and a variety of environment and vehicle performance
sensors. The combination of these technologies and the growing presence of such
vehicles offer a powerful platform for large-scale road sensing applications to
assist drivers in route planning and safe driving. As the number of
participating vehicle grows, the sheer amount of data and the cost of its
transmission in cellular networks make current, centralized solutions
unsustainable. This project proposes an integrated approach to overcoming
algorithmic and systems barriers to the cost and scalability challenges of
collaborative road sensing. The project conducts four main research tasks: (1)
obtain correlated measurements of vehicle sensor readings and network
connectivity, (2) reduce the cost of vehicle-to-cloud (V2C) communication
through vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) message delegation, (3) develop new
communication-efficient algorithmic approaches for collaborative road sensing,
(4) evaluate the communication and algorithmic solutions in an emulation
framework that pulls together vehicle sensor data, measurements of cellular and
V2V connectivity, and traffic flow data from a I-90/94 corridor information
system. Results of this project will include reliable connected vehicle
communication architecture for both urban and rural settings and theoretically
sound decentralized algorithms for sensing and estimation that will be of
interest to the broader distributed computing systems community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The communication architecture and sensing algorithms will
serve as a prototype for large-scale collaborative, real-time road sensing. The
widespread adoption of such an approach will provide drivers with better
awareness of hazardous driving conditions, supporting safer and more efficient
transportation. Techniques and systems developed in this project will also have
applications in settings that require analysis of vast amount of sensed data
that is distributed over a large number of devices or systems, for example, in
collaborative airspace monitoring in airplanes and environment monitoring in the
Internet of Things.