* 1527618
* CIF: Small: Learning Mixed Membership Models with a Separable Latent Structure: theory, provably efficient algorithms, and applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Venkatesh Saligrama, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

In a wide spectrum of problems in science and engineering that includes
hyperspectral imaging, gene expression analysis, and metabolic networks, the
observed data is high-dimensional and arises from an unknown random mixture of a
small set of unknown shared latent (hidden) causes. Being able to successfully
and efficiently identify the latent causes from the observed data is important
not only for scientific understanding, but also for efficient data
representation and decision making. Popular algorithms for such problems make
use of approximations and heuristics for computational tractability. As a
consequence, consistency or efficiency guarantees for such algorithms are either
very weak or nonexistent. This research involves the development of algorithms
for learning latent-cause models from high-dimensional data with provable
statistical and computational efficiency guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
linchpin of this research is a natural separability property of the shared
latent factors ? the presence of a signature component for each latent factor ?
that is approximately satisfied by the estimates produced by popular approaches.
This research aims to establish that approximate separability is not only a
natural and convenient structural property of mixed-membership latent-factor
models, but is, in fact, an inevitable consequence of high-dimensionality. This
research also involves the development of a suite of provably consistent and
statistically and computationally efficient algorithms for a diverse set of
mixed-membership latent-factor problems by suitably leveraging the geometry
induced by the signature components. The key insight is to identify the
signature parts of each latent factor as extreme points in a suitable space.
This can be done efficiently through appropriately defined random projections.
The random-projections-based algorithm is naturally amenable to a low-
communication-cost distributed implementation that is attractive for web-scale
distributed data-mining applications.