* 1527182
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Mobile Language-Based Aids for Intelligent Decisions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Veena Chattaraman, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2019
* USD 296,500.00

This project will create a solid science base for computer-based conversational
decision systems, by integrating psychological decision theories with an
experiential understanding of human decision-making, having the potential to
impact many domains. People make mundane and critical consumption decisions
daily, ranging from what air conditioning filters to buy to which health
insurance plan to enroll. Rational choice theory predicts that consumers can
make choices to maximize their desired attributes. However, human cognitive
limitations coupled with decision complexities often require people to develop
preferences quickly and employ multiple decision strategies to arrive at a
choice. Sub-optimal consumption decisions hurt the individual, the family, the
economy, and the nation. This project will enhance people's abilities to make
informed decisions on-the-go, when they lack domain knowledge, time and
cognitive resources for optimal decision-making. These benefits are particularly
relevant to aging users, those with cognitive, perceptual and motor impairments,
and those functioning in multitask environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past
research on decision aids has focused on single-decision strategies using
invariant algorithms, falling short of solving real decision problems, which are
inherently contingent on the decision-maker and task. Further, benefits of a
mobile, conversational setting have been under-employed in developing decision
aids. The goal of this project is to design, develop, and evaluate
conversational, mobile decision-aids (MODA) for consumption decisions based on
adaptive, intelligent information retrieval and decision strategy use. The three
main scientific objectives and methods are: 1. Capture rich spoken dialog
between consumers and service associates as they go through different types of
decision-making strategies in a physical store, using observational studies. 2.
Develop a decision inference and dialog management model that (a) uses inputs
from spoken consumer interactions, (b) applies decision inference rules to
predict the consumer's decision strategy, (c) tailors MODA's subsequent dialog
to their decision strategy, and (d) informs the consumer's decision-making
process with data retrieved from product specifications and reviews. 3. Conduct
field experiments to assess MODA effectiveness with respect to cognitive,
social, and decision outcomes among varied decision-contexts and user
characteristics.