* 1527767
* CIF:Small:Next-Generation Compressive Phase-Retrieval Using Sparse-Graph Codes: Theory, Design and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Laura Waller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 516,000.00

This research addresses the fundamental science of measurement system design and
recovery of large-scale structured signals of interest when (a) critical phase
information cannot be measured, and (b) very few measurements are available.
Also known in the technical literature as compressed phase-retrieval, this
research has applications to a plethora of important scientific fields like
optics, quantum physics, bio-medical imaging, astronomy, and material science.
The inability to measure phase information renders the signal recovery problem
particularly challenging. Most prior approaches are either computationally
prohibitive and therefore hard to scale, or based on unproven heuristics that
come with no performance guarantees. In contrast, this research fundamentally
addresses the challenge of scale together with provable performance guarantees
in the theory, design, experimental evaluation, and applications of compressed
phase-retrieval systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the
theoretical and algorithmic foundations for next-generation compressed phase-
retrieval systems. These are derived from a novel interdisciplinary mix of tools
from coding theory, graph theory, statistical signal processing, as well as
their integration into applications involving optical imaging and quantum
information systems. The research revolves around a novel paradigm built on a
family of sparse-graph codes that represent a radical departure from existing
approaches based on either computationally intensive convex relaxation methods
or greedy heuristics without performance guarantees. This research has the
potential to revolutionize the design and applications of next-generation
compressed phase retrieval systems, similar to how Low-Density-Parity-Check
(LDPC) codes have revolutionized modern communication systems, with respect to
(i) measurement cost (approaching the fundamental limits); (ii) computational
and memory cost (enabling real-time or near-real-time processing); and (iii)
provable performance guarantees (with respect to the problem scale and
robustness to noise).