* 1527579
* TWC: Small: Time Advantage-based Key Establishment Protocols for Low-cost Wireless Networked Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Yong Guan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,411.00

The essence of information assurance resides in the ability of the legitimate
communication parties to establish and maintain an advantage over their
adversary. Most often, such an advantage is in the form of a secret key. The
high costs associated with standard key establishment protocols motivate the
recent surge of less conventional protocols, which derive the legitimate
parties' advantage from physical features (the adversary may have a worse
channel than the legitimate receiver) or from correlated sources of randomness
(accelerometer readings when two devices are shaken together). The main drawback
is that the devices will usually not be aware of their physical location
relative to each-other. Therefore, human intervention (generally recognized as
the weakest link in security protocols) is required to inform them that a secure
environment has been realized. Even if the devices automatically measure their
relative distance, they cannot know whether they're at home, or in a crowded
bus. Moreover, whether automatic or human-initiated, such key exchanges rely on
the security of an underlying authentication protocol. The goal of this project
is to explore an entirely overlooked resource for key establishment: Time. The
project investigates how the long and uninterrupted time intervals spent in
secure environments can be used to create or complement secure key-establishment
protocols for low-cost wireless consumer electronics. The derived protocols have
to (1) stand alone (not rely on the security of other protocols, like
authentication) and (2) be automatic (not require human intervention). The
proposed research will be applicable to a broad spectrum of information-
assurance applications, and has the potential to inspire an abundance of related
research, and create opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students
(in particular minority and female) to participate in the cutting-edge research.

To avoid the reliance on human interaction or authentication mechanisms, one
research direction is to implement a counter-intuitive paradigm: one of the
legitimate parties creates a puzzle and outputs time-throttled clues, while the
other legitimate parties gather clues until they are able to solve the puzzle
and process its solution into a secret key. The idea is based around ciphers
that leak information at an exponential rate over time. Therefore, metrics for
key-information leakage are needed to quantify both the availability at the
legitimate parties, and the security from an adversary. The project consists of
three major simultaneous tasks: (a) the construction of a formal mathematical
framework for evaluating the security of time-based key-establishment protocols,
under the puzzle-based paradigm, and the investigation of new paradigms fit for
time-based security; (b) the design and evaluation of such protocols for low-
cost wireless devices (that may have neither an objective notion of time, nor
the computational resources to engage in advantage distillation, information
reconciliation or privacy amplification); (c) implementation of the resulted
solutions on a physical wireless testbed.