* 1527638
* SHF: Small: Xsmith, A Configurable Generator of Highly Effective Fuzz Testers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* John Regehr, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,998.00

This project is developing new techniques for the creation of highly
effective&lt;br/&gt;fuzz testers, also known as "fuzzers," for programming
language compilers and&lt;br/&gt;interpreters. Fuzz testing is an automatic and
low-cost technique for finding&lt;br/&gt;defects in software systems. A fuzzer
randomly creates test inputs for a&lt;br/&gt;software system; a fuzzer is
effective if it can continually create test cases&lt;br/&gt;that reveal defects
throughout the system under test. It is difficult to&lt;br/&gt;create effective
fuzzers for programming language compilers and interpreters&lt;br/&gt;because
these systems have highly structured inputs, but it is important
that&lt;br/&gt;such fuzzers exist. Programming language implementations are
critical software&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure: defects in compilers and
interpreters can potentially have&lt;br/&gt;great costs in terms of software
correctness and reliability, human&lt;br/&gt;productivity, and computer
security. This project seeks to reduce the time and&lt;br/&gt;human effort
needed to create sophisticated fuzzers for programming
language&lt;br/&gt;implementations. In so doing, this project is expected to
advance the state of&lt;br/&gt;the art in random software testing, improve the
quality of several programming&lt;br/&gt;language implementations selected for
study, and produce new open-source&lt;br/&gt;software tools that programmers can
use to develop new and more effective
fuzz&lt;br/&gt;testers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed by this
project will be embodied in a new generator of&lt;br/&gt;fuzz testers, called
Xsmith. Xsmith will generate language fuzzers from&lt;br/&gt;specifications and
thus reduce the time and effort required to create fuzzers.&lt;br/&gt;More
importantly, Xsmith will inject sophisticated program-
generation&lt;br/&gt;techniques into the language fuzzers it creates. This
project will investigate&lt;br/&gt;three techniques in particular. This first is
generation-time analysis,&lt;br/&gt;intended to allow Xsmith-derived fuzzers to
create output that is both complex&lt;br/&gt;and meaningful. The second is
feature subsetting, intended to increase the&lt;br/&gt;likelihood that Xsmith-
derived fuzzers will output bug-triggering test&lt;br/&gt;programs. The third is
iterative refinement, intended to further diversify the&lt;br/&gt;outputs from
Xsmith-derived fuzzers. The project participants will use Xsmith&lt;br/&gt;to
create fuzz testers for a varied set of programming languages.
Where&lt;br/&gt;possible, the bug-finding power of Xsmith-derived fuzzers will
be compared to&lt;br/&gt;that of existing fuzzers: quantitatively, in terms of
the number of&lt;br/&gt;identifiably unique defects found within a fixed test-
time budget, and&lt;br/&gt;qualitatively, in terms of the kinds of defects
uncovered. This evaluation&lt;br/&gt;will allow the investigators to assess the
impact of the techniques embodied in&lt;br/&gt;Xsmith, both individually and
collectively, over a range of programming&lt;br/&gt;language implementations.
Xsmith will be successful if it permits highly&lt;br/&gt;effective fuzz testers
to be constructed with significantly less ad hoc code,&lt;br/&gt;and thus
significantly less effort, than if they had been constructed
from&lt;br/&gt;scratch.