* 1527923
* SHF: Small: Interacting to Specify Software
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Todd Millstein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,509.00

All sectors of our society rely on the proper functioning of software. While
many tools exist to help software developers ensure important functional,
security, and performance properties of their software, these tools generally
require developers to provide a specification of the desired properties.
Unfortunately writing specifications today is a tedious, error-prone, and costly
proposition. Specifications are software artifacts in their own right, yet
developers have almost no support in creating and evolving them. Therefore,
developers tend to write highly simple or incomplete specifications, if they
write specifications at all. This project aims to address that problem by
producing techniques and tools that aid and incentivize developers in creating
and maintaining high-quality specifications. The new techniques will lead to
improved software quality and maintainability, and the associated tools will be
made available for use by both other researchers as well as practitioners.

The research focuses on two kinds of specifications: logical specs which are
traditional pre/post conditions, and structural specs which are essentially
boilerplate code patterns. The same principles will be followed for both kinds
of specifications: a language will be defined to make the specifications highly
expressive, and analysis-driven interactions with the programmer will be used to
elicit and refine the specifications. Techniques will be used from code
synthesis and dynamic invariant detection. A novel query language will enable
programmers to interrogate their specifications. The approach will be
fundamentally interactive, leveraging human judgment to guide the construction
of high-quality specifications, where the user is iteratively asked specific
questions targeted at improving the correctness and completeness of generated
specifications.