* 1527181
* RI: Small: Time Resolved Imaging: New Methods for Capture, Analysis and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Ramesh Raskar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 460,000.00

This project fundamentally combines the emerging time of flight imaging
techniques with computational methods to redefine a camera and also go beyond
the conventional barriers in scientific imaging. Imaging has transformed science
and technology in many fields. Time-aware ultrafast imaging can bring further
radical new innovations in coming years. Recently, there has been a significant
commercial interest in converting time-aware sensors into low cost consumer
solutions. Going forward, solving time-based forward and inverse transport
problems can impact new fundamental research in biology, physics, optics,
computer science, engineering, and mathematics, with broad applications in
health, robotics, defense, and mobility. They have high potential to stimulate
economic investment and entrepreneurship using modern imaging solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging image sensors with picosecond (ps) time
resolution provide new ways to capture and understand the world. For scene
analysis, typical computational imaging techniques exploit sensor parameters
such as spatial resolution, wavelength, and polarization. However, they are far
slower than light speed and are consequently limited in their ability to model
the complex dynamics of light propagation. Time-resolved (or transient) sensors
overcome this limitation, but their integration with computational methods has
not been realized yet. Therefore, with the recent spurt in commercial time-of-
flight (ToF) systems, new research in transient computational imaging is well-
timed. Beyond ToF depth information, this research explores the capture and
analysis of per-pixel time profiles at ps scales. This leads to joint re-
examination of fundamental inverse problems and solutions in scientific,
industrial and consumer applications. Specifically the project builds computer
vision algorithms for seeing objects beyond the line of sight, behind diffusive
layers and inside turbid media. This provides novel applications in medical
imaging. With the development of the theoretical foundation and enabling tools,
the project accelerates research and commercialization of this new field.