* 1527133
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Braces for Quantification and Treatment of Abnormal Curves in the Human Spine
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Charles Kim, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 141,993.00

Idiopathic scoliosis is a condition in which the spine develops a strong
left/right curvature, forming a C- or S-shape instead of a straight line.
Approximately 2% to 3% of adolescents suffer from the disorder, with about 1 in
500 required to wear corrective braces until skeletal maturity, and about 1 in
5,000 requiring spinal surgery. A typical scoliosis brace is worn around the
trunk and hips, and completely immobilizes the upper body, which substantially
degrades quality of life. This project will demonstrate a hybrid dynamic brace
for correcting scoliosis, while minimally affecting the activities of daily
living. Compliant passive braces tailored to the treatment needs of individual
wearers allow greater freedom of movement, but cannot respond to changes in
posture or more gradual evolution of the wearer's condition. Active braces
provide dynamically responsive corrective forces, but require power-hungry
motors, and greatly increase weight and complexity. This project will
demonstrate a hybrid approach, providing freedom of movement and dynamic
response, but without the weight and power requirements of fully active designs.
The result is essentially a wearable robot that continually monitors and
responds to the needs of the user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lay
the scientific foundation for the design of dynamic brace co-robots, and the
evaluation of their effectiveness for both quantification and treatment of the
abnormal spine. These dynamic braces will be designed to modulate the corrective
forces on the spine in desired directions while still allowing the users to
perform typical activities of daily life. The project will investigate the
hypothesis that dynamic braces have the potential to transform treatment in this
field, as these can provide effective control of corrective forces on the spine
both spatially and temporally. The scientific studies will characterize the
spatial stiffness of the spine in a specific pose and during different
functions. The studies will target treatment outcomes in subjects with abnormal
spine. Furthermore, this project will train students in interdisciplinary
research and will result in future workshops and courses appealing to engineers,
clinicians, medical caregivers, and high school students, motivating careers in
STEM.