* 1527535
* SHF: Small: Optimizing Consolidation Efficiency of Emerging Virtualized Cloud Applications on Contemporary Server Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Tao Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 460,000.00

Optimizing Virtual Machine (VM) consolidation performance has been one of the
most critical tasks faced by the cloud provider community. Nevertheless, when
scaling virtual platforms to handle the proliferation of cloud applications,
challenges arise due to constraints on performance degradation, especially in
those environments where VM consolidation density continues to grow. Worse, the
consolidated workloads are shifting from conventional single-task computation-
oriented applications to large-scale and complex workloads. They generate many
diverse interactions and communication patterns and some of these applications
have a large irregular memory footprint and high memory consumption, which
presents a significant challenge to optimizing the efficiency of virtual machine
consolidation. Currently, there emerge some new techniques for contemporary
server architecture. Server manufacturers are replacing traditional Uniform
Memory Access (UMA) machines with Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) ones due to
the latter's higher memory bandwidth and better system scalability. On the other
hand, the throughput-oriented graphics processing units (GPUs) are being
increasingly deployed to cloud data center servers to meet computation demands.
Modern hypervisors begin to virtualize GPU resources and deliver efficient and
reliable performance to hosted virtual machines.

To embrace the opportunities and address the associated challenges, this
research project will develop techniques to improve the consolidation efficiency
of emerging virtualized cloud applications as the advancement of the underlying
server architecture continues. The project objectives include: (1) System-wide
consolidation performance profiling and optimization for NUMA architecture; (2)
Graphic-as-a-Service (GaaS) workload consolidation overhead characterization and
minimization; and (3) Collective workload consolidation optimizations in terms
of both NUMA and GPU server configurations. This project, which synergistically
integrates emerging server architecture features and virtual machine hypervisor
resource management, will open the door for a new class of efficient scale-out
computing platforms for cloud and big data computing. It will contribute to
enabling computing systems to stay on track with its historic scaling and hence
benefit numerous real-life applications. This project will also contribute to
society through engaging under-represented groups, and research infrastructure
dissemination for education and training.