* 1527598
* CIF: Small: Disparity of Coherence and Channel Information in Wireless Networks - Opportunities and Challenges
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Aria Nosratinia, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 421,557.00

Due to the increasing demand on wireless spectrum and empowered by continued
improvements in circuit technology, the performance limits of wireless networks
as well as methods that hold the promise of approaching these limits remain a
vital topic of inquiry. Many of the advanced techniques in wireless
communication are increasingly dependent on the knowledge of link qualities
(channel state information) being acquired and properly exchanged among the
nodes. This task is closely dependent on how rapidly the corresponding channel
gains vary (coherence intervals). Link coherence intervals may easily be
different due to variations in node speeds or differences in scattering
environment, but a fundamental characterization of the performance limits of
networks under link coherence disparity has not been available thus far. This
project exploits additional degrees of freedom that coherency disparity exposes,
thus increasing spectral efficiency in wireless communication networks. The
research plan is tightly coupled with educational outreach activities that seek
to foster inclusiveness in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
initiates a fundamental study of the effects of coherence disparity on wireless
networks, addressing prototype building blocks of wireless networks, their
performance limits under coherence disparity, and efficient methods of capturing
gains in this scenario. The project has the following main components: (1) Study
of broadcast channels and multiple-access channels under coherence disparity,
including multi-user extensions and outer bounds; (2) Study of frequency-
selective channels and orthogonal frequency-division multiplex (OFDM) resource
reuse under coherence disparity; and (3) Study of relay and cooperative networks
under coherence disparity.