* 1527292
* AF: Small: Manifold optimization algorithms for protein-protein docking
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Pirooz Vakili, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 449,997.00

Proteins are the major building blocks of the cell. Many proteins perform their
function by interacting with other proteins. In a typical cell hundreds of
thousands of different protein interactions take place. Characterizing these
interactions helps elucidate how living organisms function at the molecular
level, contributes towards the development of treatments against diseases such
as cancer and facilitates the design of novel bio-inspired materials. Detailed
understanding of protein interaction mechanisms requires determining the three-
dimensional structures of protein-protein complexes. These structures are very
difficult to obtain using experimental techniques, thus, computational
approaches can be very useful. The team of Kozakov, Paschalidis, Vajda and
Vakili has developed algorithms and software that, according to the worldwide
evaluation experiment CAPRI (Critical Assessment of Predicted Interactions), are
among the best for predicting the structures of protein-protein complexes. These
methods have been implemented in the fully automated docking server ClusPro,
which is free for academic use, and has over 10,000 regular users. However, the
current tools are computationally too demanding to serve such a large user base
or to model protein interactions on a genomic scale. The goal of this project is
to use rigorous geometrical and biophysical principles to substantially improve
the efficiency of docking algorithms while retaining the accuracy of the
generated models. Faster modeling of protein complexes will lead to better
understanding of fundamental biological questions at both the cellular and
system levels and will facilitate biochemical, biomedical, and biotechnology
research. In addition, the methods will be used in training graduate students
and teaching undergraduate and high school students.

The protein-docking problem is to computationally determine the 3-dimensional
(3D) structure of the complex formed by two unbound proteins, given their
individual 3D structures, by finding the global minimum of an energy-based
scoring function. If one of the proteins, considered the receptor, is in fixed
position and orientation, the search space includes the 6D
rotational/translational space of the other protein, considered the ligand, as
well as additional degrees of freedom that represent the flexibility of the two
proteins. Since the energy function has a large number of local minima separated
by high barriers, the minimization problem is extremely challenging. The
proposed project aims to draw on the innovative manifold and optimization-based
approaches that the group has developed for various components of docking
protocols in order to (i) put the algorithms on a solid theoretical footing,
(ii) study their performance and behavior more rigorously, and (iii) develop
generalizable features of the algorithms that can be applied to other
application domains. The work will focus on four key algorithms. First, the Fast
Fourier Transform on Manifolds (MFFT) will be studied, which enables global
systematic search in the space of rigid body motions of one protein with respect
to the other. The computational complexity of MFFT will be analyzed and
numerical performance tests for different bandwidth settings will be conducted.
Second, underestimation-based sampling techniques will be explored, acting on
the same manifold and targeting a medium-range search to refine MFFT solutions.
A variety of underestimators will be developed and tested. Third, manifold-based
local optimization approaches for flexible protein optimization will be
developed. In each case, different manifold parameterizations and different
minimization approaches will be compared. Finally, a new formulation of side-
chain packing and other problems arising in protein docking will be developed
using principles from the theory of Markov Random Fields. In this context,
different solution approaches will be developed involving the Maximum Weight
Independent Set (MWIS) problem and generalized belief propagation. The
algorithms developed will be released as an open source software library to be
used both for protein docking and in other application domains.