* 1527395
* SHF: Small: Automating Software Verification using Natural Proofs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Madhusudan Parthasarathy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The automated algorithmic verification of software, even when assisted by
programmer annotations with invariants, is at an impasse today because the
underlying technical problems are not solvable using computers (undecidable).
Consequently, current tools perform very poorly for most non-shallow
specifications of software, which do not admit decidable verification, and hence
require manual help throughout the verification process. This has lead to
limited adoption of these tools by the wider population of programmers untrained
in formal methods. This project addresses this problem through a new radical
approach called natural proofs.

Natural proofs are a subclass of proofs that can be effectively and efficiently
searched for, and embody common tactics that people use and that work for most
programs. Natural proofs hence yield automatic though incomplete techniques that
work in most situations, side-stepping undecidability barriers. The project's
goal is to build natural proof techniques for the verification of a variety of
security properties, including privacy, integrity, and access control, that span
across entire systems, and that help programmers verify their programs with very
little annotation overhead. Applications include more automated verification of
security properties of software, such as an Android platform, as well as
scalable auto-grading of programming exercises in Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs).