* 1527794
* CHS: Small: Empowerment of Disabled Individuals via an Adaptive Framework for Indirect Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2022
* Janan Smither, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 523,932.00

Thanks to advances in autonomy, an increasing variety of robotic devices have
emerged over the last few years to assist disabled users with mobility and
object manipulation. However, users often report higher satisfaction from
controlling and interacting with a robot, even when an autonomous robot shows
better quantitative performance, because they tend to see the robot not merely
as an agent for retrieving objects but as a quintessential tool for reasserting
their domain of interaction with their environment and engaging their available
faculties to the fullest. Sadly, for these users effective interaction with a
robotic device is frequently hindered by the fact that haptic feedback in the
normal sense may not be possible, whether due to sensory and/or cognitive
disabilities or to limitations imposed by motor disabilities that may prevent
proper transfer of user intent in the absence of an appropriate user interface.
Motivated by these considerations, and in the hope of boosting the current low
rates of assistive technology adoption by its intended users, the PI will in
this project create a software framework that is independent of the robotic
system and allows for adaptively compensating the level and type of human-robot
interaction to increase user satisfaction based on real-time measurements of
user performance. Project outcomes will foster a new paradigm for the design of
assistive technology, which will enable system developers to understand the
impact of user preferences and incorporate them in their designs from the start,
as opposed to the current inefficient practice of user testing a design after
creating an expensive product or prototype. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will push the envelope of human-robot interaction through the creation of models
for understanding the underlying intent of users with disabilities, which may
adversely affect their environmental perception and response. By utilizing these
empirical models to design an adaptive human-robot interface that can compensate
for deficits and variability in user performance, the work will generate a novel
framework for effective sharing of control between individuals with disabilities
and their robotic assistants. Furthermore, the control design for physical
human-robot interaction that will be developed as part of this work will advance
the field of autonomous robotics in general through the creation of new
algorithms for physically interacting with users and their environments. The
research tasks include systematic modeling of user performance during human-
robot interaction, estimation of user performance parameters within a
generalized estimation framework, and design of adaptive Lyapunov-based control
strategies to facilitate safe and efficient physical interaction of the robotic
end-effector with the user and environmental objects. The work will be informed
by quantitative/qualitative data to be gathered from extensive user studies in
the field, by the PI's previous experience in working with this class of users,
and by his expertise in assistive robotics.