* 1527338
* CSR: Small: Multi-hypervisor Virtual Machines - Enabling an Ecosystem of Hypervisors in the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Kartik Gopalan, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 415,989.00

Modern cloud computing platforms offer users an array of choices in operating
systems, database systems, financial software, virtual network routers, and so
forth, all of which can be easily customized and executed within Virtual
Machines (VM). Unfortunately, this level of user choice has not extended to the
underlying systems software, called the hypervisor, which enables the cloud
infrastructure to run VMs. On one hand, cloud providers have an opportunity to
differentiate their service by offering rich hypervisor-level services such as
rootkit detection, live patching, intrusion detection, high availability, and VM
introspection. On the other hand, it is difficult for a cloud provider to
develop and maintain a single hypervisor that incorporates every feature that
each cloud user wants. This research is to enable a software ecosystem in which
third-parties can also contribute hypervisor-level services to the cloud
platform and augment the services of a base hypervisor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
use multiple hypervisor-level services, a cloud user can run a multi-hypervisor
virtual machine, which is envisioned as an unmodified VM that simultaneously
runs atop multiple co-existing hypervisors. There are two thrusts of this
project. The first is to develop the systems software to transparently run
multi-hypervisor VMs, where multiple hypervisors co-operatively exert control
over the memory, virtual CPUs, and I/O devices of a VM using nested
virtualization. The second thrust is to investigate mechanisms for the co-
existence of various hypervisor-level services and demonstrate a multi-
hypervisor ecosystem of services such as those listed above.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By enabling an ecosystem of third-party hypervisors, the
technology behind multi-hypervisor VM can significantly improve the
functionality and performance of the cloud platforms. Integration of research
with education includes course modules and projects, and an advanced topics
graduate course. Broader impacts include mentoring undergraduate and under-
represented students in research, outreach to local high schools, and technology
transfer.