* 1527232
* NRI: Deep Learning Unmanned Aircraft Systems for High-Throughput Agricultural Disease Phenotyping
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Hod Lipson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,149,273.00

An estimated 13% of crops are lost globally to plant diseases. Disease
detection, identification, and tracking is performed today by crop scouts, a
process that is expensive, slow and difficult, and is impractical to expand to
cover all crops. The project involves developing AI-drones that work side-by-
side with farmers and identify specific diseases and assess their progress. The
use of intelligent drones for crop monitoring will allow farmers to respond
quickly to emergent diseases, nutrient stress, and other potentially devastating
damages without the prohibitive expense of hiring a crop scout. This ability
could increase productivity, and may also help predict, track and respond to
epidemics for national and global food security. In addition, this technology
will also be used for ongoing collection of precise plant performance data for
breeding resistance.

The central hypothesis of this proposal is that drones equipped with trained
Convolutional Neural Networks can provide a transformative increase in
actionable crop disease identification. A secondary hypothesis is that the
proposed phenotyping at the individual plant level will also provide
unprecedented resolution of data for future modeling, breeding, and data-driven
yield optimization. In order to test this hypothesis, we will develop a UAS
platform to collect images over university owned experimental crops, and aim to
develop AI to identify pathologies at an accuracy that is on par with human
experts. The UASs will consult human experts in ambiguous cases and gradually
learn to make decisions autonomously. The key challenge will be development of
AI that can reliably diagnose disease with a good accuracy of detection to false
alarms. Automatic identification of disease is a challenging machine vision task
given the complexity of images, exacerbated by variable lighting and weather
conditions, and navigation/stability control.