* 1527050
* CSR: Small: A Separation Kernel for Mixed Criticality Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Richard West, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

This project will develop a new operating system for mixed criticality embedded
systems, such as those found in avionics, automotive, robotics, factory
automation and healthcare domains. In mixed criticality systems, there is a
combination of application and system components with different safety,
importance and timing requirements. For example, in an avionics system, the in-
flight entertainment system is considered less critical than that of the flight
control system. Security is also a key factor in the design of mixed criticality
systems. Security measures should be taken to enforce data confidentiality and
system integrity even in the presence of untrusted users. Preventing malicious
attacks from compromising the behavior or accessing the data of highly-critical
services is an important security concern.

A major challenge to mixed criticality systems is the safe, predictable and
secure isolation of separate components with different levels of criticality.
Less critical tasks should not be allowed to interfere with the timing and
otherwise correct operation of mission critical tasks. Safety guarantees should
be met to ensure software and hardware failures do not compromise highly
critical task operation. Failure of highly critical tasks or services can have
devastating consequences.

Multi- and many-core processors are being increasingly used in mixed criticality
embedded systems, due in part to their power, performance and price benefits.
Many such processors also support hardware virtualization, including Intel VT-x,
AMD-V and certain ARM Cortex processors. This research project will leverage the
combination of multiple cores and hardware virtualization features on emerging
processors, to develop a separation kernel for mixed criticality systems. Tasks
and services of different criticality levels will be separated into different
isolated "sandboxes", each responsible for a collection of hardware processing
cores, memory and I/O devices. This work builds on an earlier prototype system,
called "Quest-V". Quest-V allows sandboxed services to directly access available
resources without involving a heavyweight hypervisor, as is the case in
traditional virtual machine systems. Most existing virtual machine systems have
been designed for server class computing. So, investigating techniques to build
safe, secure and predictable mixed criticality systems on emerging hardware
platforms suitable for low-cost embedded computing applications will be an
important component of this project.

This award will extend Quest-V to support novel real-time fault detection and
recovery strategies not be possible with traditional system approaches. We also
hope to gain a greater understanding of the hardware features needed to support
secure and predictable partitioning of machine resources in mixed criticality
systems. The outcomes of this work will lead to a new system design with the
potential to have impact on many areas of computing where lives, money and
security concerns are at stake.