* 1527055
* Meeting: It's about Time: Understanding Temporal Variation in Animal Behavior, Anchorage, Alaska, June 15, 2015
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Deborah Gordon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT It's about time: Understanding temporal variation in animal
behavior&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In animal behavior, when something happens and for
how long it happens can be just as important as what happens. The timing and
duration of behavioral change can determine whether that change is beneficial or
detrimental. A greater focus on temporal aspects of behavior will clarify how
animals respond to their changing environment, how individuals in a group
respond to one another, and how behavior influences other important traits like
physiology and immunity. By bringing together researchers from diverse fields of
study, the symposium and workshop at the 2015 Animal Behavior Society Meeting
will increase focus on temporal aspects of behavior, generate new approaches to
studying behavioral variation over time, and apply those insights to a broad
range of topics. An additional facet of the workshop will involve professional
development for early career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
behavior of individuals requires quantifying how behavior changes over time.
However, the temporal dimension of behavioral variation is often ignored. When
researchers do address temporal variation in behavior, they do so in distinctly
different ways, such as measuring time trends, circadian rhythms, or
predictability. Integrating these different temporal patterns and other fields
of animal behavior will provide a greater understanding of the causes and
consequences of behavioral variation. For example, integration between circadian
rhythms and animal personality has resulted in study on individual chronotypes,
which promises to have biomedical impacts and implications for the ecology and
evolution of animal behavior. The workshop and symposium activities will extend
current points of integration and create new ones. The goals of the symposium
and workshop are to 1) outline important unresolved temporal issues in animal
behavior, 2) facilitate integration among fields that explicitly study temporal
variation in behavior and those that are impacted by temporal variation, and 3)
arm researchers with tools to experimentally test and analyze temporal patterns
of behavior.