* 1527078
* NeTS: Small: Toward Optimal, Efficient, and Holistic Networking Design for Massive-MIMO Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Jia Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 10/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The proliferation of mobile-Internet devices in recent years (e.g., smartphones,
tablets, etc.) has continuously pushed the current wireless networks to their
capacity limits. A key approach to enlarge network capacity is to increase
spectrum efficiency. To allow future wireless networks to support multi-Gigabit
per second data rates, there have been significant research efforts in recent
years termed 'massive multiple-input multiple-output' systems (M-MIMO), where
the numbers of antennas are scaled up to hundreds or even thousands. However, so
far, these efforts are mostly limited to problems at the physical layer or
signal processing aspects. There is very limited knowledge on how to optimally
employ M-MIMO technologies and develop control and optimization algorithms to
improve network capacity, delay, and energy expenditure performances from
networking perspectives. The proposed research will enable the networking
community by facilitating the development of M-MIMO-based wireless networks with
substantially increased network performances in terms of throughput, delay,
energy expenditure. Through this project, the investigator also aims to advance
M-MIMO research in formal classroom instruction and educate students to
inculcate a strong comprehension and knowledge of M-MIMO. The investigator will
host a workshop to present research findings to companies in the areas of
wireless networking. This research will not only advance the knowledge in the
design of M-MIMO wireless networks but will also serve a critical need in the
general networking research community by exploring a network-level understanding
of M-MIMO networks through a unified research program, which consists of the
development of tractable cross-layer theoretical models, exploration of
theoretical performance bounds and limits, and the development of distributed
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project strives to answer the following
overarching questions: Could the linear capacity scaling law at the M-MIMO
physical layer be translated into upper layers' performance gains in throughput,
delay, and energy expenditure? Specifically, the project will focus the research
efforts along the following three interrelated thrust areas: 1) optimal routing
and congestion control for M-MIMO multi-hop backhaul networks; 2) efficient
scheduling design for M-MIMO cellular networks; and 3) energy analytics for
M-MIMO wireless networks. The project aims to bridge the gaps between physical
layer advances in M-MIMO and wireless networking research.