* 1527301
* SHF: Small: Accelerating Asynchronous Programs through Synergistic Hardware/Software Customization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Satish Narayanasamy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Title: SHF: Small: Accelerating Asynchronous Programs through Synergistic
Hardware/Software Customization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A huge fraction of
computing systems built today use asynchronous programming to improve human-
computer interactive performance. All the Web 2.0 JavaScript applications (e.g.,
Gmail, Facebook) use asynchronous programming. There are now more than two
million mobile applications available between the Apple App Store and Google
Play, which are all written using asynchronous programming. Internet-of-Things
(IoT), embedded systems, sensor networks, desktop GUI applications, etc., all
rely on the asynchronous programming model for ensuring quick responsiveness. In
spite of the ubiquitous use of asynchronous programming, today's general-purpose
processor architectures are heavily optimized for the synchronous programming
model. The intellectual merits of this project are a set of synergistic hardware
and software optimizations named as eBoost (event Boost) that improve response
time and save energy. The project's broader significance and importance are
improvements to the capabilities of asynchronous platforms such as Web 2.0 and
mobile devices. Furthermore, the project is supporting diversity and outreach
efforts such as the MiBytes Computer Camp for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eBoost optimizations customize the computing
stack for exploiting the unique characteristics of asynchronous programs. In the
asynchronous programming model, computations are posted as events to an event
queue from where they get processed asynchronously in a thread. These events are
largely independent of each other. eBoost exploits this latent event-level
parallellism (ELP) by exposing the event queue to the processor. Furthermore,
eBoost estimates the criticality of events, and uses it to prioritize critical
events or may even skip unimportant events to improve user experience and save
energy. This project is also constructing a set of benchmarks for evaluating
asynchronous programs.