* 1527984
* III: Small: Discovering Hidden Semantics from Spatio-temporal Sensed Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Chinya Ravishankar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The increasing ubiquity of Global Positioning System devices and the widespread
deployment of monitoring and tracking mechanisms, including video cameras,
cellular phones, activity trackers and roadside sensors are creating very large
spatio-temporal datasets that are extremely rich in semantics. Such data embed a
great deal of high-level information on the behavior of moving objects as well
their interactions with objects in the environment and with each other. Standard
queries such as range queries and joins may be adequate for extracting the
semantics of spatial data, but do scant justice to the inherent richness of
spatio-temporal semantics. This project will develop approaches aimed
specifically at extracting semantic and behavioral information from trajectory
datasets. For instance, a moving object conducting surveillance on a region will
remain in the vicinity of the region for the duration of surveillance. Detecting
this behavior is difficult with standard approaches: a range query would require
the user to specify the spatial and temporal ranges of surveillance, when the
intent is, in fact, to determine both. The proposed work has many national
security applications, including law enforcement, surveillance and security
monitoring as well as social and commercial applications, such as in social
networks, link analysis and epidemiology. The solutions developed will increase
the utility of spatio-temporal data, specifically for tasks that require
investigative exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a novel
class of problems in the spatio-temporal domain, which raise a novel set of
technical challenges: First, it studies queries that elicit the semantics of
interactions between moving objects and their environment. Second, it studies
queries eliciting the semantics of interactions, such as potential meetings
between moving objects themselves. Third, it explores such queries in the real-
world contexts, where the available data is incomplete and imprecise. Examples
of the first class of query include "dwell regions" queries, which explore
spatio-temporal proximity between moving objects and objects in the environment,
with applications to detection of surveillance of regions by moving objects. The
project will also address "conclave" queries that illustrate the second and
third challenges above. Such queries return possible meeting points between
moving objects when their trajectories are not known fully or precisely. The
proposed work also explores complex spatio-temporal "reachability" queries,
which elicit possible interactions between objects via intermediaries. Finally,
given the sheer magnitude of spatio-temporal datasets, this project aims to
provide solutions that scale. A basic question is then how to efficiently index
trajectory data. While there have been various past works in this domain, this
project proposes a fourth challenge: can Hilbert Curves been used to index
trajectories? Space filling curves (SFCs) have been shown to be advantageous in
indexing spatial objects since they can reduce the space dimensionality. In past
research, SFCs have been mainly used to index multidimensional points or order
arbitrary objects; they have not though been directly used for indexing
trajectories due to various challenges that this project aims to overcome. The
project web site (http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~tsotras/semtraj/index.html) will
provide access to the project results, including source code of the developed
algorithms and relevant data.