* 1527821
* SHF:  Small: Rethinking CAD for System-Level Design via Interactivity, Learning, and Collaboration
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Luca Carloni, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

In a zeal to pack more transistors into a single integrated circuit, the
semiconductor industry has produced many generations of electronic products that
are increasingly more powerful and less expensive resulting in massive expansion
of information and communication technologies with economic benefits that are
estimated as a large part of global productivity growth during the recent
decades. A continuous stream of innovations across the three main semiconductor
technology areas lies at the root of this success story: (i) device and
manufacturing, (ii) circuits and architectures, and (iii) Computer-Aided Design
(CAD) methodologies and tools. Recent innovations in the first two areas make it
possible to envision new generations of products that are stronger in
computational power and richer in functional capabilities. The research enabled
by this project, attempts to undertake corresponding innovations in the third
area mentioned above. A core part of this program is the development of a new
senior-level undergraduate course that will engage the students in working
together on a semester-long project with the infrastructure support for
collaborative engineering provided by the new CAD environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current effort of designing state-of-the-art integrated
circuits, suffers from shortcomings that characterize current CAD flows, e.g.,
the lack of support for exploring the design space across its hardware and
software components in search of better solutions; the limited capabilities in
optimizing simultaneously multiple components at the system level; and the big
learning curve and long execution times that many tools require. This project
will investigate a new generation of CAD methodologies and tools. Specifically,
the research team will develop a new environment for System-Level Design that is
highly interactive, exalts the designers' experience, inspires their creativity,
and promotes continuous collaboration across the engineering team. The proposed
approach leverages recent work on supervised and compositional design-space
exploration, and the application of learning methods to assist designers in the
use of advanced high-level synthesis tools.