* 1527828
* NRI: Collaborative Goal and Policy Learning from Human Operators of Construction CoÂ¬-Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Girish Chowdhary, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 06/30/2017
* USD 900,000.00

The overall goal of this research is to investigate and significantly advance
the science of collaborative interaction between human operators and co-robots.
This includes the development of algorithms that can be used to train co-robots
from skilled human operators to efficiently perform complex tasks in the face of
real-world uncertainty, and to guide novice operators in performing such tasks.
The primary targeted application is the construction and farming equipment
industry that includes complex co-robots such as excavators, wheel loaders,
tractors, forage harvesters where there is a significant need to understand and
improve human-robot collaborative learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
significant scientific challenges in developing efficient algorithms for co-
robots that can actively learn from skilled human operators by observing and
posing appropriate queries to close the feedback loop between the co-robot and
the human operator. This project addresses these challenges by systematically
formulating and investigating focused problems to create efficient algorithms
that can enhance collaborative human-robot learning. To achieve the goal,
algorithms are designed to collaboratively learn latent subgoal structures from
ill-defined complex tasks, real-time path planning and control algorithms are
developed for co-robots to achieve the learned subgoals, and techniques are
developed to provide operator skill specific task decomposition and motion
execution guidance. In addition, the developed algorithms are corroborated by
simulators, hardware experimentation on laboratory and field co-robots, and
theoretical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;