* 1527888
* STARSS: Small: Simulation-Based Verification of EM Side-Channel Attack Resilience of Embedded Cryptographic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ali Yilmaz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 286,667.00

The widely used encryption algorithms, based both on private- and public-key
cryptography, provide provable security guarantees against attacks under an
abstract model of computation. In reality, physical systems leak information and
the adversarial access is not completely captured by the abstractions in the
standard model. Attacks that exploit a physically observable signal, such as
power, timing, or electromagnetic (EM) radiation, are known as side-channel
attacks. They present a formidable challenge to ensuring the security of
existing cryptographic applications. Embedded systems are especially vulnerable
to side-channel attacks as they can easily become physically accessible to an
attacker and thus permit extensive probing. This project focuses on a side-
channel attack based on the electromagnetic radiation analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to provide the designers of embedded
cryptosystems with the ability to analyze the resilience of their designs at
design-time. The project develops predictive models and algorithms that enable
the computation of EM emanation profiles of information-bearing blocks and thus
enables design-time investigation of embedded cryptosystem vulnerability to EM
side-channel with sufficient accuracy at acceptable computational costs. The
project relies on the recent advances in integral-equation based techniques for
EM simulation to enable the needed level of simulation accuracy.