* 1527460
* SHF: Small: On-Die Learning: A Pathway to Post-Deployment  Robustness and Trustworthiness of Analog/RF ICs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Yiorgos Makris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 350,000.00

Towards enabling reliable computing and promoting technology trustworthiness,
this project seeks to facilitate cost-effective realization of robust and
trusted integrated circuits (ICs), with particular emphasis in the analog/RF
domain. While manufactured ICs are subjected to extensive scrutiny in order to
weed out defective or suspicious parts prior to their deployment, a variety of
reasons such as silicon aging and adverse operational or environmental
conditions might cause the performances of a previously healthy analog/RF IC to
fail its design specifications. Similarly, field-activated triggers of hidden
capabilities might cause a previously trusted analog/RF IC to exhibit malicious
functionality. With analog/RF ICs now prevalent in most electronic systems, due
to the rapid growth of wireless communications, sensor applications, and the
Internet of Things (IoT), equipping them with robustness and trustworthiness
evaluation mechanisms becomes paramount to the applications wherein they are
deployed. The proposed research is complemented by educational and outreach
activities, including development of a new educational module, by providing
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate research in interdisciplinary
projects spanning Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Applied
Mathematics, as well as exposure of local community members to the topics of
self-test, self-calibration, and post-deployment trust evaluation of analog/RF
ICs through tutorials and seminars organized by the Texas Analog Center of
Excellence (TxACE) at the University of Texas at Dallas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project seeks to enhance post-
deployment robustness and trustworthiness of analog/RF ICs by integrating
machine learning-based on-die monitoring and calibration capabilities. The key
focus of this project is the cost-effective integration of on-die learning
capabilities, which can be trained to (i) determine whether an analog/RF IC
complies with its specifications, (ii) calibrate its performances, and/or (iii)
detect the activation of potentially malicious circuitry, based on simple
measurements from on-chip sensors. Through design, fabrication and
characterization of two different analog/RF ICs, this project seeks to
demonstrate that on-die intelligence can be integrated to provide post-
deployment self-test, calibration and trust evaluation capabilities.