* 1527822
* AF: Small: THEORETICAL AND ALGORITHMIC FOUNDATIONS OF CONSTRAINED PARTICLE FILTERING
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Roman Shterenberg, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 349,901.00

Many modern technologies (from image stabilizations in a camera, to chemical
plants, from power grids to robot navigation) require computer algorithms to
track the state of a dynamical system that is both modeled and measured with
uncertainty. Particle filters are a technique that track many particles
(candidate states) to arrive at a best estimate, which is the mean or average of
tracked state. This project considers constraints on the best estimate (and not
just individual particles) giving a new way to ensure correctness of the
modeling, and safety of the underlying system. Handling constraints in dynamical
systems in real time is challenging when either the systems or the constraints,
or both, are nonlinear. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new methods of this project
incorporate the constraints into the estimation process itself, avoiding wasted
time and guaranteeing convergence in ways that were not possible before. The
project also includes integrated research and learning activities, and will
serve as a crucial catalyst to the new Ph.D. program at Rowan University by
providing its inaugurating class. This research (i) develops a sequential Monte
Carlo method that iteratively constructs a set of particles that approximate the
posterior density of the state and also satisfy the non-linear constraints; ii)
establishes error bounds and convergence properties of this method; iii) derives
necessary and sufficient conditions under which traditional approaches admit a
bounded estimation error; iv) applies and assesses the theoretical results to
solve real-world applications, with linear and non-linear constraints, including
control of hand prostheses, estimation of time-varying sparse networks in
communications and biology, and emerging applications in the electric power
grid.