* 1527312
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Approximate Learning and Inference in Graphical Models
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Nicholas Ruozzi, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2019
* USD 201,946.00

This project is designing efficient methods for approximate learning and
prediction in graphical models. In a typical setting, the parameters of an
unknown graphical model are to be estimated from data observations. Once
learned, the parameters are often used to make predictions about unseen data.
The learning problem can be solved by estimating the parameters of the model
that generate the observed data with the highest probability (a process known as
maximum likelihood estimation), and the prediction task is typically performed
by a statistical inference method. As exact learning and prediction are
computationally intractable, in practice, we seek to replace the maximum
likelihood estimation and prediction tasks with more tractable surrogates. This
project is developing such surrogates that (a) can be leveraged for learning in
large, real-world graphical models with hidden variables, (b) are orders of
magnitude faster than the current state-of-the-art methods, and (c) provide a
rigorous alternative to the more heuristic methods that are often employed at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under certain conditions, surrogates can outperform
exact maximum likelihood estimation combined with an approximate inference
algorithm for prediction. However, many of the typical approaches are much too
slow or too limited in power to be used to learn the kinds of large-scale
graphical models with many hidden variables that arise in practice. This project
studies the design of fast, distributed approximate learning and inference
procedures based on the Bethe approximation, a surrogate that is known to
perform well in practice. The core observation is that approximate maximum
likelihood estimation using the Bethe surrogate can be reduced to solving a
series of approximate inference problems via the Frank-Wolfe algorithm. The
benefit of this approach is that many fast, combinatorial algorithms already
exist for approximate inference in graphical models. In addition to provable
bounds and convergence rates, the methods are practically evaluated using
several publicly available datasets, primarily social network and image data.
Baselines will be application-specific methods known to work well on those
datasets, with the developed code made publicly available.