* 1527536
* III: Small: Linking and Resolving Entities in Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,984.00

This project will explore the challenge of cleaning data in the context of
analysis pipelines over big data. Data cleaning has traditionally been designed
to improve data quality in ETL systems where enterprise data is collected,
prepared, staged, transformed, and loaded into a data warehouse to support
offline data analysis. In the era of big data, such back-end processes are
quickly giving way to interactive exploratory data analysis where analysts
immerse themselves in data (possibly collected from heterogeneous data sources)
in order to drive online (near-) real-time decision making. Existing systems do
not scale to the volume, velocity, or the variability of the dynamically
generated data (e.g., social media streams) and the offline architecture is
unsuited for the online real-time nature of analysis. The market is abuzz with
innovations in data transformation technologies, e.g., TriFacta allows analysts
to visually manipulate data to generate complex analytical transformations and
Data Tamer is exploring scalable data curation from diverse sources. Data
quality (and hence data cleaning technologies) remain at the core of big-data
analytics. Many popular media (as well as academic) articles have highlighted
challenges such as entity linking and resolution as among the most important and
immediate roadblocks for big data analytics. The key insight on which this
project is based is that data cleaning to support analytics over big data is not
simply a matter of scaling up known approaches to larger data sets by exploiting
more hardware. While scale up is important, big data analytics in streaming,
real-time, and interactive settings requires a paradigm shift in how data
cleaning is performed. This project will significantly impact and change the
modern practices of data cleaning and the way cleaning is integrated in the Big
Data analysis pipeline and will explore broader impact through: (a) technology
transfer opportunities with a relevant industrial partner whose existing
products could benefit from the proposed research; and (b) open source effort in
the context of the ongoing social media analytics system (SoDAS), currently
under development, in which the proposed research algorithms will be
integrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore two new innovations
that will help advance data cleaning to enable Big Data analysis. The first
innovation explores a progressive approach to entity resolution to support
progressive analysis. The research will explore an approach where
progressiveness is pervasive spanning all the phases of the cleaning process
especially in scenarios when cleaning is based on complex logic possibly
requiring dynamic acquisition of additional contextual information. The second
innovation is the analysis-aware data cleaning that is developed for structured
queries (e.g., Hive and SQL) for both one-time and continuous query scenarios
that are issued on top of static and streaming data. The project will address
these methodologies at the higher conceptual level as well as implement them on
modern highly-parallel computing platforms and frameworks that run on a cluster
of machines. The project will exploit two concrete contexts to guide the
research exploration: (a) supporting analytical queries over structured web data
sources such as fusion tables; and (b) online analysis of social media data.
These application contexts will serve as vehicles for testing and demonstrating
the research. The planned research, system development, and educational
activities (e.g., curriculum changes to incorporate projects related to big data
and data quality in the CS curriculum at UCI) will significantly enhance the
educational experience of students, preparing them for a brighter future in the
today?s knowledge driven society. More information about the project can be
found at http://sherlock.ics.uci.edu.