* 1527249
* SHF: Small: Multi-criteria optimization control for temperature constrained energy efficient data center using fuzzy decision making theory
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Jun Wang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 369,092.00

Recent years have seen many well-recognized energy conservation schemes
developed for big data computing infrastructures, which aggregate heavy
workloads on either a few chips or devices. While both of these methods reduce
energy consumption, they can also elevate temperature levels on long standing IT
instruments and ultimately cause them to overheat. As a consequence, the
reliability of these devices can be significantly degraded as shown in many
recent studies. In the worst cases, they can fail or malfunction. There is an
imperative need for developing new power and energy control solutions in the
multibillion-dollar industry of big data
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is directed
towards system-level solutions for temperature constrained data center energy
management. It will develop methods and tools for controlling energy consumption
in high-performance data centers operating under various temperature constraints
by exploring the use of fuzzy decision-making techniques. Most of the existing
studies rely on a well-developed relationship model between each criterion
including open-loop search and optimization methods and rigid control schemes
with fixed temperature constraint assumptions. In contrast, this project pursues
solutions from a different angle: given that each criterion is in a non-linear
relationship with another in a data center, how can new modeless control
techniques that do not rely on fixed constraints work successfully? The project,
if successful, will achieve foreseeable societal gains in terms of environmental
benefits of energy conservation, potential for commercial impact of reducing
costs and increasing operational efficiency in both warehouse-scale computer
systems and data centers and reducing the data-center temperature to maintain
reliability.