* 1527162
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Next Generation Communications with Low-Resolution ADCs: Fundamentals and Practical Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Philip Schniter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 247,065.00

As communication systems embrace ever wider bandwidths, analog-to-digital
converters (ADCs) struggle to meet rate, resolution, and power requirements. The
problem is exacerbated by the massive antenna arrays under consideration for
next-generation wireless, which imply tens or even hundreds of receive channels.
In response, this project develops new communication systems that operate with
very low-resolution (e.g., 1-3 bit) ADCs. In particular, the investigators
derive fundamental limits on quantized many-antenna communication and design
advanced communications strategies to approach those
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of low-resolution ADCs radically changes
both the theory and practice of communication, motivating a thorough re-
examination of capacity bounds, modulation and coding designs, receiver
processing algorithms, and limited-feedback strategies. The investigators
address these topics in the context of multiple-input multiple-output systems
with massive arrays. In particular, they derive theoretical capacity (or
achievable rate) bounds that account for coarse ADC quantization, imperfect
channel state information (CSI) at the receiver, partial CSI at the transmitter,
and multi-user interference. They also characterize the mean-squared error
achievable for sparse-channel estimation and the symbol-error rate achievable
via equalization, both in the large-system limit. In addition, they develop
limited-feedback strategies to provide transmitter CSI to the transmitter,
transmitter-precoding designs that exploit that CSI, and optimized training
sequences. Furthermore, they develop channel-estimation algorithms that learn
and exploit channel sparsity; equalization (and/or multi-user detection)
algorithms that take channel-estimation error into account; and efficient
strategies for joint channel-estimation, equalization, and decoding. Finally,
they develop optimization and adaptation strategies for the ADC thresholds, and
blind calibration strategies that account for ADC imperfections. The research
methodology leverages recent results from wireless communication theory, one-bit
compressed sensing, and approximate message passing.