* 1527086
* TWC: Small: Cross-Application and Cross-Platform Tracking of Web Users: Techniques and Countermeasures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Long Lu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,204.00

There are many applications in business and end-user applications where user
tracking is part of the core functionality or feature set. However, user
tracking can intrude on user privacy and even may lead to online crimes. Recent
research has shown that tracking companies have started using advanced web
tracking techniques that are more subtle and less transparent than traditional
online tracking. The ever increasing adoption of mobile devices further
exacerbates the tracking problem since these mobile devices are saturated with
personal information while the details of mobile-specific tracking techniques
are largely unknown. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks a deeper
understanding of the existing and potential technical capabilities and
limitations of tracking, and the trade-offs between tracking and privacy. The
project will conduct a systematic study of techniques and technologies that are
used for tracking web users, starting with new variations of traditional
tracking methods and proceeding to advanced and stealthy users and device
fingerprinting. The research will involve both in-depth analysis and large-scale
measurement studies. The gained knowledge will inform security and privacy
research communities of the technical capabilities and limits posed by the next
generation of user tracking on mobile devices, paying particular attention to
the under-researched area of stateless tracking.