* 1527668
* III: Small: Sampling Techniques in Computational Logic
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Moshe Vardi, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2020
* USD 488,286.00

Constrained sampling and counting are two fundamental problems in data analysis.
In constrained sampling the task is to sample randomly from among possible
solutions to a Boolean formula. A related problem is that of constrained
counting, determining the number of possible solutions to a Boolean formula.
These problems have applications in machine learning, probabilistic reasoning,
and planning, among other areas In particular, te project looks at the
electronic-design-automation industry to determine what practical solutions to
the problems require. Both problems can be viewed as aspects of one of the most
fundamental problems in artificial intelligence, which is to understand the
structure of the solution space of a given set of constraints.

This project focuses on the development of new algorithmic techniques for
constrained sampling and counting, based on a universal hashing - a classical
algorithmic technique in theoretical computer science. Many of the ideas
underlying the proposed approach go back to the 1980s, but they have never been
reduced to practice. This project builds on recent progress in Boolean reasoning
to develop methods to reduce these algorithmic ideas to practice. Methods for
approximations with formal guarantees provide opportunities to scale what is
fundamentally a computationally intractable problem. Pruning techniques can also
reduce "waste" in hashed solutions, but introduce challenges in ensuring samples
are independently distributed. This work has potential for breakthrough results
in constrained sampling and counting, providing a new algorithmic toolbox in
machine learning, probabilistic reasoning, and the like.