* 1527709
* CHS: Small: ETouch - Amplifying the Sense of Touch
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2016
* Yon Visell, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2016
* USD 499,650.00

Despite advances in haptic (touch) technologies, current interactive systems
make limited use of the sensorimotor capabilities of the human body. Not
surprisingly, then, the enhancement of intrinsic touch sensation has received
little prior attention. The PI's overarching goal in this research is to create
knowledge and technology for tactile sensing and feedback, in order to realize a
glove that enhances touch perception by electronically amplifying tactile
sensations, thereby greatly extending the limits of normal human haptic
perception. This will enable its wearer to feel objects with heightened
sensitivity, and to discern fine levels of detail in surfaces, objects, or
tissues. Project outcomes will include enabling technologies for hand-worn
instruments that can amplify touch much like a hearing aid is able to amplify
sound, or a digital microscope can magnify images. The wearer of such a device
will be able to feel defects in surfaces that would not normally be detected, to
detect lumps that would otherwise go unnoticed, and to perform fine manipulation
tasks that would otherwise be impossible. Thus, the project holds the potential
to impact a wide range of human activities and industries, many of which depend
upon manual interaction and inspection. As part of the current project, in
collaboration with the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine's
Department of Neurology, the PI will develop new methods for sensory assessment
and guidelines for tactile enhancement with broad implications for clinical
applications to the rehabilitation of touch deficits caused by disease or injury
affecting the somatosensory system. Further applications in sensory feedback for
upper-limb prosthetics and rehabilitation are envisioned to be directly
facilitated by knowledge generated in this way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will pioneer new methods for electronic sensing of the mechanical
stimuli underlying touch sensations in the hand, for computational enhancement
of perceptually relevant haptic features, and for reproducing touch sensations
via distributed actuators of a wearable, glove-like electronic interface, by
integrating work in tactile sensing, computational analysis, distributed
actuation and control, and real-time touch amplification. The PI will design and
fabricate new soft computing technologies for capturing, processing, and
reproducing touch sensations felt with the hand, in the form of strain and
vibration signatures of skin-object contact. Challenges to realizing such a
vision include: the multiple time and length scales involved; the complexity of
the mechanical stimuli, which consist of complex, movement-dependent distributed
strain in the skin; limitations in current knowledge about the fundamental
computations underlying sensory processing, which obscure the relevant signal
features; and the difficulty of electronically reproducing distributed touch
sensations during whole-hand haptic interaction. The work will contribute to
advances in each of these areas, first by designing and fabricating new sensor
and actuator technologies, and then by using these to reveal how touch sensation
is elicited through contact generated mechanical signals, and how these
sensations are processed by the perceptual system.