* 1527765
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards Interactive Data Visualization Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2020
* Eugene Wu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/29/2020
* USD 256,866.00

Interactive visualizations are a powerful way to explore and draw insights from
data. As the data available to practitioners continues to grow in complexity and
size, existing systems find it harder and harder to maintain a highly
interactive experience. The goal of this project is to develop an interactive
visual data exploration system designed and optimized to take human perception
into account. The aim of this research is to model human perception as
perceptual functions. These functions help the system avoid unnecessarily
computing visualization results that are more accurate than what can be
perceived by the end user. By developing and using these functions, the system
can provide highly accurate yet interactive visualizations for large datasets in
domains such as business intelligence, data-driven sciences, and healthcare
analytics. In addition, research results from these efforts will contribute
towards the development of new curriculum topics at the graduate level.

A commonly overlooked element of interactive visualization systems is the human
in the loop. Although data sizes and computational capabilities have
dramatically increased over time, human perceptual limits have remained
relatively constant. Although previous work has presented guidelines for
effective animations [Heer et al., VCG 2007; Fisher et al., ICGA 2012] and
projects such as M4 [Jugel et al., VLDB 2014] used perceptual insights to
justify approximation algorithms, our goal is to build a multi-layered data
analysis system that unifies interactive visualization clients with backend data
management systems, and explicitly takes human perceptual models into account.
These models can be used to develop perceptually-aware optimizations such as (1)
automatically approximate data transformations that are perceptually
indistinguishable, (2) model queries generated by an interaction (e.g., dragging
a scrollbar to the right) as a single session and optimize across the entire set
of queries, and (3) apply interaction-oriented caching and rewrite strategies to
minimize latency. Ultimately, these techniques can ensure high frame-rate
interactions for data exploration without negatively impacting the insights that
users draw from their visualizations. Further information, publications and
results of this research are available at the project web site
(http://perceptvis.github.io).