* 1527037
* RI: Small: Modeling Platform Competition: A Multi-Agent Systems Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Sanmay Das, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 429,600.00

In many important real-world settings, the interactions of multiple agents are
governed by the platform that brings them together. Even if we assume rational
behavior on the parts of agents, the outcomes of such interactions depend
heavily on the rules, regulations, and norms of the platform. When multiple such
platforms compete in dynamic environments, and agents are constrained in terms
of their knowledge and computational capabilities, it becomes very difficult to
predict societal outcomes based only on traditional economic theory. The goal of
this project is to employ computational methods to study platform competition in
three important domains: (1) financial markets; (2) kidney exchange; (3) online
episodic labor and matching markets. We will explore these domains in detail,
focusing initially on the following questions: (1) In financial markets, is
high-frequency trading (HFT) beneficial or costly to society? If it is costly,
how can we incentivize agents to switch to market platforms that do away with
the incentives for HFT? (2) When multiple living-donor paired kidney exchanges
compete on how frequently they run their matching algorithms, is this socially
harmful in preventing a thicker market that would potentially allow more
matches? Does this disproportionately affect certain types of patients? If so,
how can we incentivize exchanges or patients to wait longer? (3) In platforms
that allow users to search for tangible goods/durables (e.g. cars) or intangible
matches, how does the amount and type of information provided to participants
affect social welfare? How do the dynamics of platform competition affect the
information available to users?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI and
his students will use multiple approaches, including computational game theory,
multi-agent simulation, and empirical game analysis, to model the dynamics of
platform competition. Applying the computational lens to studying the dynamics
of platform competition is particularly important because of three features of
these environments: (1) The complex interactions that occur between participants
(e.g. traders learning from market prices, platforms deciding how much
information to provide to participants); (2) The inherent complexity of the
decision-problems faced by the big players (the platform itself, or agents that
perform an important service for the platform) like market-makers in financial
markets or the clearing algorithm for kidney exchanges; (3) A focus on the
dynamics of how platforms evolve under competition. This research program will
serve to both elucidate important questions about the specific applications, as
well as explore new methodological questions as they arise in how computational
modeling of economic and social systems can contribute deeper understanding when
used in conjunction with the types of modeling common to economics and
operations research.