* 1527324
* SHF:  Small: Physics-Based Electromigration Assessment and Validation For Reliability-Aware Design and Management
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 482,000.00

Long-term reliability has become a significant challenge for design of
integrated circuit (IC) chips used in today's computers and smart phones. Among
many effects, electromigration-induced reliability has become the dominant
limiting factor due to aggressive transistor scaling and increasing power
density. In this project, the PI proposes to address IC reliability problems by
providing more accurate electromigration models and assessment techniques at
both circuit level and system level so that electromigration induced reliability
and aging effects can be fully accounted, leveraged and optimized at both the
design stage and run time stage to improve chip reliability and their lifetime
at minimum design costs. Furthermore, through the collaborations with the
industry partners, the proposed techniques are expected to impact the design and
tool development community, thus increasing design productivity. This project
also enables the institution to hire students from underrepresented groups, thus
enhancing the diversity of science and technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop new physics-based
electromigration models and full-chip assessment techniques, to perform model
validation for accurate yet efficient electromigration verification at the
design stage, and to enforce electromigration-aware reliability management at
run time for nanometer IC chips. First, the research will develop new physics-
accurate electromigration models to better predict mean time to failure for
multi-branch interconnect trees, which are commonly seen in IC chips, for both
void nucleation and void growth phases. Second, the project will develop
electromigration models that can accommodate time-varying temperature and
current densities, which reflect a more realistic chip working condition due to
time-varying loads for both single wire and multi-branch interconnect trees. On
top of this, the project team will develop resource-based electromigration
models, which are more amenable to the system-level run-time reliability
optimization and management.