* 1527796
* SHF: Small: An Asynchronous Network-on-Chip Methodology for Cost-Effective and Fault-Tolerant Heterogeneous SoC Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Steven Nowick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

One of the grand challenges of the next decade is to provide cost-effective and
systematic approaches to build large-scale computing systems to meet the
country's future technological needs. Such systems will involve 100s or 1000s of
processors, or more, on a single computer chip, which perform massively parallel
computation tasks, and can be housed in either large data centers or even in
desktop or hand-held consumer products. Such parallel computing is the key to
supporting the continued growth of social networks (texting, Facebook) and rapid
Web queries, as well as solving massive scientific computation problems, such as
for weather, oceanography, air traffic control, military, and security. However,
there are currently severe cost overheads in designing such systems: huge energy
usage, thermal overheating, poor delivered performance, and complexity in
assembling such complex and varied components into a single chip. Many of these
bottlenecks have been exacerbated by the traditional use of a fixed-rate clock,
which centrally controls all components on a chip. The goal of this research is
to explore and significantly advance one highly promising alternative solution:
to build ?plug-and-play? easy-to-assemble computer systems without any global
clock, but instead through asynchronous (i.e. clock-less) assembly. Such a
solution promises much lower energy consumption, and ease of assembly, of such
systems. The project will also train students in asynchronous circuit design and
the general area of information and computing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular focus of this research is to
develop structured digital interconnection networks for a chip, called
"networks-on-chip", which form the "backbone" of recent commercial parallel
computer systems. While initial solutions with asynchronous design have been
promising, they have lacked fundamental features needed to make them viable for
industry. In this proposal, several key features are developed for asynchronous
networks-on-chip: error detection and correction, performance enhancement, and
automated design flow. The approach will also be applied to a realistic cell
phone application, to demonstrate the ease-of-design and cost benefits. Taken
together, this new approach promises a significant advance forward in providing
the capability to assemble complex parallel computer systems needed in the
future.