* 1527118
* III: Small: Scalable, Practical Deterministic Database Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Daniel Abadi, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James French
* 11/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The database system was one of the first highly concurrent systems ever
designed, and has served as a blueprint for the design of many subsequent
concurrent computing systems. The decision to allow the system to process
concurrent transactions nondeterministically has led to countless headaches from
bugs (and debugging), security, replication, and general code complexity. The
research funded by this grant will investigate the development of a
fundamentally different design for concurrent execution of transactions in
database systems that guarantees that the final state of the database is
deterministically prescribed from the input to the system. Such databases have
the potential to significantly improve the throughput, latency, fault tolerance,
and general robustness of database systems. In addition to performing
fundamental research on deterministic database systems, we plan to develop open
source code for the different components of the system including transaction
management, concurrency control, and log management. We expect this code will be
useful both for development of other database systems, and also as pedagogical
tools for database systems courses. We plan heavy undergraduate involvement in
the research, including contributions from women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key research areas within the project include
automatic read/write-set detection (a key requirement to making deterministic
database systems practical and widely adopted), leveraging the active
replication enabled by determinism to accelerate distributed read-only queries,
building a deterministic system out of nondeterministic components, and worker
thread scheduling within the database system. These research topics will enable
a high-throughput ACID-compliant database system that can scale commit protocols
for distributed transactions, the support of performant transactions and queries
within the same system, and the ability to handle wild fluctuations in server
performance (especially virtual servers in the cloud) and fluctuations in
offered workload (including unexpected load spikes). For further information see
the project web site at: http://db.cs.yale.edu/calvin.