* 1527093
* SHF: Small: Assisting Developers in the Creation and Maintenance of Unit Tests
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Emily Hill, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

To test software, developers must perform two activities:
test&lt;br/&gt;creation and test maintenance. The first activity, test
creation,&lt;br/&gt;consists of developing and implementing a test suite---the
set of&lt;br/&gt;tests that will be used to evaluate the software. The
second&lt;br/&gt;activity, test maintenance, consists of both understanding
existing&lt;br/&gt;test cases and evolving them in response to changes in the
application&lt;br/&gt;that is being tested. Despite decades of work, both of
these&lt;br/&gt;activities are still expensive and labor-intensive. In this
project,&lt;br/&gt;we will address the need for useful developer support for
both test&lt;br/&gt;creation and test maintenance by investigating and
building&lt;br/&gt;cooperative approaches where automated tools and developers
work&lt;br/&gt;together, each focusing on their respective strengths. Improving
the&lt;br/&gt;efficiency and effectiveness of both testing activities will
be&lt;br/&gt;beneficial in reducing the overall cost of software development
and,&lt;br/&gt;at the same time, improving software
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the
state of the art by (1) innovating&lt;br/&gt;in the areas of program analysis
and natural-language program analysis&lt;br/&gt;and (2) synergistically
integrating these two strands of innovations.&lt;br/&gt;First, the PIs will
investigate cooperative approaches for generating unit&lt;br/&gt;tests based on
developer intent to save developer's time and to lower&lt;br/&gt;the cognitive
barrier for writing tests by automating the tedious&lt;br/&gt;aspects of test
creation. Second, the PIs will investigate techniques for&lt;br/&gt;improving
the comprehensibility of existing tests by automatically&lt;br/&gt;generating
various forms of test documentation including descriptive&lt;br/&gt;test method
names and both summary and explanatory comments. Finally,&lt;br/&gt;the PIs will
quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate and refine the
newly&lt;br/&gt;developed techniques to ensure that they are both useful
and&lt;br/&gt;effective. The tools and experimental infrastructure developed
within&lt;br/&gt;the project will be released, which will let researchers
and&lt;br/&gt;practitioners build on the project's results.