* 1527090
* NeTS: Small: Optimized Mobile Data Off-loading Architectures and Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Leandros Tassiulas, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 487,621.00

The unprecedented growth of mobile data traffic, that is expected to surpass 25
exabytes/month in 2020, poses major technical and economic challenges to the
cellular operators, and necessitates rapid capacity increase. Several network
expansion methods based on technology upgrades and spectrum acquisitions, are
costly and more long-term approaches. There is a need for alternative solutions,
and mobile data offloading to Wi-Fi networks appears as one of the most
promising. Despite several recent initiatives, the research community still
lacks a systematic approach for achieving a seamless integration of Wi-Fi
networks and for ensuring the maximum possible offloading benefits. This project
will fill this gap by proposing, analyzing, and validating a techno-economic
framework that enables optimized and efficient mobile data offloading solutions.
First, it will analyze how an operator can deploy a Wi-Fi overlay network
(large-scale, long-term optimization), and how it can be used to offload
cellular traffic in an efficient fashion (dynamic, real-time optimization).
Then, it will study how operators can outsource offloading by leasing dormant
user-owned network resources, such as residential Wi-Fi access points, and by
cooperating with Wi-Fi sharing communities or Wi-Fi operators. Such approaches
not only enable on-the-spot and on-demand offloading, but also promote
sustainable networking solutions and create opportunities for novel business
models in this emerging mobile ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed plan
lies at the nexus of network optimization and network economics, and employs
convex, stochastic and discrete optimization in conjunction with game theory and
auction theory tools. In particular, the project comprises the following two
Thrusts: (I) Wi-Fi Access Point Deployment, Pricing Strategies, and Traffic
Offloading Policies, and (II) Wi-Fi Spare Capacity Markets and Mechanisms.
Thrust I will study network policies for overlaying Wi-Fi auxiliary networks in
cellular networks. These policies will be jointly designed with pricing schemes
for charging the users who offload mobile data. This approach departs
significantly from the current practice of gratis offloading services, and is
expected to bring significant economic benefits for the mobile network operators
(MNOs). Moreover, the project will study dynamic (online) policies that adapt on
traffic variations and optimize, for a given network infrastructure, the
offloading benefits while taking into account the users? requirements. The
theoretical analysis in this Thrust involves challenging optimization problems,
which are often NP-hard, and require sophisticated and/or lightweight solution
algorithms. The second Thrust will study how the operators can effectively lease
dormant user-owned Wi-Fi networks for offloading purposes. This study refers to
decentralized architectures as the network infrastructure is owned by different
entities, and often to user-initiated offloading schemes where the mobile users
decide when to offload their traffic. Various scenarios will be analyzed based
on whether the leased networks are owned by independent individual users, by Wi-
Fi operators, or Wi-Fi sharing communities. Each case raises unique issues as
both the required offloading mechanisms, and the incentive design problems are
different. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is motivated by
current challenges of the telecommunications industry, builds upon real data
sets, and is supported by extensive testbed experimentation. The proposed
research, incorporating communication system design, network optimization, and
network economics, will have broad impact on science, education, and
communication markets. First, it will increase substantially the cellular
capacity by optimized Wi-Fi networks and offloading mechanisms. This will be a
decisive step towards accommodating the surging mobile data traffic. It can also
inspire new business models, and collaboration schemes among cellular operators,
Wi-Fi operators, and Wi-Fi sharing communities. Besides, this project adopts a
radical approach for employing sharing economy models to wireless networks,
which is expected to lead in sustainable networking solutions. Moreover, the
project will serve as an excellent conduit between academia and industry,
involving actively top research labs such as the Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs. Top-
notch network testbed facilities will be employed in order to build realistic
models and evaluate the proposed architectures. This will create datasets that
can be reused by the research community for studying various aspects of the next
generation heterogeneous wireless networks; this will also serve as a method for
further disseminating the research outcomes. Special emphasis will be given on
recruiting women and under-represented minority (URM) students to the project,
as well as undergraduate students via Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REUs). A systematic effort will be made in outreach activities to identify,
engage, and nurture exceptional talents for careers in STEM.