* 1527563
* EAGER: Detecting and Addressing Adverse Dependencies Across Human-in-the-Loop In-Home Medical Apps
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2017
* John Stankovic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Millions of mobile applications (apps) are being developed in domains such as
energy, health, security, and entertainment. The US FDA expects that there will
be 500 million smart phone users downloading healthcare related apps by the end
of 2015. Many of these apps will perform interventions to control human
physiological parameters such as blood pressure and heart rate. The intervention
aspects of the apps can cause dependency problems, e.g., multiple interventions
of multiple apps can increase or decrease each other's effects, some of which
can be harmful to the user. Detecting and resolving these dependencies are the
main goals of this project. Success in this research can significantly improve
the safety of home health care.

This project will develop EyePhy, a completely new approach to primary and
secondary dependency analysis for wellness and mobile medical apps based on
smart phones. The approach offers personalized dependency analysis and accounts
for time dependent interventions such as time interval for which a drug or other
intervention is effective. To do that, EyePhy uses a physiological simulator
called HumMod which was developed by the medical community to model the complex
interactions of the human physiology using over 7800 variables. Among the goals
of EyePhy are the reduction of app developers' effort in specifying dependency
metadata compared to state of the art solutions, offering personalized
dependency analysis for the user, and identifying problems in real time, as
medical app products are being used. Such dependency problems occur mainly
because (i) each app is developed independently without knowing how other apps
work and (ii) when an app performs an intervention to control its target
parameters (e.g., blood pressure), it may affect other physiological parameters
(e.g., kidney) without even knowing it. A priori proofs that individual cyber-
physical systems (CPS) app devices are safe cannot guarantee how it will be used
and with which other (future) apps it may be run concurrently. It is becoming
more common for people to use multiple apps. The average person will not
understand how multiple apps might affect his health due to hidden dependencies
among a large number of parameters. Consequently, a tool such as EyPhy is
critical to future deployments of safe mobile medical apps.