* 1527364
* TWC: Small: Statistical Models for Opinion Spam Detection Leveraging Linguistic and Behavioral Cues
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Arjun Mukherjee, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,695.00

Online opinions now play a pivotal role in decision making and influence a wide
spectrum of our lives. Choices of restaurants at which to dine, places to stay,
universities to attend, books to read, doctors to consult, and even political
candidates to vote for, are largely influenced by crowdsourced opinions.
However, it is estimated that up to 30% of reviews on websites are fake. As a
larger part of the US economy is becoming driven by social opinions, it poses a
serious risk to the general public (e.g., by getting mislead to invest on low
quality products, services or doctors). The Federal Trade Commission Opinion may
soon consider online fraud as unlawful and a legal offense. Detecting fake
online opinions is an urgent research area. Otherwise, online social media might
continue to progress undetected. This project aims to develop novel deception
detection algorithms in order to identify fraudulent behavior. It
synergistically integrates techniques from computational linguistics, behavioral
modeling and statistical machine learning in order to advance knowledge in this
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of a four-pronged research
effort: 1) novel methods to learn deception classifiers from large-scale noisy
crowd data and small-scale domain expert coded data, 2) unsupervised models that
treat "spamicity" of reviewers as latent with observed behavioral footprints, 3)
a relational architecture for jointly modeling reviews, reviewers, and their
linguistic and behavioral patterns leveraging inherent reinforcement relations,
and 4) an ensemble scoring mechanism blending cues from of all approaches, and
an end-to-end validation framework. The techniques developed in the project can
(1) reduce the marketing, consumer, and economic risk in e-commerce; (2) improve
user profiling, detecting online harassment, bigotry, trolls, and other social
media fraud that are of major relevance to national security; and (3) transition
techniques developed to courses/tutorials and attract underrepresented students,
including minorities and women. The result is a suite of novel, principled, and
scalable techniques to filter opinion spam at large scale.