* 1527034
* CSR: Small: ENACT: Environment-Aware Management of Mobile Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Tajana Rosing, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 466,000.00

Mobile systems are pervasive and have been adapted for diverse computing needs
throughout the world. Smart mobile systems, with advanced computing and
connectivity, promise superlative experience, yet battery constraints limit
their use. Device temperatures are also a major concern as high temperatures
reduce hardware reliability but also because human skin can tolerate only
moderately warm phones. Mobile system usage is highly influenced by user
context, hence can provide a crucial input for proactive, instead of reactive,
device power, thermal and reliability management. Even with a small amount of
contextual information such as user location and motion, battery lifetime can be
improved by as much as a factor of five. Yet, despite the fact that there are
already many sensors available in mobile systems, there have been no simple and
flexible ways to incorporate context into mobile system resource management. To
enable mobile systems to become more context-aware, this project is designing
ENACT, an ENvironment Aware ConTrol framework that leverages overarching sensor
data for system-wide context-aware management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ENACT is a
lightweight framework that enables a mobile system to tap into a vast array of
sensors, and leverage comprehensive context about hardware, software, and user,
to control system-wide actuators. The framework has two main components. A
context recognition service leverages well-established statistical techniques to
robustly derive semantic information from raw sensor data. Then, by observing
system behavior with respect to context and actuators, it computes stochastic
models. A context-aware control service, based on stochastic model predictive
control, smartly sets the system's actuators to minimize the energy consumption
while meeting reliability, temperature, and performance constraints. To
efficiently meet these requirements, the control framework is supported by a
hierarchical structure working at different time scales. ENACT can efficiently
transforming a large set of raw sensor data into usable contextual information
accessible system-wide, and leverage context to configure a set of actuators to
improve the way mobile system resources are managed while providing excellent
user experience. This allows for accurately aligning system goals to performance
expectations. The project includes the implementation of novel context-aware
techniques for energy, thermal and reliability management, which can smartly
adapt to dynamic performance requirements without sacrificing energy margins.
Students involved in this project gain valuable training in disciplines across
machine learning, hierarchical control, optimization and resource management.
The ENACT framework can be leveraged in academia and industry alike to implement
context-awareness in systems, and to design resource management policies that
can leverage context.