* 1527140
* NRI: Balance Recovery Control for Amputees Using Powered Leg Prostheses
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Steve Collins, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2019
* USD 908,000.00

Falls among amputees are frequent, costly and negatively impact quality of life.
In 2005, there were one million people in the United States with lower limb
amputation. About 10 percent of these people experience at least one fall that
results in serious injury, resulting in estimated costs to the United States
health care system of about $1.1 billion annually. This number is expected to
quadruple by the year 2050 due to increasing rates of obesity and diabetes.
People with amputation are conscious of their increased fall risk, leading to
reduced mobility and social activity. About half of the amputee population
reports a fear of falling. Similarly large numbers list as major limitations to
their quality of life the inability to walk on uneven terrain or without a
stabilizing gait aid. These facts highlight the challenge imposed by imbalance,
and suggest that improving balance recovery in amputee locomotion would
significantly improve the quality of life of lower-limb amputees as well as
reduce related health care costs. The emerging field of robotic prosthetics
provides the opportunity to attack this problem with novel prosthesis designs
and control strategies. The project seeks to take advantage of this opportunity.
It combines computational models of the human neuromuscular control system with
novel designs of powered knee-and-ankle prostheses and biomechanical gait
analysis to establish new control paradigms for powered prostheses that
substantially improve the ability of amputees to recover from large
disturbances. Implemented in commercial devices, these control techniques could
reduce fall rates and fear of falling, thereby improving the mobility and
quality of life for millions of people. Other benefits of the project include
the support of education. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
and mentored, and research tools and outcomes will be integrated into
coursework, including the software and hardware tools developed in this project
for studying prosthesis control and disturbance recovery in human locomotion. In
addition, the project supports the dissemination of research results by
publishing and freely providing simulation code, control implementation code,
and hardware designs online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
project is to test the hypothesis that a reflex-like prosthesis control strategy
inspired by human motor control substantially improves the balance recovery for
above-knee amputees during walking. Balance recovery has evolved into a major
research area as fall-connected injuries are one of the main causes of
impairment, disability and death in aging societies. Lower limb amputees are
especially at risk of falling as current prosthetic limbs provide only limited
functionality for recovering from unexpected disturbances. The project combines
methods from computational neuromechanics, robotic prosthetics, and
biomechanical gait analysis to identify prosthesis control strategies that help
above-knee amputees recover balance after large disturbances such as trips,
slips and pushes. An existing reflex control model of human locomotion is
adapted to amputee gait, involving theoretical research on feedback control
algorithms for powered prosthetic limbs and predictions of amputee recovery
behavior in simulated experiments. Prototypes of powered knee-ankle prostheses
are developed, including a tethered prosthesis emulator for rapid human-in-the-
loop control design and evaluation on a treadmill, and a mobile prosthesis
allowing evaluation outside the laboratory. Control algorithms identified in the
reflex control model are embedded in these prototypes and systematically
evaluated in balance recovery experiments with above-knee amputees. An outcome
confirming the hypothesis could establish new control paradigms for powered
prostheses and enable practical controllers for improved balance recovery in
amputee gait. In addition, the project will advance theoretical models of human
balance recovery as well as control algorithms and hardware designs for robotic
knee-ankle prostheses.