* 1527318
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Algorithmic Resilience (CAR) for Big Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Lu Peng, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 282,000.00

Big Data analytics is the process of mining useful knowledge in very large data
sets, critical to the advancement of many research and application fields. With
manufacturing technology downscaling of processor size coupled with increasing
power densities, modern computer systems suffer from potential hardware and
software failures, which can manifest themselves as errors. The errors happen
when long-running Big Data analytics are executed on the systems, causing system
crashes or worse, returning undetected incorrect results. While numerous
hardware-based resilience methods exist, they often come at the cost of
excessive power efficiency reduction and substantial design complexity
enlargement among others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to reinforce
popular Big Data analytics by embracing a host of comprehensive algorithmic
resilience (CAR) software techniques that include concurrent error detection,
coordinated checkpointing, and execution recovery, for high execution
resilience. Upon detecting potential hardware and software errors concurrently
during analytics, CAR enables execution recovery from detected errors without
lofty overhead common to hardware-based resilience methods. Research activities
of the project aim to achieve six main objectives that focus on addressing
several technical challenges to realize CAR, based on investigators' encouraging
preliminary results and prior work. The success of this project can benefit wide
scientific and industrial applications due to its better support of Big Data
analytics and processing. Research advances from this research are to be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate education, to be disseminated and
shared broadly through technical presentations and by a website, and to inspire
high school students for their STEM interest.