* 1527320
* SHF: Small: Design/Automation for Synthesizable and Scaling Friendly Analog/Mixed-Signal Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Nan Sun, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of the proposed research is to tackle two critical challenges for
conventional analog and mixed-signal circuits to address scaling incompatibility
and low design productivity. The proposed time-domain analog mixed signal
circuits are scaling compatible, and can achieve higher performance with
substantially reduced chip area, power, and cost. They address the critical
real-world challenge of cost effectively integrating analog-mixed-signal
circuits with digital functions. They can enable emerging applications that
demand ultra-low-power and ultra-low voltage solutions. The proposed research
design for synthesizability and new synthesis tools also has significant impacts
on enhancing design productivity, leading to reduced cost, enhanced capability,
shortened time-to-market, and improved reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed novel time domain analog-mixed-signal circuits process analog
information in the time or phase domain. Thus, they naturally benefit from CMOS
scaling with increased transistor speed and reduced delay. Moreover, this
proposal opens up a new research direction of analog-mixed-signal design for
synthesizability, the objective of which is to alleviate the difficulty in
analog synthesis by intentionally creating new topologies that are synthesis
friendly. New analog synthesis tools will be developed, with focus on developing
compact and high-fidelity models to reduce runtime and tackle process variation.
Several previously untouched issues will be addressed, such as sensitive node
protection, current flow constraints, and substrate noise coupling. A new
machine-learning based framework will also be developed to further increase
automation level.