* 1527432
* NRI: Robust Stochastic Control for Agile Aerial Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Marin Kobilarov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 496,093.00

A new class of flying robots are beginning to, not only navigate and observe,
their surroundings, but also reach and manipulate objects in places that are
difficult for humans to go. Such systems will assist people through manipulation
in unsafe or remote locations, and will automate manual labor-intensive tasks
such as package delivery, agricultural inspection, and infrastructure repair.
Current aerial manipulator prototypes lack the control fidelity to ensure
reliability and efficiency that is expected from such operations. To overcome
these limitations, the proposed project develops novel control techniques that
exploit the capabilities of the aerial vehicle. If successful, this research
project will enable agile and safe aerial manipulation in extreme environments
that is presently impossible or infeasible using standard methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is the realization of planning
and control methods with built-in robustness for robots that can interact with
and manipulate the environment in autonomous and human-assisted modes. This is
accomplished by posing the coupled perception-control problem as a statistical
learning problem and adaptively computing decision policies to optimize future
performance and minimize probability of safety violation. At the core of the
approach lies a provably-stable adaptive control methodology equipped with
probabilistic robustness guarantees in terms of maximum expected cost and
probability of collision. These bounds correspond to concentration-of-measure
inequalities derived through Bayesian probably-approximately-correct analysis.
Two experimental platforms provide proof-of-concept for: 1) an autonomous "Air-
gripper" for repetitive tasks such as load delivery, crop sampling, and remote
cleaning; 2) co-robotic "hands in the sky" in direct assistance to a human
operator enabling access to dangerous or difficult-to-access places, e.g. for
inspection and repair in extreme environments, during rescue or security-
sensitive missions. The implemented techniques are generally applicable and will
be released as open-source ROS-compatible software.