* 1527371
* AF:  Small:  Linear Algebra++ and applications to machine learning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Sanjeev Arora, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 466,000.00

Many areas of unsupervised learning (i.e, learning with data that has not been
labeled by humans) currently rely on heuristic algorithms that lack provable
guarantees on solution quality or running time. In fact the underlying problems
- as currently formulated - are often known to be computationally intractable
(NP-hard, to use a technical term). This proposal identifies a big set of these
problems that can be seen as twists - involving constraints such as
nonnegativity and sparsity - on classical linear algebra problems like solving
linear systems, rank computation, and eigenvalues/eigenvectors. The PI has
proposed calling this set of problems collectively as Linear Algebra++. The
project will seek to develop algorithms with provable guarantees for these
problems. The methodology will be to make suitable assumptions about the
structure of realistic inputs. The algorithms will be applied to problems in
unsupervised learning, in areas such as topic modeling, natural language
processing, semantic embeddings, sparse principle components analysis (PCA),
deep nets, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will lead to new and more
efficient algorithms for big data processing that will come with provable
guarantees of quality. It will bring new rigorous approaches to machine
learning. (Some recent work of the PI shows that the new rigorous approaches can
be quite practical.) It will advance the state of art in theoretical computer
science by expanding its range and its standard toolkit of algorithms. It will
contribute fundamentally new primitives to classical linear algebra and applied
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train a new breed of graduate
students who will be fluent both in theoretical algorithms and machine learning.
The PI has a track record in this kind of work and training during the past few
years and will continue this including working with undergrads and Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) students. Any new algorithms discovered as
part of this project will be released as open source code. The PI also plans a
series of other outreach activities in the next few years including (a) A
workshop. (b) A special semester or year at the Simons Institute in 2016-17 on
provable bounds in machine learning which he will coorganize. (c) A new book on
graduate algorithms based upon his new grad course, which tries to re-orient
algorithms training for today's computer science problems. (d) A series of talks
aimed at broad audiences, of which he gives several each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques will build upon recent progress by the
PI and others on problems such as nonnegative matrix factorization, sparse
coding, alternating minimization etc. They involve average case analysis,
classical linear algebra, convex optimization, numerical analysis, etc., as well
involve completely new ideas. They could have a transformative effect on machine
learning and algorithms.