* 1527435
* AF: Small: Compact Data Structures for String Matching and Retrieval
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Sukhamay Kundu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,787.00

In the era of big-data, one needs to organize massive amounts of data
&lt;br/&gt;so that it can be searched quickly. This requires the building of an
&lt;br/&gt;index over the raw data. In many cases of big-data, like world-wide
web&lt;br/&gt;or DNA sequencing, the actual information content is low. This
data is &lt;br/&gt;highly compressible. On the other hand, the indexes require
space which &lt;br/&gt;is several times the raw data. Thus, indexing and
compression are often &lt;br/&gt;conflicting goals. The field of compact (or
succinct) data structures &lt;br/&gt;attempts to achieve both these goals
-compression and indexability- &lt;br/&gt;simultaneously. This project will
address some of the most fundamental &lt;br/&gt;open problems in this field.
This will have impact on next generation &lt;br/&gt;biological sequence mining
databases which could simply work within the &lt;br/&gt;memory of a PC instead
of requiring high-performance clusters. The &lt;br/&gt;foundations built by this
project will also impact image matching and &lt;br/&gt;music retrieval. Since
data structures is one of the most fundamental &lt;br/&gt;areas in computer
science education, research from this project will &lt;br/&gt;also impact data
structures curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suffix trees are central to string
indexing and have myriads of &lt;br/&gt;applications. However, suffix trees are
known to take 15 to 50 times &lt;br/&gt;the size of the text they index. This
actually stems from a complexity &lt;br/&gt;gap in the size of data which is n
log s bits compared to the size of &lt;br/&gt;the index which is O( n log n)
bits, for the text of n characters drawn &lt;br/&gt;from alphabet size of s. The
techniques of Burrows-Wheeler Transform(BWT)&lt;br/&gt;and Phi-function were
introduced in the last decade to address this gap. &lt;br/&gt;Most subsequent
research in this field has treated BWT as a black box, &lt;br/&gt;compressing
augmenting structures around it to address various &lt;br/&gt;applications.
However, many problems (like parameterized pattern matching&lt;br/&gt;and 2D
pattern matching) have remained open in this field. This project &lt;br/&gt;will
attempt to go deeper and beyond the philosophy of BWT to solve such
&lt;br/&gt;issues. It will also try to build foundations for deriving lower
bounds &lt;br/&gt;for problems where compact index would be impossible. To
create better &lt;br/&gt;understanding of data structure space and query
complexity, the project &lt;br/&gt;will explore the recent theoretical model
called "encoding model". The &lt;br/&gt;project will also explore the applied
case of compressed indexing for &lt;br/&gt;highly repetitive
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web site
at: &lt;br/&gt;http://csc.lsu.edu/~rahul/succinct