* 1527867
* AF: Small: Distributed Algorithmic Foundations of Dynamic Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Gopal Pandurangan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

The overarching goal of this project is to significantly advance the state of
the art in the algorithmic foundations of distributed computing for dynamic
networks. In a dynamic network, the topology of the network---both nodes
(representing processors/endhosts) and communication links---changes
continuously over time. Modern networking technologies such as peer-to-peer
networks, overlay networks, and ad hoc wireless and mobile networks, are
inherently very dynamic; furthermore, they are resource-constrained, unreliable,
and vulnerable to attacks. Distributed/decentralized algorithms are critical to
the efficient operation of large-scale communication networks, e.g., distributed
shortest paths algorithms are used for routing in the Internet. Till recently,
much of the distributed algorithmic theory developed over the last three decades
has focused mainly on static networks; as such its results do not apply to
dynamic networks. This necessitates the development of a solid theoretical
foundation for robust, secure, and scalable distributed computing for dynamic
networks. Such a foundation is critical to realize the full potential of these
large-scale networks that have a wide variety of applications including
communication, data storage and retrieval, environment monitoring, electronic
commerce, resource distribution and sharing, and
search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a rigorous theoretical
foundation for distributed computing in highly dynamic networks. In particular,
it will develop and analyze distributed algorithms that scale well to very
large-sized networks, are highly robust to dynamic changes and large-scale
failures, and are secure against malicious participants in the network. The
project will result in an algorithmic toolkit which will provide the building
blocks for performing distributed computation in dynamic networks, besides
providing algorithms with performance guarantees and theoretical benchmarks for
practitioners. The project has the potential to impact the design and
engineering of topologically-aware and self-regulating networks, i.e., networks
that can measure, monitor, and regulate themselves in a decentralized fashion.
The PI plans to develop a new course and a textbook on distributed network
algorithms that is closely related to the research undertaken. This research
will actively involve postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two key research
goals. First, it will design and analyze scalable and robust distributed
algorithms for fundamental distributed computing problems including agreement,
leader election, storage and search, and routing. These problems are basic
building blocks in distributed computing and are widely used. Motivated by
fault-tolerance and security considerations, the project will study the above
problems in an adversarial dynamic setting, that can also include the presence
of Byzantine (malicious) nodes which may try to foil the distributed algorithm.
The project will also study lower bounds on the performance of distributed
algorithms including the amount of dynamism that can be tolerated. Second, it
will develop fully-distributed algorithms for computing key global metrics of a
network and to maintain dynamic networks with desirable properties. This
addresses an important issue that is complementary and also critical to the
first goal, i.e., how to measure basic parameters of a dynamic network such as
its size, connectivity properties, conductance, average degree and other node-
related statistics. A related goal is to construct and maintain dynamic networks
with good topological properties such as low diameter, high connectivity, and
high conductance. In both the above research goals, the key challenge is to
design scalable distributed algorithms that are robust and fault-tolerant even
under a high amount of dynamism and the presence of a large amount of Byzantine
nodes. The project will build on and significantly extend the distributed
algorithmic framework for dynamic networks that was recently developed by the PI
and his collaborators.