* 1527239
* NeTS: Small: Long-range Ocean Communication Links Powered by Energy Harvesting
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Yaling Yang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 199,978.00

Advancements in maritime communications are severely lagging behind its land
counterpart. Existing marine communication technologies usually have very
limited capacity and are extremely expensive to operate. Novel solutions are
demanded to meet the imminent requirements for broadband marine mobile wireless
access. The purpose of this project is to fill the void of marine broadband
wireless communications by developing long-range self-powered ocean wireless
communication links. The ocean wireless link is composed of compact,
maintenance-free and low cost floating wireless base stations (BS) that can be
simply dropped into the water. Once in the water, the BSs start to harvest
energy from ocean waves and establish communication links with each other.
Users' broadband traffic, then, can be delivered to the Internet through these
links. This project will bring revolutionary change to the maritime
communications. New maritime networked applications and operation scenarios that
are infeasible but highly desirable in the past can be enabled by this
technology. It can have significant impact on all aspect of ocean related
industry, such as fishing, recreational boating, marine transportation, oil and
gas industry, ocean scientific study, and national security and
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on two thrust areas: Thrust
1 is about ocean wave energy harvesting. For a BS to provide large coverage
range and high capacity links to its users and other BSs, the BS must consume a
large amount of energy. Existing technologies are too large in size and hence
are expensive and hard to be stabilized in rough ocean states and require
frequent maintenance. This project solves this critical challenge by building a
novel ocean wave energy harvester that can effectively harvest tens of watts of
power on typical ocean states with a floating buoy of less than 1 meter
diameter. Thrust 2 is about building the high capacity marine communication
links. The constantly moving ocean waves can affect the capacity, stability and
range of the backhaul links among BSs. In this project, we will study how to
analyze and model the channel and design antenna and radio hardwares to handle
the complex channel of ocean communication links. The researchers will also
study the unique features of ocean communication links and their potential
beneficial and/or harmful impact on network communications.