* 1527562
* SHF:  Small:  Synthesis of Robust Clock Networks for Multiple-Corner Multiple-Mode Designs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2020
* Cheng-Kok Koh, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Integrated circuits for power-conscious electronics commonly found in mobile and
portable devices typically operate in several operational modes in order to
deliver adequate performance while maintaining energy efficiency. These circuits
also have to operate robustly even under uncertainties injected by the
manufacturing process and operating environments. The operation of such a
complex circuit or system is synchronized by a network that delivers a clocking
signal to various components of the circuit or system. Success in this research
will lead to highly scalable synthesis tools that can competently design robust
clock networks to synchronize large-scale high-complexity integrated circuits
for mobile applications. Summer camp activities and community outreach
activities that embed essential concepts related to circuits, systems and
computing will be developed, benefiting K-12 students and broadening the
participation of underrepresented students in computer engineering. With the
integration of research results into the undergraduate and graduate curricula,
students will be trained with a broad range of skills, in areas such as
circuits, numerical linear algebra, and fundamental
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing approaches of synthesizing a
robust clocking system involve the application of iterations of legalization
steps to correct the timing violations of an initial clock network in different
operating scenarios. In contrast to such a lengthy iterative process that has no
guarantee of convergence to a feasible solution, a correct-by-construction
approach will be developed in this project. The proposed research activities are
driven by a reconfigurable circuit structure that could robustly deliver the
clocking signal for different modes of operation, while accounting for different
corners of manufacturing process and operating environments. The fundamental
problems of scheduling the arrival times of clocking signals at different
components of a circuit under various operating scenarios will be explored.
Various techniques of inserting safety margins into the reconfigurable circuit
structure will be developed. For some critical components, redundant paths will
be inserted such that the synchronizing signal could be delivered to them
robustly should a failure occur in one of the redundant paths. A new suite of
circuits for various benchmarking purposes will also be made available to
promote research in this important area.