* 1527464
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Multi-level Non-volatile FPGA Synthesis to Empower Efficient Self-adaptive System Implementations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Chengmo Yang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 266,000.00

Self-adaptivity is a key requirement for many electronic devices to consistently
interact with the dynamic, uncertain, and noisy physical environment. While
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), being reconfigurable, are a natural
platform for implementing such devices, it is becoming more and more difficult
for traditional FPGAs to keep up with the ever-increasing scale and complexity
of self-adaptive applications due to the limited scalability, high leakage
power, and severe process variations of CMOS technologies. A set of prior
research projects demonstrated that it is technically feasible to construct
FPGAs based on non-volatile memories (NVMs). These NV-FPGAs offer attractive
features such as better scalability, superior energy efficiency, near-zero
power-on delay, anti-radiation, as well as the ability to store more than one
bit per cell. However, NV-FPGAs also display a complex design space involving
information density, read and write speeds, data retention time, and device
endurance. When used for self-adaptive systems, the distinctive NVM
characteristics may influence reconfiguration speed, clock frequency, circuit
functionality, memory performance, and/or device
lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses this technology gap as it
prepares NV-FPGAs for more demanding self-adaptive systems. This project aims to
fine-tune various procedures on the FPGA synthesis flow based on NVM
characteristics, so as to exploit their advantages and mitigate their
shortcomings. First, considering the needs of self-adaptive applications, this
project fine-tunes various steps on the FPGA synthesis flow. Novel techniques
are proposed to optimize task scheduling, data allocation, logic mapping,
placement, and routing to improve reconfiguration speed, energy efficiency,
reliability, and endurance of NVM FPGAs. Second, this project explores the rich
NVM design space and sets different optimization goals for look-up tables, flip-
flops, and on-chip memories. The success of this project will lead to a long-
lasting, rapid-adaptive, reliable, and energy-efficient platform better suited
to the needs of a wide range of applications with self-adaptivity requirement,
including healthcare, wellness, industry, and even military applications, all of
which are critical for the United States to drive its new strategies of
innovation and technology. It will also train a diverse type of engineers to
design the future generation of embedded and cyber-physical systems with the
cutting-edge technology of non-volatile memories. Algorithms and tools developed
in this project will be made publicly available so that they will benefit the
entire scientific community.