* 1527351
* Collaborative research: Sea-level responses to sediment erosion and deposition over the past 3 million years
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Jerry Mitrovica, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2018
* USD 89,430.00

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance Rising sea level is a concern for coastal
communities, regardless of its ultimate cause. This project will more accurately
investigate the height of sea level as it was during the mid-Pliocene climatic
optimum, approximately three million years ago. This time period is important
because atmospheric carbon dioxide had levels of 350 to 450 parts per million
and global temperatures were two to three degrees warmer than today.
Accordingly, conditions during this episode are analogous to projections of the
Earth's future during the next century. Current models of sea level for this
time are controversial because of the lack of knowledge about the extent of
polar ice that existed. This project will examine three locations where
shorelines that formed during the mid-Pliocene climatic optimum are exposed and
have wide differences in elevation above present sea level. The main goal is to
incorporate the mass of sediment that has subsequently been eroded and
redeposited from these uplifted shorelines into numerical models in order to
more accurately reconstruct the actual height of sea level during this era and
estimate the extent of polar ice. This will provide a tool to better predict the
magnitude of future sea-level rise under warming conditions.

A technical description of the project

Sea-level changes provide an important constraint on ice volumes and polar ice-
sheet stability during periods of relative ice-age warmth, including the mid-
Pliocene Climatic Optimum (MPCO), the interglacial periods represented by Marine
Isotope Stages 5e and 11 (~120 thousand years and ~400 thousand years ago,
respectively), and the present. In this regard, the MPCO remains a period of
significant interest and contention. Climate models of the MPCO often adopt a
eustatic sea level of 25 meters higher than the present-day as a boundary
condition, but individual published estimates range from 10-40 meters. Any
eustatic value above 10 meters implies major collapse of ice sheets at both
poles. Model-based corrections of sea-level markers for glacial isostatic
adjustment and mantle flow-induced dynamic topography are available, but the
most recent application of these models yields residual elevations for sea-level
of MPCO age along the U.S. east coast with large and systematic geographic
variability. This proposal focuses on improving existing estimates of eustatic
sea level and ice volumes during the MPCO by accounting for sediment
redistribution along the US east coast and the southern coastal margins of
Australia and South Africa. This research is a novel study at the interface
between coastal margin processes and paleoclimate.