* 1527568
* AF: Small: Size, Uncertainty, and Imprecision in Algorithmic Game Theory and Economics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Richard Cole, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Non-Technical Description

As is well known, settings with many interacting participants sometimes work
well, for example in market economies, and other times can lead to poor
outcomes, as in the Tragedy of the Commons. The hypothesis driving this project
is that as the number of participants increases, if these participants have
varied interests, then the poor outcomes will be mitigated, i.e. the Tragedy of
the Commons becomes increasingly less tragic.

To make this precise, one needs to be able to quantify the quality of the
outcomes. One standard approach is to measure the social welfare, which is
simply the sum of the values the participants achieve. The intent in this
project is to compare the ideal social welfare to the social welfare that
actually occurs. The ratio of these values is called the Price of Anarchy. The
aim is to show that as the number of participants increases, these values will
become increasingly close, i.e. that the Price of Anarchy approaches the ideal
value of 1. Of course, this is only going to be true under appropriate
conditions and one of the goals of the project is to identify such conditions.

Why is this interesting? First, for settings with positive results, this will
help explain why good results are achieved. Second, for other settings, it may
indicate why poor outcomes are likely. In addition, it may suggest how to design
or constrain settings so as to achieve improved results.

One or more PhD students will participate in this project. In addition, the PI
hopes to interest more junior students. A prime means to this end is to teach
inviting undergraduate courses. One specific tool here is to create compelling
course videos to complement classroom instruction and this is part of the plan
for this project. Of course, such videos are valuable in their own right.

Technical Description

A main concern of this project is to understand the impact of self-interested
behavior (a.k.a. strategic behavior) on shared outcomes. The PI wants to
understand for which settings and to what extent size and uncertainty reduce the
losses due to strategic behavior. These types of questions have been previously
studied in the Economics literature, but by and large the ensuing results are
in-the-limit statements. The intent for this project is to obtain quantified
tradeoffs. Furthermore the aim is to identify settings for which these are
polynomial tradeoffs, with the implication that the loss reduction is evident at
moderate sizes.

By uncertainty, the PI is not simply referring to Bayesian settings, where there
is uncertainty about participants' desires (utilities) -- in such settings,
participants' utilities are given by draws from known distributions. There is a
need for additional uncertainty, either as to the number of participants or to
the resources being shared. In practice, it seems reasonable that this
information would not be known exactly in large settings; furthermore, some such
uncertainty appears to be necessary for positive results.

Specific questions the PI will seek to answer include:

1. Is price-taking a plausible behavior in (some classes of) market economies,
i.e. are the gains from strategic behavior small when the economy is large? A
follow-up question is whether the resulting outcome, which may include small-
gain strategic behavior, is close to the optimal outcome. (This is not an
immediate implication of a positive answer to the first question.)

2. For auctions with many copies of each good and many buyers, does uncertainty
reduce the gains from strategic behavior, and again, is the resulting outcome
close to optimal? In other words, does the Price of Anarchy for these settings
tend to 1 as the setting size grows?

3. Do results shown for market economies comprising idealized arbitrarily
divisible goods extend approximately to indivisible goods, again when the
setting sizes are large?

4. The outcomes being considered in 1-3 above are stable outcomes, a.k.a.
equilibria, which have the property that no participant wishes they had used a
different strategy. These are viewed as plausible outcomes, but leaves
unanswered the question of how they are found. A natural approach is to consider
dynamic behavior. Of course, this may change the ensuing outcomes. This leads to
asking: for what settings do natural dynamics converge toward equilibria?
Complicating matters further, one can imagine that settings change over time,
leading to the question: for what not-too-rapidly changing settings can drifting
(changing) equilibria be tracked? The PI will be seeking quantified relations
between the rate of change and the closeness to equilibrium.