* 1527144
* TWC: Small: Techniques and Tools for Enforcing Proximity-based  Policies in Wireless Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Yao Liu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

As wireless technologies become more pervasive, it becomes increasingly
important for devices to authenticate the locations of other devices. For
example, patients with implantable medical devices (IMDs) may reasonably expect
that any device used to control their IMD would have to be within arm's reach,
to help prevent unauthorized access to their device. In other words, IMDs should
enforce policies based on the proximity, and in general the location, of
wirelessly connected devices. Similar examples exist in many application areas:
contactless payment terminals may require credit cards to be located in front of
the terminals; wireless routers may require network users to be located in the
same building; GPS devices may require signals to come from satellites (rather
than from adversaries masquerading as satellites); and mobile phones may require
signals to come from known, legitimate cell-tower locations. Hence, the security
of many wireless devices could be improved by enforcing proximity-based policies
on remote devices' locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address
the problem that, although proximity-policy enforcement would improve the
security of many wireless devices, robust techniques and tools do not yet exist
for enforcing such policies. The project addresses this problem by creating such
techniques and tools. The proximity-authentication techniques will allow a
device to passively authenticate the location of remote device, without having
to send messages to, or share secrets with, the remote device. They identify the
proximity of a remote target by utilizing the multipath effect, in which a
wireless signal sent by a transmitter propagates to the receiver in the air
along multiple paths due to reflection, diffraction, and scattering. The
proximity authentication decision is made based on amplitude ratios of wireless
signal copies traveling on these prorogation paths. The proximity-policy
enforcement tools will include (1) an expressive language, and a graphical
interface, for specifying remote-device location policies, (2) an engine for
statically analyzing specified location policies, in order to notify security
engineers as to how accurately their policies can be enforced and whether their
policies are unsatisfiable, and (3) a compilation module to transform valid
policies into concrete enforcement code that can be inlined or otherwise hooked
into a device's existing connection-establishment code.