* 1527434
* RI: Small: New Directions in Computational Social Choice and Mechanism Design
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Vincent Conitzer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,972.00

We often need to make collective decisions: who will represent us as president,
where will we all go out for dinner tonight, who will receive the award, and so
on. Similar problems are faced in multiagent systems in artificial intelligence.
What are the best procedures for reaching such decisions? The agents could vote
over the outcome, but what should the exact procedure be? This is studied in the
theories of social choice and mechanism design, with the latter focusing
particularly on agents that act strategically in their own self-interest.
However, an ever-increasing amount of activity is moving online, and collective
decision making is no exception. For example, we rate or vote on content,
products, and people online. Key aspects of these novel applications are not
present in the traditional models of social choice and mechanism design. For
example, in an Internet-based mechanism, who gets to and who will participate?
How can we know that a single agent is not participating multiple times? How can
we allow agents to meaningfully participate when the number of voting events is
potentially overwhelming? The proposed research aims to extend the traditional
models to incorporate these aspects and to develop new algorithmic and other
techniques to ensure outcomes are meaningful and increase economic efficiency
and human welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many domains, multiple self-
interested agents need to make a collective decision. The theory of social
choice concerns how such collective decisions should be made. Closely related,
the theory of mechanism design concerns how to design mechanisms for such
problems that result in good outcomes even when agents behave strategically. In
recent years, major progress has been made on understanding the computational
aspects of both social choice and mechanism design. In the proposed research,
the PI and his team set out to adapt these techniques to novel domains such as
those enabled by the Internet or the availability of new data. For example, one
key issue is the identity of the participating agents. In an Internet-based
mechanism, who gets to and who will participate? How can we know that a single
agent is not participating multiple times? The PI and his team aim to address
such issues with techniques based on social network structure, as well as on the
effort that agents expend participating. Another key issue is the possibility of
agents strategically providing inaccurate data. Again, explicit modeling of the
agents' effort costs in doing so will play a key role.