* 1527153
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Cracking Down Online Deception Ecosystems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Bogdan Carbunar, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2019
* USD 261,652.00

Used by hundreds of millions of people every day, online services are central to
everyday life. Their popularity and impact make them targets of public opinion
skewing attacks, in which those with malicious intent manipulate the image of
businesses, mobile applications and products. Website owners often turn to
crowdsourcing sites to hire an army of professional fraudsters to paint a fake
flattering image for mediocre subjects or trick people into downloading
malicious software. This research aims to disrupt fraudulent job markets,
identify behavioral differences between fraudsters and honest users, and design
fraud detection methods for popular crowdsourcing sites such as Yelp and Google
Play. Detecting fraudulent information and malicious behavior serves to improve
the quality of life of online service users, help reduce the distribution and
impact of malware, and protect the credibility of online
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
significantly increase the complexity and cost of attacks that seek to
undetectably influence the ranking and public image of online service subjects.
The project consists of two thrusts: modeling and detecting search rank fraud.
The modeling thrust dissects fraudulent job markets supported by crowdsourcing
sites, documents and models their employer-to-worker interactions and
equilibria, and identifies the subjects they target. The researchers will
monitor subjects and leverage community expertise and malware detection tools to
create large-scale, ground truth datasets in order to assist the effort to
identify temporal, spatial and social indicators as well as patterns that
differentiate fraudsters from legitimate users. The detection thrust builds upon
game theory to develop solutions that disrupt detected, active fraudulent jobs.
The researchers will also design scalable search rank fraud detection techniques
and algorithms - built on the indicators and patterns identified in the modeling
thrust to detect fraudulent, search rank altering behaviors - for online
services. The researchers will devise graph-based methods that identify
suspicious connections among users and flag multiple colluding accounts. This
final aspect uncovers not only targets of large-scale review campaigns but also
less popular subjects, whose rank is impacted by even a few fraudulent reviews.