* 1527727
* CSR: Small: Predictable Real-Time Computing in GPU-enabled Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Cong Liu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 354,076.00

Given the need to achieve higher performance without driving up energy
consumption, most chip manufacturers have shifted to multicore architectures,
especially heterogeneous ones. Among heterogeneous processing elements, graphic
processing units (GPUs) have seen wide-spread use. GPUs have the power to enable
orders of magnitude faster execution of many applications. Thus, they are
becoming increasingly applicable for general-purpose systems. Unfortunately, it
is not straightforward to reliably adopt GPUs in many safety-critical systems
that require predictable real-time correctness, one of the most important tenets
in certification required for such systems. A key example is the advanced
automotive system where timeliness of computations is an essential requirement
of correctness due to the interaction with the physical world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to ensure predictable real-
time correctness in current GPU-enabled systems, through (i) developing new
real-time resource allocation methods that can be applied in GPU-enabled
systems, where a number of difficult analysis issues due to the problem of co-
scheduling CPU and GPU resources and several GPU-specific constraints will be
addressed, and (ii) building an open-source ecosystem of predictably managing
GPU resources in the operating system. These efforts will pave the way to
utilizing GPUs in a predictable manner and benefit many applications and systems
in which real-time constraints exist, such as automated automobiles and medical
instrumentation. The successful completion of this work will enable powerful GPU
computing capability. In safety-critical systems which usually require
certification, this work will help enable such systems equipped with GPUs to be
certifiable.