* 1527032
* AF: SMALL: Approximation Algorithms Matching Integrality Gaps for Network Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ramamoorthi Ravi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,998.00

Optimization problems that often arise in practice can be cast as those of
designing appropriate networks that connect specified locations. Many such
network design problems such as the traveling salesperson problem are
computationally hard to solve exactly; nevertheless, approximation algorithms
that run quickly yet deliver near-optimal solutions have been devised for
solving them, often using these problems as exemplars to develop new techniques.
A large set of these techniques for designing approximation algorithms are based
on applying the mathematical modeling formalism of linear programming to obtain
a starting point, and using different ways to convert them to actual solutions
that are cheap. This project will study some prototypical network design
problems under the linear programming formalism to establish the limits of its
accuracy. In the process, the project will attempt to discover new techniques
for designing such approximation algorithms, adding to the existing toolkit.
Methods from the project will be useful in designing new stand-alone solutions
for many network design problems as well as enhancing current methods that
employ the linear programming framework. The project will synthesize diverse
ideas from algorithm design, optimization theory and combinatorial discrete
mathematics, and will broaden participation by supporting two female doctoral
students. The educational plan will disseminate the results to a broad audience
in Computer Science, Mathematics, Operations Research and Business where the PI
is a professor.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The set of problems examined in this
project contains some of the long standing open problems in the theory of
approximation algorithms, such as the symmetric traveling salesperson problem
and its variants: the traveling salesperson path and two-edge-connected subgraph
problems; it also includes other classical problems such as tree augmentation
and prize-collecting Steiner forest that arise in a variety of network design
applications. All these problems share the property that for their natural
linear programming relaxations, the limits of these relaxations, also known as
their integrality gaps, have not yet been established. The goal of the project
is to design new approximation algorithms with performance ratios that match the
exact integrality gap for these problems. These algorithms will be based on
advancing current techniques such as primal-dual methods and iterated rounding,
and developing new methods based on structural decompositions.