* 1527415
* NeTS: Small: PerSoNet: Overlay Virtual Private Networks Spanning Personal Clouds and Social Peers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Renato Figueiredo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 477,150.00

Progress in mobile and cloud computing leads to an ever-increasing number of
devices with increasing diversity in capacity, capabilities and usage
modalities. Furthermore, the wide adoption of Online Social Networks (OSNs) for
user interaction points to a future where applications increasingly demand the
ability to communicate among distributed personal devices, and across those of
social peers. It is crucial for these devices to communicate with each other not
only seamlessly, but also securely. However, the increased number, mobility and
diversity of devices pose ever-increasing challenges. Outside of an enterprise
environment, users remain typically responsible for managing their own devices
which is complex and error-prone. To address these challenges, this project
develops PerSoNet, a novel approach based on overlay peer-to-peer (P2P) networks
allowing Internet users to seamlessly establish virtual private networks
connecting their own personal devices and extending to devices of their trusted
peers by leveraging OSNs as a basis for user and device discovery and for the
setup of private communication channels.

PerSoNet is an unstructured P2P overlay whose topology is derived from personal
device links and social networking relationships. It supports private end-to-end
communication among various personal devices, leverages social relationships for
the discovery and setup of private messaging channels among social peers, and
applies network virtualization techniques to support unmodified software. Thus,
existing and future applications can communicate privately within personal
device networks and across social peers, abstracting friend connections as
network links, without forfeiting the use of existing OSNs for seamless
discovery and management of relationships, and exposing using well-known network
abstractions and programming primitives to developers. Specifically, PerSoNet
exposes a layer-2 virtual network abstraction among the set of personal devices,
and a layer-3 abstraction across devices of social network users, providing a
basis to support existing and future applications. The project investigates
novel overlay techniques with quantitative studies, using simulation techniques
and also by advancing the state-of-the-art in systems design and implementation
through a software prototype and experiments with realistic applications and
systems. This project has the potential to impact a large number of OSN users in
applications including private data sharing, private communication among peers,
and disaster- and censorship-resistant communication systems. The PerSoNet
software will be available to the systems research community, open-source
developers, and the public at large.