* 1527110
* AF: Small: Distributed Algorithms for Near-Planar Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2018
* Bernhard Haeupler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of this project is the development of an algorithmic toolbox to design
efficient distributed algorithms for planar and near-planar networks.
(Informally, a planar network is one that can be drawn on a two-dimensional
surface without any lines crossing.) Many real-world networks and optimization
problem instances have a near-planar structure that allows for simpler, more
efficient, and often more practical algorithms. The study of such network
structures and their algorithmic implications has been a very successful
endeavor with a rich theory, many versatile tools, significant algorithmic
advances, and drastic performance improvements on problem instances of interest.
While modern systems become increasingly larger and more distributed, little is
known about how distributed algorithms can be improved on near-planar instances.
This project aims to change this and to bring similar improvements to the
distributed setting. While its scope is primarily theoretical, the algorithms
and general principles to be developed have the potential of laying the
groundwork for practical algorithms with real-world impacts. The project will
also have a broad educational impact. Much of the research will be done by or in
collaboration with graduate students. Furthermore, the proposed research
direction features many theoretical questions suitable for undergraduate
students without extensive background knowledge and also provides opportunities
for experiments and implementation projects. Lastly, the interdisciplinary
nature of the problem will likely foster many collaborations between the PI and
other researchers in different fields. Any tools and algorithms developed will
be shared publicly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will initiate the
principled study of distributed algorithms for planar and near-planar networks.
In particular, for networks with diameter D and standard bandwidth-limitations
(CONGEST model), the project aims at obtaining efficient distributed algorithms
running in O(D) synchronous rounds for important standard optimization problems
like maximum flow, minimum spanning tree, and various shortest path problems.
This approach very timely connects to recent, far-reaching, distributed lower
bounds which show that in general (sparse) graphs many optimization problems
cannot be computed or even crudely approximated in less than
Omega(sqrt(n))-rounds. The PI believes that this proposal provides an exciting
new direction for the theory of distributed network optimization algorithms and
gives a new perspective on the algorithmic study of planar and near-planar
graphs. The expectation is that this broader research direction and the concrete
initial results coming out of this project will spark the interest of the
community and serve as a basis for a larger and more extensive investigation.