* 1527193
* AF: Small: Subdivision Methods: Correctness and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Michael Burr, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 08/31/2019
* USD 246,411.00

Subdivision-based algorithms can solve problems from a wide variety of
applications in mathematics, computer science, and the sciences. For example,
these types of algorithms are used in computer graphics, mathematical biology,
computational geometry, mathematical modeling, robotics, machine learning, and
mathematical computation. Subdivision-based algorithms are popular because they
are relatively easy to describe and implement on a computer, and they are often
efficient in practice. The work in this project is to quantify and improve the
effectiveness of these types of algorithms. By studying the efficiency and
providing algorithms to approximate solutions to problems which are typically
considered intractable, the results of this project provide techniques which can
be applied to practical problems throughout the sciences.

Subdivision-based algorithms recursively and adaptively subdivide a given domain
into smaller regions until, in each smaller region, the behavior of a problem-
specific feature can be determined. Subdivision-based algorithms are frequently
used because they are parallelizable, recursive, and adaptive. More precisely,
they use weak local tests and perform more subdivisions only near difficult
features. These features that make subdivision-based algorithms practical,
however, also make them challenging to study. For example, local tests make
global topological correctness difficult and adaptive (non-uniform) subdivisions
make the number of subdivisions difficult to bound. This project addresses both
of the important questions of complexity and correctness for subdivision-based
algorithms in the following two ways: (1) Using continuous amortization as a
uniform method to compute the complexity of subdivision-based algorithms. (2)
Developing topologically certified subdivision-based algorithms for geometric
applications on algebraic varieties. This project extends the technique of
continuous amortization to many different types of algorithms including
iterative and two-dimensional subdivisions; additionally, the project develops
subdivision-based algorithms to approximate previously intractable problems such
as the medial axis and intersections of surfaces.