* 1527612
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Designing Hierarchical Edge Cloud for Mobile Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,04/30/2018
* Wei Gao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2018
* USD 125,000.00

Cloud computing can be leveraged to bridge the gap between the increasing
complexity of mobile applications and the limited capabilities of mobile
devices, by remotely executing mobile applications at the cloud. However, the
efficiency of such remote execution is hindered by excessive network latency
accessing data centers and significant overhead of provisioning and managing
large amounts of Virtual Machines (VMs). Traditional solutions reduce the cloud
access latency by deploying servers at the network edge, but ignore the impact
of mobile users' workload patterns on the efficiency of cloud operation.
Instead, this project aims to design the edge cloud as a tree hierarchy of geo-
distributed servers, so as to efficiently exploit the cloud resources for
handling the peak load from mobile users. This research will benefit end users
with various mobile devices by facilitating practical integration of these
devices into the cloud. The results from this research are likely to foster new
research directions on edge cloud design and mobile cloud computing. The project
will engage under-represented students in the research activities, and the
scholarly discovery of this project will be disseminated broadly to the
community.

This project aims to satisfy the performance requirements of remote program
execution by designing the edge cloud in a hierarchical manner and hence
ensuring efficient utilization of cloud resources. More specifically, this
project consists of three closely intertwined research thrusts: (i) developing
algorithms and systems to optimize the placement of mobile workloads among edge
cloud servers and efficiently serve the mobile peak load; ii) mitigating the
impact of user mobility on the performance of remote program execution, by
developing efficient mobility-aware VM migration techniques; iii) developing an
experimental testbed, as a unique research facility, to emulate and investigate
the impact of mobile workload peak on edge cloud operations.