* 1527631
* TWC: Small: Employing Information Theoretic Metrics to Quantify and Enhance the Security of Hardware Designs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Ryan Kastner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 532,000.00

Computing devices control much of the world around us. They power smart phones,
kitchen appliances, cars, power grids, medical devices, and many of the other
objects that we rely upon in our everyday lives. The foundation of these systems
is the hardware, which are complex multi-billion transistor chips. Gaining
control of the hardware provides unfettered access to every part of the system.
This makes it a highly attractive target for attackers. Compromised hardware
allows unauthorized users to obtain personal information, and can be used to
force the device into unsafe and potentially life threatening scenarios. Thus,
it is paramount to develop techniques to enable secure hardware
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating secure hardware requires the designer to
assess potential vulnerabilities. Currently it is hard to concretely say
anything about the security (or lack thereof) of the hardware. This project is
developing quantitative hardware security metrics that enable designers to
precisely evaluate the security of the system. The team is attempting this by
employing statistical measures on the amount of uncertainty and information flow
that is present across different portions of the hardware. These metrics are
oblivious to the types of variables under consideration. Thus, the team can
assess both functional security properties related to confidentiality and
integrity as well as covert channels. These metrics enable the characterization
of portions of the system that are potentially vulnerable to attacks. And they
determine the effectiveness of mitigation techniques on the overall security of
the system. The end result is more secure hardware, which leads to safer and
more secure computing devices.