* 1527049
* SHF: Small: Targeting Hazard Activated Faults to Improve Open Defect Coverage of Scan Delay Tests
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,05/31/2019
* Adit Singh, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2019
* USD 449,846.00

The explosive growth in the use of computers to manage all aspects of everyday
living is rapidly making us critically dependent on the reliability of the
underlying electronic circuits. However, this extensive reliance on electronics
may result in much greater disruption, damage and financial loss in case of
malfunction or failure. Consequently, integrated circuit (IC) manufacturers are
already facing far more stringent quality and reliability demands for parts used
in applications such as aerospace, automotive, and implantable medical devices;
the range of applications demanding such high quality is expected to expand
rapidly in the next few years. Unfortunately, improving the quality and
reliability of ICs by orders of magnitude at reasonable cost is extremely
challenging, which is made even more difficult by new types of manufacturing
flaws and subtle defects being triggered by the new materials, circuit
structures. This proposal will address techniques needed for testing cutting
edge microelectronic circuits so as to ensure failure free operation. The
project will also involve graduate and undergraduate student training, include
members of underrepresented groups and will thus help enlarge the workforce in
information and communication technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure
failure free operation, individual integrated circuits are extensively tested
before being incorporated into electronic circuit boards and assembled into
systems. However, the problem of verifying that each of the billions of internal
components in modern ICs is defect free is compounded by the limited number of
external wires that are available to access the miniature circuits and
components on silicon. Often a defective component can remain dormant and unused
inside an IC for days, or even months, before it becomes activated during
operation resulting in a malfunction. New research indicates that the number of
such test escapes may be much larger than previously believed because of the
presence of some particularly hard to detect open defects that can become
activated by commonly occurring circuit hazards. The aim of the proposed
research is to develop and validate targeted and cost effective test
methodologies for precisely those types of manufacturing defects. In particular,
the project will develop robust test strategies targeting open defects to
significantly reduce Defective Parts per Million and operational failure. It
proposes four activities to achieve this goal: i) conventional scan tests for
targeting the open faults in complex CMOS cells, ii) test generation for hazard
activated open defects, iii) low-cost design-for-test methods for hazard
activated opens detection, and iv) validation of results on state-of-the-art
circuits and volume production manufacturing.