* 1527084
* AF: Small: Allocation Algorithms in Online Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Debmalya Panigrahi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 416,000.00

In recent years, the Internet has undergone explosive growth --- in the number
of users and connected devices, volume of traffic, geographical reach, and
diversity of services --- and its role in enriching modern human societies is
indisputable. Two key contributors to this growth and success are: (a) the
unique economic model of the Internet that predominantly relies on advertising
revenues instead of paid services thereby allowing multitudes of users
affordable access to online services such as email and search, and connectivity
via social networks; and (b) the large-scale computing infrastructure based on
massive data centers capable of providing computing and connectivity services to
billions of users across the globe at any given time. The success of these
critical components of the Internet revolution is contingent on the development
of efficient allocation algorithms --- for deciding which advertisement an ad
exchange should show an online user to maximize the user's utility and generate
revenue, and for scheduling user service requests on the available resources
such as processors, storage devices, and network elements in a data center. In
this project, the PI will develop novel algorithmic tools and techniques to
address these problems, thereby advancing the state of the art in algorithmic
research. Moreover, the PI will regularly consult with practitioners to create
opportunities for technology transfer in Internet applications. This project
will also train graduate and undergraduate researchers in algorithms and
theoretical computer science, with a focus on problems motivated by real world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Allocation problems in large online systems
have emerged as a vibrant area of research. In this project, the focus is on two
important domains: scheduling and load balancing with applications to data
center management, and online matching and budgeted allocation with applications
to Internet advertising. Both application domains have been at the forefront of
the Internet revolution and have grown into multi-billion dollar industries.
Moreover, from a technical perspective, these problems are characterized by some
of the key challenges in modern algorithm design for real world problems:
uncertainty and incompleteness of input data, the existence of multiple
simultaneous objectives, and non-linear optimization requirements. This project
will address technical problems in the above-mentioned application domains that
exhibit one or more of these characteristics. Specific problems to be considered
include vector scheduling and load balancing, online convex optimization and
applications to non-linear scheduling objectives, multi-objective and stochastic
versions of budgeted allocation and online matching problems, etc. The
successful completion of this project will yield an algorithmic toolkit for
allocation problems motivated by real world applications on the Internet.