* 1527336
* NeTS: Small: New models and techniques for efficient communication in smartphone ad-hoc networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* Bo Sheng, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2019
* USD 207,998.00

This project aims to develop two new smartphone-based infrastructure models to
support applications that require interaction and communication in the proximity
without the support of the Internet. It is motivated by the fact that ad-hoc
networks formed by a collection of smartphones can help improve the current
location-based services, propel new applications, and enhance the wireless
infrastructures. In this project, one model harnesses the heterogeneous radio
interfaces to improve bulk data transfer while the other model explores a new
passive communication approach for disseminating short messages such as Tweets
and Facebook messages. Both new models target on reducing the energy cost and
network overhead which are critical to deploying smartphone ad-hoc networks. If
successful, this project will result in two new mobile ad-hoc network
architectures and a suite of protocols built on them. It is expected to have
immediate impact on the research community and industry. The results of this
project will further broaden the mobile application scope and may inspire
developers to create innovative services based on local data
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project addresses the
high-cost issue in path establishment and path recovery in traditional mobile
ad-hoc networks. The first new model integrates a long-range radio into a
smartphone to carry out control and management packets while payload data are
still transferred over regular radios such as WiFi and Bluetooth. A new routing
protocol will be developed based on this dual radio setting to improve the
efficiency. The second new model uses the mandatory 'peer discovery' function in
Bluetooth and WiFi-Direct protocols to disseminate short messages among the
smartphones in the proximity. The cost for establishing and maintaining wireless
links is negligible, and the feature of fetching messages from multiple nearby
devices is desirable for the applications that spread messages in the proximity.
This project will develop an appropriate strategy for each smartphone to receive
and dispatch messages with the objective of conserving the energy cost and
improving the message delivery ratio.