* 1527377
* SHF: Small: Continuously operable biomolecular circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,12/31/2018
* Rebecca Schulman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 481,977.00

Biomolecular circuits can evaluate logic functions for which inputs are sensed
and outputs produced directly within a physical environment. These circuits, not
designed to complete with electronic computers, are meant to control physical
processes such as chemical synthesis, cell behavior, or to direct how materials
change their properties. Recently, it has become possible to build inexpensive,
easy to design biomolecular circuits capable of a variety of nontrivial
calculations using only short single strands of DNA that operate via a process
called strand displacement. However, currently strand displacement circuits lack
the capacity to respond dynamically to environmental changes because devices
within the circuit can stop responding after a single computation. This
limitation makes it impossible to design memory circuits, feedback controllers
or to develop reprogrammable systems that take as input biomolecular "software."
The goal of this proposal is to construct a new generation of strand
displacement circuits that can operate continuously, with devices dynamically
updating their outputs as their input values change. The proposed research will
be integrated into the larger program at Johns Hopkins University via an
interdisciplinary course in chemical and biomolecular engineering on the design
of biomolecular systems from a computing perspective. Undergraduates and high
school students from diverse backgrounds will participate in laboratory
research. The broader notion of applying computer science principles to the
design of biomolecular systems and circuits will be included as part of a set of
interdisciplinary hands-on demonstrations and lessons developed by the PI for
secondary school students that focus on how physical systems can
compute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, the work will focus
on the design of continuously operable logic devices, and multidevice logic
circuits. In each case it will be demonstrated that circuits correctly recompute
their outputs as input values change. The final aim of this work will be to
create a flip-flop memory circuit, which requires continuous operability for
function. This work has important implications for both computer science, where
principles of computing machines will be tested beyond the domain of
electronics, as well as for bioengineering and chemistry, where the ability to
exploit logic and analog information processing within a reaction vessel or cell
culture dish will open up new possibilities for diagnostics and process control.