* 1527497
* AF: Small: Using Ordinal Information to Approximate Cardinal Objectives in Social Choice, Matching, Group Formation, and Assignment Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Elliot Anshelevich, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 350,470.00

Many modern algorithms must make decisions using only limited information: they
not only need to make the best choices given the input, but also don't know what
the "true" input actually is; and yet they are required to make good choices
anyway. This problem arises often in settings where the goal is to maximize the
total happiness (a.k.a. social welfare or total utility) of the system, such as
social choice settings in which voters submit their preferences for different
alternatives, matching settings (e.g., matching people with job openings or
organ donors with patients), assigning people to groups or projects, economic
market settings, and many others. In all of these settings, the people or agents
involved may care deeply about which outcome is selected (e.g., which
alternative is selected by the voting mechanism, or which patients are assigned
a donated kidney), with the mechanism designer's goal being to maximize the
overall welfare and satisfaction. Unfortunately, in all these applications, only
limited information is usually available: it is relatively easy to obtain
*ordinal* information (which choice is preferred to which other choice by each
participant), but almost impossible to obtain the underlying numerical
information (how *much* each choice is preferred by each participant). This
project will use a novel notion of approximation to give new insight into the
design and evaluation of many mechanisms for the settings mentioned above. The
approximation algorithms resulting from this project will be used to suggest new
protocols, which would not only optimize some notion of fairness (as is common
in social choice), or maximize the size of a matching (as is common in kidney
exchange), but would have provable guarantees on the quality of the outcomes.
One reason why such guarantees have not been considered in the past is that
without the knowledge of exact numerical utilities or exact compatibilities
between matches, protocols can only rely on ordinal, or otherwise limited,
information. However, as preliminary work shows, one can often design algorithms
which behave well no matter what the *true* information is, as long as the
underlying (unknown) numerical values have some reasonable structure, or are at
least correlated in some way, which is certainly the case for most applications.
Because of this, this project will provide a different perspective, and will
result in algorithms which produce provably good outcomes while using only
limited ordinal information. Due to the applications touched by this project,
the work done should be of interest to researchers in many fields, including
Social Choice, Artificial Intelligence, Game Theory, Social Networks, and
Economics. This research will be strongly complemented by the PI's education
plan, which includes teaching several courses with research components,
presenting this work at numerous scientific seminars, and recruiting several
graduate and undergraduate students to work on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to design and
analyze algorithms which only know ordinal information, and yet create solutions
which are provably close to the "true" optimal solution: the one which would be
chosen if the full numerical information were known. The project will
specifically focus on the settings of social choice, matching, group formation,
and economic markets. Very little is known about approximation algorithms in the
presence of ordinal information, and designing such algorithms for the settings
above will likely require new and interesting techniques. When the numerical
values are completely uncorrelated, it is of course impossible to form good
approximations from only ordinal information, so this work will involve looking
at different kinds of correlations (e.g., lying in a metric space, symmetric
values, values from a common distribution, etc), and determining how much power
this structure gives to the ordinal information, as compared to the true
numerical information. The PI will also consider optimization problems with
other interesting constraints which deserve further study, focusing especially
on computing good solutions in the presence of self-interested agents, in the
contexts of social choice, matching, and envy-free pricing. This work should
lead to basic understanding of the fundamental power of ordinal information, by
determining under which settings and conditions ordinal information is enough to
approximate the numerical truth, and when such an approximation is impossible.