* 1527629
* CSR: Small: Scalable Coordination for Wide-Area Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Murat Demirbas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 499,566.00

Scalable coordination of concurrently executing tasks is a challenging open
problem for large-scale distributed systems. For loosely dependent tasks that
require little or no communication, simple abstractions such as barrier
synchronization suffice for coordination. However, for large-scale cloud-
computing and web-services applications that require tighter synchronization
(such as online transaction processing systems, distributed file systems, and
graph processing applications), a fine-grained complex coordination service is
needed. Especially with increasing demand for large-scale web-services for
e-commerce, social networking, and Internet of Things, the coordination of tasks
over wide-area (i.e., across clusters, across datacenters, and across Internet)
has recently gained greater importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
distributed coordination techniques fail to scale for wide-area networks to
support these new generation applications. Centralized coordination fails to
scale with respect to the increased distances in the wide-area, whereas
distributed coordination fails to scale with respect to the number of nodes
involved. This research project claims that it is possible to achieve scalable
coordination of distributed tasks over wide-area using a novel hybrid design,
called Maestro. The Maestro framework will address the following research
questions: (1) What are the limits of fully-centralized and fully-decentralized
solutions to coordination, and what are the scalability benefits of a hybrid
hierarchical approach? (2) How can locality-awareness be utilized to achieve
high-performance across wide-area? (3) How can partition-awareness be utilized
to achieve consistency across wide-area? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Maestro
framework will employ a hierarchical lock broker architecture with a novel lock-
leasing mechanism and smart/adaptive lock migration. This combination allows
flexibility of control and provides the best of both centralized and
decentralized approaches. As the authority of their respective domains, the
brokers learn and adapt to the access patterns of tasks at runtime to improve
lock-locality and hence scalability, while they also have autonomy to allow
independent tasks to be initiated and executed in a decentralized manner.
Maestro will provide optimizations such as proactive leasing of locks to servers
even before they are requested, lock migration (changing primary site assignment
of locks), and shared/fractional lock-leasing to selectively allow decentralized
coordination and relaxed consistency when appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed Maestro framework will be evaluated on two popular distributed
application domains: wide-area ZooKeeper for distributed coordination, and wide-
area distributed metadata management. Maestro will fill an important gap in the
wide-area scalable coordination of tightly-coupled consistency-critical
distributed applications, and it will enable further broader impacts through
graduate and undergraduate level curriculum development, enhancing
scientific/technological understanding via organizing academic workshops,
outreaching to K-12 students, recruitment of minority groups, and distributing
tools and software to the community.