* 1527268
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Privacy-Aware Collaborative Data Sharing in Human-Centered Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Gail-Joon Ahn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

With the help of Online Social Networks (OSNs), people share personal and public
information and make social connections with friends, coworkers, colleagues,
family and even with strangers. As a result, OSNs store a huge amount of
sensitive information about users and their interactions. To protect such
information, privacy control has been treated as a central feature of OSNs.
Although OSNs currently provide some privacy control mechanisms allowing users
to regulate access to information they share, users, unfortunately, have no
control over data others share. For instance, if a user posts a comment in a
friend's space, s/he cannot specify which users can view the comment. Similarly,
when a user uploads a photo and tags friends who appear in the photo, the tagged
friends cannot restrict who can see this photo. Since multiple associated users
may have different privacy concerns over the shared data, privacy conflicts
occur and the lack of collaborative privacy control increases the potential risk
of leaking sensitive information by friends to the public. To address such a
critical issue, it is essential to accommodate diverse privacy control
requirements coming from multiple associated users for collaboratively managing
the shared data in OSNs. The new techniques developed in this project will
substantially enhance the state-of-the-art in privacy-aware data sharing in OSNs
and will have implications for the design of future collaborative sharing
systems in OSNs. Moreover, since privacy practices in many other collaborative
environments, such as electronic health records and financial data sharing also
require multiple users to co-manage the privacy of information, the fundamental
results generated by this project could be expanded to those collaborative
environments beyond social networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to seek an effective and flexible mechanism to enable privacy-aware
collaborative data sharing in OSNs. To this end, the researchers will first
analyze data sharing associated with multiple users in OSNs, and articulate
several typical scenarios of privacy conflicts to understand the risks posed by
those conflicts. To mitigate risks caused by privacy conflicts, the researchers
will investigate a collaborative data sharing mechanism to support the
specification and enforcement of multiple privacy concerns. In addition, a
systematic conflict detection and resolution mechanism will be created and
evaluated with respect to its ability to cope with privacy conflicts occurring
in collaborative management of data sharing in OSNs. The conflict resolution in
the project attempts to balance the need for privacy protection and users'
desire for information sharing by quantitative analysis of privacy risk and
sharing loss. Another compelling feature of the proposed approach is the support
of both theoretical and empirical analyses on privacy control in OSNs. The
researchers will analyze the strategic behaviors of rational users using a game-
theoretic model, where each player aims at accommodating her/his privacy
concerns as much as possible by adjusting her/his privacy setting in
collaborative data sharing in OSNs. Furthermore, the researchers will carry out
empirical analysis for practical user behaviors and contrast it with the
theoretical analysis in collaborative data sharing, articulating the gap between
the theoretic model and real user behaviors. More details about this project,
including experimental data and curricular materials can be found on the project
website (www.cs.clemson.edu/~hongxih/projects/gpc).