* 1527065
* SHF: Small: Closing the Productivity/Performance Gap with Just-in-Time Configuration of Meta-Trace Accelerators
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2020
* Christopher Batten, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Title: SHF: Small: Closing the Productivity/Performance Gap with Just-in-Time
Configuration of Meta-Trace Accelerators

Dynamic programming languages are growing in popularity across the computing
spectrum from smartphones, to servers, to supercomputers. Dynamic programming
languages such as Python, JavaScript, and MATLAB are all now among the top-ten
most popular programming languages. These "productivity-level" languages make it
easy to quickly develop, verify, and maintain applications, but unfortunately,
the performance of such applications is usually quite low. This project is
exploring a new hardware/software co-design approach for closing this
productivity-performance gap. The intellectual merits of this project are the
potential for fundamental advances in new hardware accelerators specifically
designed for dynamic programming languages, and new software techniques to let
applications take advantage of these accelerators. The project's broader
significance and importance are rooted in the popularity of dynamic programming
languages, and the potential to significantly improve the performance of these
highly productive languages.

There has been great interest in software and hardware techniques to close the
"productivity-performance gap". On the software side, high-performance
interpreters are increasingly leveraging just-in-time (JIT) method- or trace-
based compilation techniques. On the hardware-side, there is a long history of
directly supporting high-level languages in hardware. Unfortunately, direct
execution of high-level languages precludes the kinds of aggressive
optimizations possible with JIT compilation and can prevent efficient execution
of alternative high-level languages. A key insight is that future hardware
acceleration for dynamic programming languages should not replace JIT
compilation, but should instead elegantly complement JIT compilation for a
variety of different dynamic programming languages. This project is
investigating a new approach using just-in-time configuration of meta-trace
accelerators. The project is using a vertically integrated research methodology
to explore the following four research thrusts: (1) developing and optimizing a
new Scheme interpreter (called RLisPy) to create a state-of-the-art software
baseline; (2) exploring various novel hardware meta-trace accelerators for
RLisPy; (3) exploring JIT configuration to accelerate RLisPy using these meta-
trace accelerators; and (4) applying these techniques to the more popular Python
dynamic programming language.