* 1527072
* STARSS: Small: New Attack Vectors and Formal Security Analysis for Integrated Circuit Logic Obfuscation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Siddharth Garg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 321,080.00

Reverse engineering of integrated circuits (ICs) has become a major concern for
semiconductor design companies since services to depackage, delayer and image an
IC can be used to extract the underlying design. IP theft of this nature has not
only economic impact due to IP theft, but also compromises the security of ICs
used in military and critical infrastructure. The goal of this project is to
gain a deeper understanding of the capabilities of an attacker who is trying to
reverse engineer ICs that use current methods to camouflage their design, and
develops stronger camouflaging techniques in light of these new attacks.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project explores foundational analysis of the
security of logic obfuscation using camouflaging. The project develops a
fundamental security metric for logic obfuscation, D-security, that measures the
minimum number of input patterns an attacker needs to know to decamouflage a
circuit. This research devises strong and effective decamouflaging attacks in
order to understand the vulnerabilities in existing approaches, and new
fortified IC camouflaging mechanisms that are resilient to these attacks. This
work addresses the economic and security concerns result from IC reverse
engineering, and will be integrated in graduate and undergraduate coursework at
NYU as well as in the Embedded Systems Challenge (ESC) at NYU's annual cyber-
security awareness week.