* 1527354
* CIF: Small: Secure and Private Function Computation by Interactive Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Prakash Narayan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,998.00

This research takes an information theoretic approach to develop principles that
govern secure or private function computation by multiple terminals that host
user data. The goal of the terminals is to compute locally and reliably, a given
function of all the possibly correlated user data, using an interactive
communication protocol. The protocol is required to satisfy separate security
and privacy conditions. The former stipulates for each terminal that a coalition
of the remaining terminals should glean no more information about the data at
the terminal from their own data and the communication -- than can be obtained
from the function value. The latter protects each individual user's data at a
terminal from a similar coalition. A common framework is developed for analyzing
the distinct concepts of security and privacy, and new information theoretic
formulations and approaches are proposed with the objective of understanding
basic underlying principles. Potential applications arise, for instance, in:
hospital databases that store clinical drug trial results or university
databases with student performance records; private information retrieval from
user data stored in private clouds; and security and privacy certifications for
the identities/locations of communities and individuals participating in crowd-
sourced traffic and navigation services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators' technical approach involves the development of a theory with
three main distinguishing features. It (i) establishes a key role for
interactive communication in reducing communication complexity, and in enhancing
security and privacy; and formulates computable measures of security and privacy
in terms of conditional Renyi entropy; (ii) provides a common framework for
formulating and analyzing problems of secure and private function computation
with prominent roles for classical Shannon theory as well as zero-error
combinatorial information theory; and introduces the concept of a multiuser
privacy region for quantifying privacy tradeoffs among users; and (iii) develops
a new method for obtaining converse bounds for communication complexity, upon
analyzing the common randomness or shared information generated in function
computation with an interactive communication protocol. Rooted in information
theory, estimation theory and theoretical computer science, a central objective
of the research is to elucidate tradeoffs among computation accuracy, terminal
security and user privacy; key to these tradeoffs is the essential role of
interactive communication. Furthermore, it aims at creating advances in
information theory through the introduction of new models and concepts. Expected
outcomes are precise characterizations of the mentioned fundamental tradeoffs,
and associated algorithms for secure and private computing.