* 1527059
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: From Pliable to Content-Type Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Daniela Tuninetti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Coding has traditionally aimed to securely and efficiently convey specific
information messages, for example speech in a phone call, to one or more
receivers. Today?s communication networks, however, increasingly deliver content
rather than a specific message. Popular networks that serve content-type traffic
include advertising networks, news aggregators, and social media. This proposal
formulates a novel theoretical framework aiming to determine the fundamental
performance limits and design principles for content-type networks. This new
research direction promotes the progress of science and has the potential to
transform the way content-type traffic is encoded and transmitted in networks.
As a result, this research is expected to benefit society at large by laying the
foundation for a more efficient design of network services, and to be of
immediate and far-reaching use for both private and public sectors. This
proposal integrates discovery research and education: it develops a rich
learning experience for students through an integrated inter-university program
and curricular development. The investigators will keep serving as a role model
for minority students, especially young women, by active engagement at their
institutions and within their peer societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
work in this proposal is fundamentally motivated by current trends in the
Internet traffic: today society increasingly relies on content-type services for
educational, professional and social purposes. This proposal explores coding
specifically targeted to content-type communication; it can therefore form a
solid theoretical foundation for the design and optimization of future network
services. This proposal formulates new research directions not explored before
by addressing the following main technical objectives: (1) Develop an
information theoretical framework by proposing a novel model for classical
message-specific index coding and extending it to content-type pliable index
coding, deriving inner and outer bounds, and efficient numerical algorithms for
their evaluation. (2) Derive fundamental bounds and practical coding strategies
for content-type coding, where clients are interested in multiple, as opposed to
a single content, identify order approximations and study extensions to noisy
network versions of the problem. (3) Develop oblivious strategies for servers
with limited knowledge about the clients' side-information (for instance, the
server knows the number of downloads of the clients but not necessarily which
ones); quantify the amount and quality of the side-information necessary for
optimal performance. (4) Investigate the case where all content is not "equal"
(for instance, because of personalized recommendations based on the client's
past behavior); connect with recommendation systems, and understand how
preferences affect the content-type algorithms and
bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For each technical objective, the investigators
will develop tools from information theory, network coding, and algorithms to
address the novel questions posed in this research. The new framework is
expected to significantly advance the state-of-the-art and fundamental
understanding of content-type coding from both a theoretical (information
theory) and a more practical (code and algorithm design) perspective. The
results of this research will be timely presented at major national and
international professional venues in the information theory, network coding, and
networking communities. The proposal has also a strong educational and outreach
component. In order to reach the general public the investigators will leverage
the departmental media tools to demonstrate the developed technology and its
practical impact. Students will receive a solid foundation in communications,
coding and networking thus acquiring the fundamental skills to be successful in
the competitive, diverse, and global workforce market. It is the investigators?
goal to serve as a role model for minority students, especially women.