* 1527387
* TWC: Small: Towards Stealth Networks: Fundamental Limits and Algorithms for Stealth Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Matthieu Bloch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 428,015.00

The widespread development of communication networks has profoundly transformed
our society, resulting in a significant increase in productivity and efficiency.
However, the benefits of this increased connectivity are today also
counterbalanced by the ease with which malicious individuals can interfere or
tamper with sensitive data and information. The past decade has thus witnessed a
growing concern for the issues of privacy, confidentiality, and integrity of
communications. In many instances, the users in a communication network may now
wish to communicate without being detected by others, to maintain privacy, avoid
attacks, or escape the attention of regulatory entities monitoring the network.
This project takes a distinctive approach to lay the foundation of a
comprehensive framework, enabling both the analysis of the fundamental
information-theoretic limits and the development of explicit low-complexity
algorithms for stealth communication.

The project investigates two interrelated research tasks. In the first task, the
researchers will develop information-theoretic tools enabling the systematic
analysis of stealth communications over a wide range of channel models; this
includes architectures with and without secret keys, as well as wired and
wireless networks, in which privacy and un-detectability play a central role. In
the second task, the researchers will design low-complexity algorithms from
error-control codes for stealth communication, which will be tested on
experimental prototypes. Additional activities related to the project include,
dissemination of research results in various forms and mentoring of students.
The proposed research has the potential to enable advances in the implementation
of provably stealth communication systems and lead to novel cost-effective
techniques for the the generation of stealth communication system.