* 1527846
* NeTS: Small: PTERA: Prospect Theory Enhanced Resource Allocation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2020
* Venkatachalam Anantharam, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Numerous empirical studies have shown that humans evaluate utilities in ways
that are not consistent with utility theory. Cumulative prospect theory,
pioneered by the Nobel prize-winning economist Daniel Kahneman, and his
collaborator, Amos Tversky, provides a framework, including utility theory as a
special case, which is able to capture a wide range of actually observed human
behaviors when faced with choices. This project develops the implications of
prospect theoretic models for how humans evaluate choice in the context of some
of the core problems of communication networking. The project studies how
communication networking protocols may need to be modified when the evaluation
of choice is done by prospect-theoretic end users. It is expected that better
network protocols that improve the end-user experience could be a result of this
research.

In cumulative prospect theory, gains and losses are measured relative to a
reference. In order to make the theory consistent with empirically observed
behavior the function used to evaluate gains and losses is concave for gains and
convex for losses, with a larger slope for losses than for gains near the
reference. A prospect is a list of possible gains or losses, each with a certain
probability. Users are presented with prospects and modeled as evaluating them
via the rules of cumulative prospect theory, which also involve weighting
functions that overweight small probabilities relative to large probabilities.
This project focuses on two specific, widely applicable, and highly important
problem classes in communication networking. One of these is the question of how
to incentivize users to follow best practices to secure their individual devices
that are connected to the network. The project studies how to design the
appropriate prospects to present to the users to achieve the goal of a better
secured and therefore safer and more resilient network. The second of these is
the problem of resource allocation in the network for elastic users. The project
studies how to design TCP-like protocols that are backward compatible with the
existing ones, but that will improve the perceived utility for prospect-
theoretic users while still working with the same network resources. By trading
off user experience of elastic users with the network resources used, this
project also develops ways to improve the performance for inelastic users.

Broader Impacts: Techniques for decision making and game theoretic techniques
provide the underpinnings for a broad range of disciplines that study how humans
interact with technological systems and with each other. Apart from
communication networking, examples of such disciplines include economics and
finance. The outcomes of this project have broader impact in these disciplines,
because novel methodologies for cumulative prospect theory research that can be
used for analysis and design in similar scenarios that are relevant to these
individual disciplines are developed in this research. This project also has a
significant educational component, including training graduate students and
providing a platform for undergraduates to have a research experience. The
research developed in this project will be incorporated into the curriculum of
the course on estimation and control of stochastic systems and is expected to
impact the course on network economics, both taught at Berkeley. The research
provides opportunities for undergraduate projects, in particular through the
Berkeley EECS departmental initiatives that foster diversity and inclusion by
inviting a diverse group of undergraduates during the summers to participate in
the research programs of the faculty members.