* 1527075
* SHF: Small: Bilinear Constraint Solving and Optimization for Program Verification and Synthesis Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Sriram Sankaranarayanan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

Bilinear constraints arise from numerous formal verification and synthesis
problems for programs and hybrid control systems. However, bilinear constraints
are also hard to solve. Existing approaches suffer from high computational
complexity and the lack of guarantees due to numerical errors. Progress in
solving bilinear constraints is an important step towards developing provably
safe cyber-physical systems. This project investigates special structural
properties of bilinear constraints to yield efficient solver implementations.
The impact on program verification and synthesis problems is studied through
specialized client applications. This infrastructure is disseminated online as
open-source software. The research in this project is directly tied to
educational materials in the form of video lectures and assessments for an
existing open, online course on linear, integer programming and their
applications.

The overall goal of this project is to develop bilinear solvers targeted to
verification and synthesis applications for programs and hybrid systems by
exploiting key properties such as separability and the presence of sparse
solutions. The main approaches are being investigated towards this goal: (a)
relaxing bilinear constraints to simpler convex optimization problems, while
recovering feasible solutions for the original constraints, (b) symbolic
approaches that linearize the constraints and employ exact solvers for linear
arithmetic constraints, and (c) iterative techniques that eliminate infeasible
solutions incrementally to arrive at feasible solutions. These approaches are
implemented inside prototype solvers with specialized clients for various formal
verification and synthesis applications.