* 1527223
* SHF: Small: Computer Architecture for Scripting Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2019
* Josep Torrellas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this work is to speed-up the execution of the&lt;br/&gt;most popular
programming languages of the internet, namely Scripting Languages&lt;br/&gt;such
as JavaScript and Python. These languages are easy to use,
because&lt;br/&gt;they do not require declaring all the variables. However, this
makes them very&lt;br/&gt;hard to compile efficiently. In this work, the
principal investigator will design&lt;br/&gt;processor hardware that is
specifically equipped to help speed-up&lt;br/&gt;these languages. Given the
importance of these languages for&lt;br/&gt;web development, effective
techniques to speed-up their execution&lt;br/&gt;are fundamental for the
continued development of the&lt;br/&gt;web infrastructure. Such development is
crucial to our&lt;br/&gt;society's efficiency, competitiveness, and
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will focus on several
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;One of them is using speculation support to execute the
most likely&lt;br/&gt;execution path of the codes, and undo the execution if
another path&lt;br/&gt;was taken instead. The other technique is prediction, to
predict which&lt;br/&gt;parts of the code will be executed. Finally, the third
technique is reuse, where the&lt;br/&gt;processor will keep enough state in its
structures to reuse&lt;br/&gt;it across invocations of the same functions.