* 1527811
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: A Service Centric Architecture for Efficient Spectral Utilization in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

This project will begin by questioning the basic design paradigms of wireless
networks, where there are limited spectral resources for a large population of
users needing a diverse set of services. The ultimate goal of the project is to
expand the application base of wireless networks from wireless Internet, to
include scalable mobile healthcare, first-responders, security applications,
transportation, factory automation and robotics. The main strength of the
project will be to bring theoretical foundations, as well as system level
designs and algorithms to develop a realizable network. The PIs plan to work
closely with their industrial partners to ensure that project outcomes impact
next-generation wireless networks.

This research presents a fundamentally novel approach to address spectrum
efficiency that reflects the shifting nature of networking philosophy as
networks migrate from the classical paradigm of well-defined users and operators
to the notion that networking is a tool for the provision of services. Then the
primary objective of future service centric networks is to distribute content
and to provide fresh information about on-going processes. Over the last few
years, the rise in the number of different wireless services has put
unprecedented pressure on providers' networks, to the point that current
architectures cannot scale to meet the exponential growth of users' demands and
the dissimilarities in the services. To confront the crisis, this research meets
the required paradigm shift away from a static view of users' needs and in
accord with a vertically integrated architecture to harness features of the
services. The driving vision in this project is to architect a wireless network
with a prevailing service centric philosophy. The concept of network-wide
cognition is introduced in this endeavor to explore attributes and disparities
of these services as well as heterogeneity of network nodes. Exercising 'true
cognition' at the physical layer, nodes in the network will be assumed to
operate with flexible radios and that the network is agnostic to the radio
access technology; however, the network will be designed to exploit this
flexibility. Therefore, the concept of network- wide cognition substantiates
across several layers of wireless network design and revisits core network
foundations in two coupled thrusts one on scheduling for service centric
networking and the other on network provision for delay sensitive services.