* 1527540
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Smart Buttons:  Bio-Enabled Wearable Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2019
* John Stankovic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 202,941.00

This project aims to build Smart Buttons, a bio-enabled wearable device weighing
less than 2 grams. A network of smart buttons will be built that scales from a
few buttons for each person individually to over a hundred of buttons for a
crowd. This network simultaneously records, generates, compiles posture and
interaction data spanning various scenarios, time scales and physical settings.
The smart button platform will be able to assist domain scientists in
understanding human posture and behavior as well as social interaction in a
crowd.

The intellectual contributions include a novel bio-enable design philosophy and
a set of concrete approaches to seamlessly integrate computation with bio-
enabled functions. Subjects (e.g., humans) are treated not only as the source of
information, but also as the source of functionality. Unlike electronic
computation functions, bio-enabled functions are highly unpredictable and have
inherent uncertainty in both measurement and control. The research explores (i)
how computation from electronic systems interact with physical bio-enabled
functions from living subjects, and (ii) how to integrate these functions. The
proposal work first demonstrates a few cases of bio-enabled functions and their
effectiveness, including bio-enabled proximity detection, ranging, bio-enabled
on-demand sensing, bio-enabled networking and energy management. After these
case studies, reusable patterns are extracted, and principles and methodologies
to design bio-enabled wearable devices are derived.

The results of this research can be used in the future by domain scientists to
support (i) individual's behavior predictions and generalizations, and (ii)
crowd social interaction modeling and control. The broader impact of this work
includes (i) utilizing the smart button technology to analyze teaching
effectiveness and reveal the issues and desired features in a teaching
environment; (ii) improving curriculum development with hand-on smart button
projects; (iii) raising interest in technology among K-12 students and under-
represented minority groups through smart button demos in open houses; and (iv)
supporting talented female and minority PhD students to successfully accomplish
their doctoral studies. The ultimate impact of the smart button technology is to
provide a low-cost open experimental platform for behavior/social scientists,
leading to a solid foundation for a new science of social interaction. The
principles based on bio-feedback can give rise to new paradigms, principles,
theory and methods in computer system control with bio-in-the-loop.