* 1528698
* Population Movement And Biological Adaptation At High Altitudes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Mark Aldenderfer, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 182,393.00

Dr. Mark Aldenderfer, of the University of California, Merced, along with
colleagues from the University of Oklahoma, the University of Chicago, and
Nepal, will lead a project to explore the ways in which high elevation
environments affect the movement of people, material culture, ideas, and genes.
High elevation and high mountain valleys were among the last places on the
planet colonized by humans due to the combined challenges of hypoxia, cold
stress, and the relative scarcity of resources found in them. High mountains act
as barriers to population movement and gene flow and often create cultural,
linguistic, and genetic isolates in valley systems that are only short distances
apart. But most critically, high altitude environments require genetic
adaptations for successful permanent habitation in them. But the antiquity of
the selective processes that have increased the frequency of these genes in
modern populations is unresolved; some researchers argue that these genes can
become fixed very rapidly in human populations due to intense natural selection
while others suggest the process develops much more slowly. Archaeology is
uniquely positioned to study human biological and cultural adaptation to these
extreme environments and to look at the ways in which culture and genes have
interacted within and been affected by them over the course of time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Aldenderfer and his team will study the ways in which
culture, environment, and genes have interacted over time in the Kali Gandaki
valley of Upper Mustang, Nepal. Known from history as a key trade route that
connected the Indian subcontinent to the Tibetan plateau, the valley appears to
have been first occupied some 3000 years ago. While the geographic origin of
these migrants is unknown, three source populations have been hypothesized:
peoples from the Indian subcontinent, peoples from the Tibetan plateau, and
finally, peoples from Central Asia via the northwestern Himalayas. To test these
hypotheses and determine the antiquity of genes that promote adaptation to high
elevation life, the researchers will conduct excavations at key early sites to
recover additional material culture for regional comparisons and human remains,
extract and genotype ancient DNA (aDNA) from the human remains from three
archaeological periods that span the prehistory of the valley, compare the
genetic make-up of these three ancient populations to contemporary South Asians,
East Asians and Western Eurasians as well as archaic human genomes to test
hypotheses about the peopling of the region as well as subsequent migrations
into it, and finally, estimate the frequency of genes in these ancient
populations known to promote high elevation adaptation to test for systematic
increases in these genes over time. The project will train graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in the cutting edge aDNA extraction and computational
methods developed in this research. The researchers will also foster a wide
range of educational activities with their Nepali partners, including the
development of displays of project findings in regional and local museums and
engagement with local village leaders on how preserve and maintain their
cultural heritage.