* 1528156
* TWC: TTP Option: Small: Understanding the State of TLS Using Large-scale Passive Measurements
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2021
* Robin Sommer, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 663,635.00

The Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol constitutes the key building block
for today's Internet security and is, for example, used for encrypted web
connections using the HTTPS protocol. However, from its first version in 1994
until today, researchers and practitioners keep discovering TLS deficiencies
undermining the protocol's security on a regular basis. While the academic
community has applied intense scrutiny to the TLS/X.509 ecosystem, much of such
work depends on access to difficult to acquire representative data on the
protocol's deployment and usage. This project leverages an already operating
large-scale passive TLS traffic measurement effort that has been continuously
collecting TLS information from live Internet uplinks of 8 large research
institutions with about 390,000 users total. The current data set contains more
than 100 billion observed TLS connections with more than 100 million unique
certificates. This project expands the collection effort and uses both historic
and new data to perform studies of current TLS ecosystem trends as well as what-
if analyses of future developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new measurements
will address different parts of the TLS ecosystem, including studying the impact
of certificate revocation, non-HTTPS deployments of TLS, and applications
masquerading as TLS without actually speaking it. Furthermore, leveraging
historic data, the project examines trends in TLS usage and deployment like the
evolution of TLS software, session resumption, and virtual hosting. Finally, the
project combines historic and new measurements to drive a series of what-if
analyses predicting the impact of upcoming and proposed ecosystem changes like
OCSP stapling for certificate revocation and Google's Certificate transparency.
In addition to these measurement efforts, the project offers a community service
that makes the data collection accessible to researchers and practitioners by
allowing them to run their own analyses on the data set using a mediation
process.